TOWN OF CHINO VALLEY, ARIZONA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-13 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance No. 2025-952, passed 5-13-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      Chapter
         
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to chapters and sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time; calculation of time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinances
   
10.17   Conflicting provisions
   
10.18   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.19   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.20   Authority to correct scrivener’s errors
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated “The Code of the Town of Chino Valley, Arizona,”
and may be so cited. The code may also be cited as “The Chino Valley Town
Code.”
(2001 Code, Art. 1-1)
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   The rules and the definitions set forth in this chapter shall be
observed in the construction of this code and the ordinances of the town unless
the construction would be inconsistent with either the manifest intent of the
Council or the context of this code or the ordinances of the town.
   (B)   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
(2001 Code, Art. 1-5)
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood
according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to the peculiar
and appropriate meaning.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, MUNICIPALITY or TOWN. The Town of Chino
Valley, Arizona.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.
      COUNCIL. The Council of the Town of Chino Valley, Arizona.
      COUNTY. Yavapai County, Arizona.
      DAY. The period of time between any midnight and the midnight following.
      DAYTIME The period of time between sunrise and sunset.
      DEPARTMENT, BOARD, COMMISSION, OFFICE, OFFICER or EMPLOYEE. Whenever any
department, board, commission, office, officer or employee is referred to, it
shall mean a department, board, commission, office, officer or employee of the
town unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
      EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the Fire, Police and Public Service
Departments and legally authorized ambulances and emergency vehicles of the
State of Arizona, Yavapai County, or any political subdivisions thereof, and
vehicles of public service corporations.
      EMERGENCY WORK.  Any work performed to prevent or alleviate physical
trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency, which has or
may result in a disruption of service, and which is necessary to protect the
health, safety and welfare of persons or property.
      IN THE TOWN or WITHIN THE TOWN. All territory over which the town now
has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police
powers or other regulatory powers.
      JOINT AUTHORITY. All words purporting to give a joint authority to 3 or
more town officers or other persons shall be construed as giving the authority
to a majority of the officers or other persons unless it shall be otherwise
expressly declared in the law giving the authority.
      MAJORITY. When used in reference to the Town Council, means 51% of those
members in attendance provided that a quorum of the Council is also present.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      MOTOR VEHICLE.  Every self-propelled device in, upon, or by which any
person or property is, or may be, transported upon a public highway, excepting
aircraft and devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
      NIGHTTIME. The period of time between sunset and sunrise.
      OATH. Includes affirmation or declaration.
      PERSON. Shall extend and be applied to firms, corporations, or voluntary
associations, as well as to individuals, unless plainly inapplicable.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes every species of property, except real
property as defined in this section.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. The words PRECEDING and FOLLOWING mean next
before and next after, respectively.
      PROPERTY. Real and personal property.
      REAL PROPERTY. Lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
      SHALL or MAY.  SHALL is mandatory and MAY is permissive.
      SHALL HAVE BEEN. Includes past and future cases.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the signer cannot write,
the signer’s or subscriber’s name being written near the mark by a witness who
writes his or her own name near the signer's or subscriber's name; but a
signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a
signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when 2 witnesses so sign
their own names thereto.
      STATE. The State of Arizona.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      TENANT or OCCUPANT. When applied to a building or land shall include any
person holding a written or an oral lease or who occupies the whole or part of
the building or land, either alone or with others.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, except where otherwise provided.
(2001 Code, Art. 1-3)
Statutory reference:
   Definitions and construction of statutes generally, see A.R.S. §§ 1-211
through 1-215
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of
the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:
   (A)   And/or. “Or” may be read “and,” and “and” may be read “or,” if the
context requires it.
   (B)   Acts by agents. When this code or an ordinance requires an act to be
done which may by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, the
requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an
authorized agent.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.
      (1)   Words of the masculine gender include the feminine; words in the
singular number include the plural, and words in the plural number include the
singular.
      (2)   The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the
future includes the present.
   (D)   General terms. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council that the titles,
chapters, subchapters, sections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code
shall be severable, and if any provision of this code is held unconstitutional
for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality
shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of the code.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO CHAPTERS AND SECTIONS.
   (A)   All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and
sections of this code unless otherwise specified.
   (B)   Whenever in 1 section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
(2001 Code, Art. 1-4)
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the town exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within the town for the transaction of all municipal
business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME; CALCULATION OF TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done as provided in this code or
in any order issued pursuant to any ordinance, when expressed in days, shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the
last day is a Saturday, Sunday or holiday it shall be excluded; and when such
time is expressed in hours, the whole of Saturday, Sunday or a holiday, from
midnight to midnight, shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code, except
as otherwise provided in
§ 10.14. However, all rights, duties and obligations created or imposed by the
repealed ordinances shall continue and exist in all respects as if this code
had not been adopted and enacted.
(2001 Code, Art. 1-9)
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   The adoption and enactment of this code shall not be construed to repeal or
in any way to modify or affect:
   (A)   Any special ordinance or ordinances regarding franchises, annexations,
dedications or zoning;
   (B)   Any ordinance making an appropriation;
   (C)   Any ordinance affecting any bond issue or by which any bond issue may
have been authorized;
   (D)   The running of the statute of limitations in force at the time this
code becomes effective;
   (E)   The continued existence and operation of any department, agency,
commission or office heretofore legally established or held;
   (F)   Any bond of any public officer;
   (G)   Any taxes, fees, assessments or other charges incurred or imposed; and
   (H)   Any ordinances authorizing, ratifying, confirming, approving or
accepting any compact or contract with any other municipality, the State of
Arizona or any county or subdivision thereof, or with the United States or any
agency or instrumentality thereof.
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.
   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall
be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former
ordinance, clause or provision unless it shall be expressly so provided. The
repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred
before the repeal took effect nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending
at the time of the repeal for any offense committed under the ordinance
repealed.
(2001 Code, Art. 1-9)
§ 10.17 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If any provision of this code conflicts with any other provision of this
code, any other local legislation, or any state or federal law, the provision
which is more stringent or restrictive in nature shall apply unless the context
clearly requires or indicates otherwise.
(2001 Code, Art. 1-4)
§ 10.18 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to the
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.19 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Am. Ord. 25, passed
1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (A.R.S. § 9-240) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-
1985)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
      § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
         This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
      Statutory reference:
         Inspection of public records, see A.R.S. § 39-121
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the town published in 2001 and subsequently amended, the 2001
code section number shall be indicated in the history by “(2001 Code, §
     ).”
§ 10.20 AUTHORITY TO CORRECT SCRIVENER'S ERRORS.
   (A)   The Town Attorney and Town Clerk are hereby each individually
authorized to correct scrivener's errors in the town code, the Unified
Development Ordinance, and ordinances, resolutions and minutes adopted by the
Council or other public body without the need for re-adoption of the town code
provision, Unified Development Ordinance provision, ordinance, resolution or
minutes.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, a SCRIVENER'S ERROR includes 1 or
more of the following:
      (1)   A misspelling;
      (2)   A grammatical error;
      (3)    A numbering error;
      (4)   A cross-referencing error; or
      (5)   An inconsistency with the rules of style adopted for the
reformatted town code and Unified Development Ordinance.
   (C)   A correction to an ordinance, resolution or minutes shall be
accompanied by a scrivener's note on or attached to the corrected ordinance,
resolution or minutes. Any such correction shall be reported within three
months of such correction at a regular meeting of the Council.
   (D)   Corrections to complete sections of the town code and the Unified
Development Ordinance shall be noted therein.
(Ord. 13-763, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found responsible for violating any provisions of this
code, except as otherwise provided in this code, shall be responsible for a
civil code infraction, and upon such finding of responsibility therefor may be
punished by a civil sanction not to exceed $500. Each day that a violation
continues shall be a separate offense punishable as herein provided.
      (1)   In addition to any monetary civil sanction, the Civil Hearing
Officer shall order the defendant to abate the civil code infraction, unless it
has been abated by the date of a finding of responsibility therefor.
      (2)   The Civil Hearing Officer shall have the authority, within his or
her discretion, to suspend the payment of any civil sanction imposed.
      (3)   In any case involving a civil code infraction relating to the
occupancy or use of land, any monetary civil sanction imposed pursuant to this
section upon a defendant who holds an ownership interest in such land shall be
recordable as a lien upon the land and shall run with the land. The town, at
its sole option, may record a notice of civil sanction and abatement order with
the Yavapai County Recorder and thereby cause compliance by any person(s) or
entity thereafter acquiring the property. When the property is brought into
compliance by the owner or responsible party, a satisfaction of notice of civil
sanction and abatement order shall be filed at the request and expense of the
owner or responsible party. It shall be the property owner’s responsibility to
secure the satisfaction of notice of civil sanction and abatement order from
the town.
   (B)   Any violation of or failure or refusal to do or perform any act
required by Title VII of this code constitutes a civil traffic offense which
shall result in a civil penalty not to exceed $250. In addition, the court
shall levy penalty assessments pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 12-116.01 and 12-116.02.
Civil traffic violations are subject to the provisions of A.R.S. §§ 28-1592 et
seq., as amended.
   (C)   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this code which
is classified as a Class 1 misdemeanor, upon conviction thereof, may be
punished by a fine not to exceed $2,500, by imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 6 months, by a term of probation not to exceed 3 years, or by any
combination of the fine, imprisonment and probation.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, any person found to
have violated any provision of this code or amendments thereto, which pursuant
to this section is classified as a civil code infraction, and who has been
twice previously found to have violated the provision within the preceding 24
months, shall, in addition to any penalty prescribed for such civil code
infraction, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $2,500, by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 6 months, by a
term of probation not to exceed 3 years, or by any combination of the fine,
imprisonment and probation.
(2001 Code, Art. 1-8)
Statutory reference:
   Maximum penalty for civil traffic violations, see A.R.S. § 28-1598
   Misdemeanor penalty authorized, see A.R.S. § 9-240(28)(b)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
      Chapter
         
30.   GOVERNING BODY
         
31.   OFFICERS
         
32.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
         
33.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
         
34.   COURT
         
35.   CODE OF ETHICS
         
36.   LEGISLATIVE PROVISIONS
         
37.   ELECTIONS
CHAPTER 30: GOVERNING BODY
Section
Town Council
   
30.001   Elected officers
   
30.002   Corporate powers
   
30.003   Duties of office
   
30.004   Vacancies
   
30.005   Compensation
   
30.006   Oath of office
   
30.007   Bond
   
30.008   Financial disclosure statement
Mayor
   
30.020   Direct election of Mayor
   
30.021   Vice Mayor
   
30.022   Acting Mayor
   
30.023   Powers and duties
   
30.024   Absence
   
30.025   Failure to sign documents
Council Procedure
   
30.065   Meetings
   
30.066   [Reserved]
   
30.067   Rules
   
30.068   Meetings to be public
   
30.069   Quorum
   
30.070   Agenda; notice of meetings
   
30.071   Boards, committees and commissions
   
30.072   Voting
   
30.073   Suspension of rules
Cross-reference:
   Legislative Provisions, see
Chapter 36
TOWN COUNCIL
§ 30.001 ELECTED OFFICERS.
   (A)   The elected officers of the town shall be a Mayor and 6 Council
members. The Mayor and Council members shall constitute the Council and shall
continue in office until assumption of duties of office by their duly elected
successors.
   (B)   The term of office of the Mayor shall be 2 years.
   (C)   Council members shall serve 4-year overlapping terms in the manner
provided by state statute.
(2001 Code, § 2-1-1)
§ 30.002 CORPORATE POWERS.
   The corporate powers of the town shall be vested in the Mayor and Council
and shall be exercised only as directed or authorized by law. All powers of the
Council shall be exercised by ordinance, resolution, order or motion.
(2001 Code, § 2-1-2)
§ 30.003 DUTIES OF OFFICE.
   The Mayor and Council members shall assume the duties of office at the first
regularly scheduled meeting in December following an election at which the
Mayor or Council members were elected.
(2001 Code, § 2-1-3) (Am. Ord. 14-783, passed 4-22-2014)
§ 30.004 VACANCIES.
   The Council shall fill any vacancy that may occur for whatever reason as
provided by state law.
(2001 Code, § 2-1-4) (Am. Ord. 11-755, passed 11-8-2011)
§ 30.005 COMPENSATION.
   The compensation of elective officers of the town shall be fixed from time
to time by resolution of the Council.
(2001 Code, § 2-1-5)
§ 30.006 OATH OF OFFICE.
   The Mayor and each Council member shall take and subscribe to the oath of
office at the time prescribed by state law.
(2001 Code, § 2-1-6) (Am. Ord. 11-755, passed 11-8-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. § 38-232
§ 30.007 BOND.
   Prior to taking office, the Mayor and every Council member shall execute and
file an official bond, enforceable against the principal and his or her
sureties, conditioned on the due and faithful performance of his or her
official duties, payable to the state and to and for the use and benefit of the
town or any person who may be injured or aggrieved by the wrongful act or
default of the officer in his or her official capacity. A person so injured or
aggrieved may bring suit on the bond under provisions identical to those
contained in A.R.S. § 38-260. Bonds shall be in such sum as shall be provided
by resolution and the premium for the bonds shall be paid by the town.
(2001 Code, § 2-1-7)
§ 30.008 FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE STATEMENT.
   The Mayor and each Council member shall file a financial disclosure
statement in a form and with such information as provided by resolution of the
Council.
(2001 Code, § 2-1-8)
MAYOR
§ 30.020 DIRECT ELECTION OF MAYOR.
   The Mayor shall be directly elected by the qualified electors of the town.
(2001 Code, § 2-2-1) (Am. Ord. 14-783, passed 4-22-2014)
§ 30.021 VICE MAYOR.
   At the first regular meeting in December following an election, the newly
elected Mayor shall nominate 1 of the Council members as Vice Mayor, and, upon
approval by the majority of the Council including the Mayor, the Vice Mayor
shall be so elected and shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. The Vice
Mayor shall perform the duties of the Mayor during the Mayor’s absence or
disability.
(2001 Code, § 2-2-2) (Am. Ord. 14-783, passed 4-22-2014)
§ 30.022 ACTING MAYOR.
   In the absence or disability of both the Mayor and Vice Mayor, the Council
may designate another of its members to serve as Acting Mayor who shall have
all the powers, duties and responsibilities of the mayor during the absence or
disability.
(2001 Code, § 2-2-3)
§ 30.023 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The powers and duties of the Mayor shall include the following:
   (A)   He or she shall be the chief executive officer of the town.
   (B)   He or she shall be the Chairperson of the Council and preside over its
meetings. At any meeting where the Mayor is present and able to preside, the
Mayor may designate a Councilmember to preside over that meeting and, upon
designating the Councilmember, the Mayor may relinquish the chair for that
meeting only. The Mayor and any Councilmember designated by the Mayor to
preside over a meeting may make and second motions and shall have a voice and
vote in all Council proceedings.
   (C)   He or she shall enforce the provisions of this code.
   (D)   He or she shall execute and authenticate by his or her signature such
instruments as the Council or any statutes, ordinances or this code shall
require.
   (E)   He or she shall make such recommendations and suggestions to the
Council as he or she may consider proper.
   (F)   He or she may, by proclamation, declare a local emergency to exist due
to fire, conflagration, flood, earthquake, explosion, war, bombing or any other
natural or man-made calamity or disaster or in the event of the threat or
occurrence of riot, rout or affray or other acts of civil disobedience which
endanger life or property within the town. After declaration of the emergency,
the Mayor shall govern by proclamation and impose all necessary regulations to
preserve the peace and order of the town, including but not limited to:
      (1)   Imposition of a curfew in all or any portion of the town;
      (2)   Ordering the closing of any business;
      (3)   Closing to public access any public building, street or other
public place; and/or
      (4)   Calling upon regular or auxiliary law enforcement agencies and
organizations within or without the political subdivision for assistance.
      (5)   The emergency powers of the Mayor shall not continue for more than
30 consecutive days. Upon cessation of the emergency, the Town Council shall
resume its regular duties.
   (G)   He or she shall perform such other duties required by state statute
and this code as well as those duties required as chief executive officer of
the town.
(2001 Code, § 2-2-4) (Am. Ord. 15-801, passed 7-28-2015; Am. Ord. 15-802,
passed 9-22-2015)
§ 30.024 ABSENCE.
   The Mayor shall not absent himself or herself from the town for a greater
period than 15 days without the consent of the Council.
(2001 Code, § 2-2-5)
§ 30.025 FAILURE TO SIGN DOCUMENTS.
   If the Mayor refuses or fails to sign any ordinance, resolution, contract,
warrant, demand or other document or instrument requiring his or her signature
for 5 days consecutively, then a majority of the members of the Council may, at
any regular or special meeting, authorize the Vice Mayor or, in his or her
absence, an Acting Mayor to sign the ordinance, resolution, contract, warrant,
demand or other document or instrument which when so signed shall have the same
force and effect as if signed by the Mayor.
(2001 Code, § 2-2-6)
COUNCIL PROCEDURES
§ 30.065 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings. The Council shall hold regular meetings on the
second and fourth Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m. When deemed appropriate,
any regular meeting date of the Council may be canceled or rescheduled by the
affirmative vote of a majority of the Council, except that at least 1 regular
meeting a month must be held, and notice of the canceled or rescheduled meeting
shall be given to the public as is reasonable and practicable under the
circumstances. All regular meetings of the Council shall be held in the Town
Hall of Chino Valley, or in such other locations as Council may determine.
   (B)   Special meetings. A special meeting of the Council may be called at
any time by: (1) The Mayor; (2) Any 3 Councilmembers; or (3) a majority vote of
the Council at a public meeting, and by giving notice thereof to all other
Councilmembers of the date, time, place and purpose of the special meeting.
Public notice of such meeting shall be made pursuant to state law.
   (C)   Study sessions. The Mayor or the Council, by common consent thereof,
may call a study session of the Council at any time by notifying the
Councilmembers of the date, time, place and purpose of the study session.
Notice of the study session shall be made pursuant to state law for public
meetings.
(2001 Code, § 2-4-1) (Am. Ord. 09-723, passed 10-22-2009; Am. Ord. 10-737,
passed 8-12-2010; Am. Ord. 14-781, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 30.066 [RESERVED].
§ 30.067 RULES.
   The Council may by motion adopt rules of procedure to govern its
proceedings.
(2001 Code, § 2-4-3)
§ 30.068 MEETINGS TO BE PUBLIC.
   All proceedings of the Council shall be open to the public, except that upon
approval by a majority vote of the Council, the Council may meet in a closed
executive session pursuant to the provisions of state law. Notice of meetings
shall be given in a manner consistent with state statutes.
(2001 Code, § 2-4-4)
§ 30.069 QUORUM.
   A majority of the Council shall constitute a quorum for transacting
business, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time and compel the
attendance of absent members.
(2001 Code, § 2-4-5)
§ 30.070 AGENDA; NOTICE OF MEETINGS.
   According to the time schedule set by motion of Council, the Town Clerk
shall prepare an agenda at the direction of the Mayor and according to the
order of business established by motion of Council. The agenda shall list the
specific matters to be discussed, considered or decided at the meeting. Notice
of executive sessions shall state the specific provision of law authorizing the
executive session but shall be required to include only a general description
of the matters to be considered. Except in the case of an actual emergency, the
agenda shall be available to the public at least 24 hours prior to the meeting.
By motion, the Council shall establish where all public notices of Council
meetings are to be posted. Public notices of Council meetings shall be posted
by the Clerk in 3 or more public places within the town.
(2001 Code, § 2-4-6)
§ 30.071 BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS.
   The Council may, by motion, resolution or ordinance, create such boards,
committees and commissions, standing or special, as it deems necessary. The
boards, committees and commissions shall consist of as many members and shall
perform such duties as the Council may require and shall exist at the pleasure
of the Council.
(2001 Code, § 2-4-7)
§ 30.072 VOTING.
   (A)   The Mayor shall vote as a member of the Council.
   (B)   Upon the request of any member, the ayes and nays upon any question
shall be taken and entered in the minutes.
(2001 Code, § 2-4-8)
§ 30.073 SUSPENSION OF RULES.
   Any of the provisions of this subchapter may be temporarily suspended in
connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote of 3/4 of the
members present, except that this section shall not be construed to permit any
action that is contrary to state statutes.
(2001 Code, § 2-4-9)
CHAPTER 31: OFFICERS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Creation of offices
   
31.02   Additional officers
   
31.03   Bond
   
31.04   Vacancies; holding more than 1 office
   
31.05   Additional powers and duties
Specific Officers
   
31.20   Town Manager
   
31.21   Town Clerk
   
31.22   Town Marshal
   
31.23   Town Engineer
   
31.24   Town Attorney
   
31.25   Town Magistrate
   
31.26   Finance Director
Enforcement Officials
   
31.40   Purpose
   
31.41   General provisions
   
31.42   Initiation of enforcement proceedings
   
31.43   Investigation
   
31.44   Appeals
Volunteers
   
31.60   Applicability
   
31.61   Obligations of the town to volunteers
   
31.62   Obligations of volunteers
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 CREATION OF OFFICES.
   There are hereby created the Offices of Town Manager, Town Attorney and Town
Magistrate, who shall be appointed by the Council and who shall serve, with the
exception of the Magistrate, at the pleasure of the Council. The Magistrate
shall be appointed for a term of office as provided in §
34.02(A).
(2001 Code, § 3-1-1)
§ 31.02 ADDITIONAL OFFICERS.
   (A)   The Council may, at its discretion, enter into intergovernmental
agreements for the performance of the duties of town officers.
   (B)   The Council may appoint and remove from time to time such other
officers as it may deem necessary and that are not provided for in this code or
state statute.
(2001 Code, § 3-1-2)
§ 31.03 BOND.
   The Council shall require each officer of the town to give bond for the due
discharge of his or her duties in such sums and with the security as it may
direct and approve as determined by resolution. The town shall pay the costs of
the bond.
(2001 Code, § 3-1-3)
§ 31.04 VACANCIES; HOLDING MORE THAN 1 OFFICE.
   Any vacancy that shall occur in any town office shall be filled by
appointment by the Council, provided that 1 person may hold more than 1 office
and that at the discretion of the Council, the functions of a town official may
be validly performed and discharged by a deputy or another town official, or an
otherwise qualified individual not holding office but employed at the pleasure
of the Council.
(2001 Code, § 3-1-4)
§ 31.05 ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   In addition to any powers and duties prescribed in this code, each officer
shall have such further powers, perform such further duties and hold such other
office as may be provided by the Council through ordinance, resolution or
order.
(2001 Code, § 3-1-5)
SPECIFIC OFFICES
§ 31.20 TOWN MANAGER.
   (A)   The Office of the Town Manager of the town is hereby created and
established. The Town Manager shall be appointed by the Council on the basis of
administrative and executive ability. Annual performance evaluations will be
performed by the Council on or before the adoption of the final fiscal year
budget. The Office of Town Manager will function as depicted on the
organization chart. The Town Manager serves at the pleasure of the Council and
is responsible only to the Council.
   (B)   Residency in the town at the time of appointment shall not be required
as a condition of appointment. However, permanent residency in the Tri-City/
Yavapai County area will be required within 1 year of appointment.
   (C)   No member of the Council shall be eligible for appointment as Town
Manager until 1 year has elapsed after the Council member shall have ceased to
a be a member.
   (D)   The Town Manager shall appoint, from among the department heads, an
acting Town Manager to serve in his or her absence for a period of up to 30
days of planned absence. For Town Manager absences exceeding 30 days and for
absences due to disability, termination or death, the Town Council shall
appoint an Acting Town Manager.
   (E)   The Town Manager shall receive compensation as determined by the
Council. The Town Manager shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses
incurred in the performance of official duties.
   (F)   The Town Manager shall be employed and/or terminated only by Council
action.
   (G)   The Town Manager shall be the head of the administrative branch of the
town government. The Town Manager shall, under the specific direction and
control of the Council, be responsible for the proper administration of the
affairs of the town.
      (1)   Except when excused, the Town Manager shall attend all meetings of
the Council.
      (2)   The Town Manager shall make personnel decisions regarding the
employment of all officers and employees of the town not appointed by the
Council. The Town Manager shall notify the Council, however, of his or her
intentions to hire, suspend, demote or remove a department head and, if a
Council member provides input, shall consider such input prior to making a
final decision regarding the department head.
      (3)   The Town Manager shall have the exclusive authority to control,
order and give directions to each department head, while each department head
shall retain the direct supervision of the employees within each department.
Personnel decisions involving disciplinary action concerning employees within a
department are within the sound discretion of the Town Manager, and shall be
made by the Town Manager or by the department head with the approval of the
Town Manager.
      (4)   Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members
shall deal with the town’s administrative functions solely through the Town
Manager. Neither the Council nor any member thereof shall give orders directly
to, or discuss job performance directly with, any subordinates of the Town
Manager, either publicly or privately, but may discuss the same directly with
the Town Manager. No individual member of the Council shall direct or request
of the Town Manager the appointment of any person to office or the removal from
office of any employee or any subordinates.
      (5)   It shall be the duty of the Town Manager to see that all laws and
ordinances of the town and that all franchises, contracts, permits and
privileges granted by the Council are faithfully observed and to report any
failure in that regard to the Council which shall give such instruction and
direction as it may desire for remedial, corrective or terminating action by
the Town Manager.
      (6)   In the discharge of duties, the Town Manager shall endeavor at all
times to exercise the highest degree of tact, patience and courtesy in contacts
with the public and with employees, to the end that the highest possible
standards of public service shall be continuously maintained.
      (7)   The Town Manager shall prepare an organizational chart for the
town. A copy of the chart must be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk
and available for public inspection during normal office operating hours.
(2001 Code, § 3-2-1) (Am. Ord. 523, passed - -2002; Am. Ord. 13-768, passed 4-
9-2013; Am. Ord. 2024-939, passed 2-13-2024)
§ 31.21 TOWN CLERK.
   (A)   The Clerk shall keep a true and correct record of all business
transacted by the Council and any other records that either pertain to the
business of the town or that the Council directs. The Clerk shall number,
plainly label and file separately in a suitable cabinet all ordinances,
resolutions, notices, deeds, surveys, leases, letters, orders and other
documents of whatever nature.
    (B)   The Clerk shall keep convenient for public inspection all public
records and public documents under his or her control, as provided by state
statute.
   (C)   The Clerk shall prepare or cause to be prepared all minutes of Council
proceedings and ensure their correctness and accuracy.
   (D)   Prior to each Council meeting, or on or before the time fixed by the
Council for preparation and distribution of the agenda, whichever is earlier,
the Clerk shall collect all written reports, communications, ordinances,
resolutions, contracts and other documents to be submitted to the Council,
shall prepare an agenda at the direction of the Mayor and according to the
order of business established by motion of Council and shall furnish each
Council member, the Mayor and the Attorney with a copy. The Clerk shall
process, record, file, publish and, if required by state statute, post all
ordinances, resolutions, budgets and notices that may be passed by the Council.
   (E)   The Clerk shall be the town election official and perform those duties
required by state statute.
   (F)   The Clerk shall issue or cause to be issued all licenses that may be
prescribed by state statute or this code.
   (G)   The Clerk shall perform those administrative responsibilities and
duties that are conferred upon the Clerk by the Council or the Town Manager in
addition to those specified in this code.
(2001 Code, § 3-2-2)
§ 31.22 TOWN MARSHAL.
   The Marshal shall be the Chief of Police and shall perform such duties as
may be required of the marshal by law and as the Council may deem necessary
herein.
(2001 Code, § 3-2-3)
§ 31.23 TOWN ENGINEER.
   The Town Engineer shall be a registered engineer and shall approve all
plans, which shall be submitted by a licensed engineer, for town streets,
drainage, sewers and waterworks under the jurisdiction of the town and shall
perform such duties as may be required by law and such other duties as the
Council may deem necessary.
(2001 Code, § 3-2-4)
§ 31.24 TOWN ATTORNEY.
   A town attorney may be appointed by Council, shall serve at the pleasure of
Council and shall report directly to Mayor and Council. The Attorney shall act
as the legal counselor and advisor of the Council and other town officials and,
as such, shall give an opinion in writing when requested. The Attorney shall
draft all deeds, contracts, conveyances, ordinances, resolutions and other
legal instruments when required by the Council. The Attorney shall approve as
to form, in writing, all drafts of contracts and all official or other bonds
before final approval or acceptance thereof by the Council. The Attorney shall
return all ordinances and resolutions with approval or disapproval as to form
noted thereon, together with the reasons therefor. The Attorney shall prosecute
and defend all suits, actions or causes where the town is a party and shall
report to the Council, when required, the condition of any suit or action to
which the town is a party.
(2001 Code, § 3-2-5)
§ 31.25 TOWN MAGISTRATE.
   The Town Magistrate shall be the presiding officer of the Magistrate’s
Court, shall be selected by the Council to serve a 2 or 4 year term and shall
perform those functions necessary to the maintenance of the Magistrate’s Court
as provided by state statute and as described herein.
(2001 Code, § 3-2-6)
§ 31.26 FINANCE DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The Finance Director shall prepare the annual budget for Council
approval and shall implement the same upon final approval.
   (B)   The Finance Director shall make regular financial reports to the
Council as to the fiscal status of the town and make such adjustments to the
budget as recommended to and approved by the Council.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Finance Director to see that no
indebtedness is incurred nor expenditure made in violation of the Arizona
Constitution, the state budget laws, Arizona Revised Statutes, or the Chino
Valley Procurement Code.
   (D)   The Finance Director shall hold the office of Town Treasurer and
receive and safely keep all monies that shall come to the town and pay out the
same when authorized by the Council. He or she shall keep a separate record and
account of each different fund provided by the Council, apportion the monies
received among the different funds as prescribed by the Council, and keep a
complete set of books showing: every money transaction of the town, the state
of each fund, from what source the money in each fund was derived, and for what
purpose expended, and he or she shall make regular reports to the Council of
all receipts and disbursements and the balance in each fund. At the end of the
fiscal year, he or she shall make a full and detailed statement of the receipts
and expenditures of the town during the year, specifying the different sources
of revenue and the amount received from each, all appropriations made by the
Mayor and Council, and the object for which they were made, and the amount of
money expended under each, the evidences of indebtedness issued, and what
portion remains thereof outstanding, with the rate and amount of interest due
thereon, and the amount of cash on hand.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS
§ 31.40 PURPOSE.
   In order to provide for the fair, orderly and timely enforcement of town
ordinances, resolutions and regulations, it is necessary for the town to employ
an enforcement official and to adopt an enforcement process to effectuate the
provisions of the town's ordinances, resolutions and regulations, which
include, but are not limited to, the sign ordinance, zoning ordinance,
subdivision regulations and street naming and numbering ordinance.
(2001 Code, § 3-3-1)
§ 31.41 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Citizens are encouraged to redress problems with neighbors in a
cooperative manner before involving the town in the problem.
   (B)   The town shall provide no enforcement assistance of deed restrictions
or other restrictive covenants contained in any real property instrument or
conveyance.
(2001 Code, § 3-3-2)
§ 31.42 INITIATION OF ENFORCEMENT PROCEEDINGS.
   Citizens may initiate an investigation of an alleged violation by filing a
complaint on a form provided by the Clerk. The complaint shall be filed with
the Clerk who shall forward it to the permit, license and zoning inspector,
hereinafter called enforcement official, for the town.
(2001 Code, § 3-3-3)
§ 31.43 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Within 5 working days after a reporting citizen’s complaint has been
duly and properly filed, the enforcement official shall investigate the
allegations contained in the complaint and issue a written report of the
results of the investigation.
   (B)   Within 3 working days from the date the enforcement official’s written
report is completed, a copy of the report shall be served, by reasonable
service, upon the reporting citizen and the alleged violator.
   (C)   If the enforcement official’s written report indicates that a town
ordinance, resolution or regulation has been violated, the enforcement official
shall issue a written notice of violation within 3 working days from the date
of the issuance of the written report as described in division (A) of this
section. The notice of violation shall specify the nature of the violation and
the ordinance, resolution or regulation violated. The notice of violation shall
be posted on the site where the violation is alleged to have occurred. Further,
a copy of the notice and a copy of this subchapter shall be personally served
upon the alleged violator.
   (D)   Within 30 days after the written notice is served and posted as stated
in division (C) above, the alleged violator shall correct the alleged
violation.
   (E)   A complete record of all investigations and actions taken on any
reporting citizen’s complaint shall be kept on file by the enforcement official
in the town hall.
(2001 Code, § 3-3-4)
§ 31.44 APPEALS.
   (A)   If either the reporting citizen or the alleged violator disagrees with
the results of the decision contained in the enforcement official’s written
report, either or both persons shall, within 30 days from the date of receiving
a copy of the report, request a hearing before the Board of Adjustment. The
request for hearing shall be filed with the Clerk.
      (1)   If a hearing is requested, it shall be granted no sooner than 15
days, nor more than 30 days after the request for hearing has been received by
the Clerk.
      (2)   At the conclusion of the hearing and, after due deliberation, the
Board of Adjustment shall issue a written opinion, containing appropriate
findings of fact, either affirming, modifying or negating the decision of the
enforcement official. If the Board of Adjustment affirms the decision of the
enforcement official, the Board of Adjustment shall also set a reasonable time
in which the alleged violator shall correct the alleged violation.
   (B)   The written opinion of the Board of Adjustment shall be appealable
directly to the Council by either the reporting citizen or the alleged
violator. A hearing to review the Board of Adjustment’s final decision shall be
heard by the Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
      (1)   At the hearing before the Council, the reporting citizen, the
alleged violator and a designated member of the Board of Adjustment shall
present testimony to the Council.
      (2)   At the conclusion of the Council hearing, and after due
deliberation, the Council shall issue a written decision, containing
appropriate findings of fact, either affirming, modifying or negating the
decision of the Board of Adjustment.
      (3)   If either the reporting citizen or the alleged violator is
dissatisfied with the decision of the Council, he or she may appeal the action
to the Yavapai County Superior Court.
(2001 Code, § 3-3-5)
VOLUNTEERS
§ 31.60 APPLICABILITY.
   The Town of Chino Valley hereby establishes the following policy for all
town volunteers.
(2001 Code, § 3-4-1)
§ 31.61 OBLIGATIONS OF THE TOWN TO VOLUNTEERS.
   (A)   The town recognizes the need to supplement its work force with
volunteers in various departments for the betterment of the community.
   (B)   The town does not pay its volunteers, either directly through the town
budget or indirectly through any town-sponsored group or organization.
   (C)   The town will recognize its volunteers during an annual ceremony held
in their honor.
   (D)   Upon prior approval of the Town Manager, the town may reimburse
volunteers for expenses, such as special clothing, incurred while serving the
town.
(2001 Code, § 3-4-2)
§ 31.62 OBLIGATIONS OF VOLUNTEERS.
   (A)   Volunteers are encouraged to keep accurate records of their mileage
and other deductible expenses for IRS purposes while serving.
   (B)   Volunteers are expected to give timely notice to their supervisor of
their absence from any scheduled assignment. Volunteers whose absence would
cause undue pressure on staff are encouraged to provide a replacement whenever
possible. Volunteers are also to notify their supervisor at least 2 weeks in
advance of an extended leave of absence or a planned resignation.
   (C)   Volunteers are expected to attend orientation and on-going training
sessions if provided.
   (D)   Volunteers are expected to contribute to a smooth working relationship
with paid staff and other volunteers.
   (E)   Volunteers must consult with their supervisor before assuming any new
volunteer responsibilities.
   (F)   Volunteers are to respect and accept the town’s right to dismiss any
volunteer for reasons including, but not limited to, poor performance, poor
attendance, unwillingness to accept directions or any other violation of this
subchapter.
(2001 Code, § 3-4-3)
CHAPTER 32: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
Procurement Policy
   
32.01   Scope
   
32.02   Definitions
   
32.03   Council approval; when required
   
32.04   Emergency purchases; procedure
   
32.05   Purchases in general
   
32.06   Lowest responsible bidder
   
32.07   Performance and payment bonds
   
32.08   Exceptions
   
32.09   Professional and technical services
   
32.10   Forms and rules
   
32.11   Waiver by Town Council
Tax Code
   
32.25   Adopted by reference
Fees
   
32.40   Adopted by resolution
PROCUREMENT POLICY
§ 32.01 SCOPE.
   This subchapter shall govern the purchase of all goods and services for or
on behalf of the town. No purchase or contract for supplies or services of any
kind or description, payment for which is to be made from funds of the town,
shall be made by the purchasing agent, or any officer, employee or agent of the
town, except in the manner set forth in this subchapter, and unless the
purchase is in accordance with the adopted town budget.
(2001 Code, Art. 3A-1) (Am. Ord. 13-775, passed 10-22-2013)
§ 32.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BID. To offer goods or services to the town in response to an oral or
written request for bids or a formal invitation for bids.
   BUSINESS. Any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship,
joint stock company, joint venture or any other private legal entity.
   CONSTRUCTION. The process of building, altering, improving, demolishing or
relocating any public structure or building, or other public improvements of
any kind to any public real property. CONSTRUCTION does not include the routine
operation, repair or maintenance of existing structures, buildings or real
property.
   CONTRACT. All types of town agreements, regardless of what they may be
called, for the procurement of goods, services or construction or the disposal
of materials.
   COOPERATIVE PURCHASE CONTRACT. A contract previously bid through a
competitive process by another governmental entity, including purchases from
the state bid list or from a purchasing cooperative.
   EMERGENCY PURCHASE. Procurement when goods or services are needed for a
situation where time is of the essence to provide for the health, safety or
welfare of the public.
   GOODS. Any materials, supplies, equipment, printing, insurance and leases of
property and equipment.
   IN HOUSE CONSTRUCTION PROJECT. A capital project, as defined in the current
budget, that is constructed using primarily regularly employed town personnel
or volunteer labor, pursuant to A.R.S. § 34-201, as amended.
   INVITATION FOR BID (IFB). All documents, including those attached or
incorporated by reference, used for soliciting bids where price is the sole
determining factor.
   PROCUREMENT. Buying, purchasing, renting, leasing or otherwise acquiring any
goods, services or construction, to include contracted professional services
not exempt by Arizona Revised Statutes.
   PROPOSAL. An offer to sell goods or services or a combination of goods and
services to the town in response to a request for proposals.
   REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS (RFP). All documents, including those attached or
incorporated by reference, used for soliciting proposals.
   REQUEST FOR QUALIFICATIONS (RFQ). All documents, including those attached or
incorporated by reference, used for soliciting statements of qualifications.
   RESPONSIBLE BIDDER OR PROPOSER. A bidder or proposer who has the capability
to fully perform the contract requirements and the reliability which will
assure performance of the contract.
   SERVICES. The furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor which does
not involve the delivery of a specific end product other than required reports
and performance.
   TOWN MANAGER. The manager of the town or designee.
(Ord. 2020-884, passed 8-11-2020)
§ 32.03 COUNCIL APPROVAL; WHEN REQUIRED.
   Council approval shall be obtained prior to making a purchase in the
following instances:
   (A)   Where the funds for the purchase are not provided in the budget as
adopted.
   (B)   For the expenditure of funds in the amount of $50,000 or more.
(Ord. 2020-884, passed 8-11-2020)
§ 32.04 EMERGENCY PURCHASES; PROCEDURE.
   In case of an emergency that requires immediate purchases of supplies or
services and when time is of the essence, the Town Manager is authorized to
approve emergency purchases up to $50,000, and the Mayor is authorized to
approve emergency purchases over $50,000, without complying with the
requirements and procedures in this chapter. A full report of the circumstances
of the emergency purchase, the goods or services obtained, the vendor used to
provide the supplies or services and the process used to select the vendor
shall be made to the Council at its next regular meeting.
(Ord. 2020-884, passed 8-11-2020)
§ 32.05 PURCHASES IN GENERAL.
   (A)   Purchase orders. All purchase orders shall be prepared and approved
prior to any purchase, except in the event of an emergency, as determined by
the Town Manager. Purchase orders may be issued for purchases up to $50,000,
subject to approval as set forth below.
      (1)   Budgeted and unbudgeted items under $10,000. Purchase orders may be
issued with department head authorization for budgeted items under $10,000;
unbudgeted items shall be submitted to and processed by the Finance Director
prior to the goods being ordered.
      (2)   Budgeted items over $10,000. For budgeted items over $10,000 but
less than $50,000, purchase orders must be submitted to and processed by the
Finance Director prior to the goods and services being ordered.
      (3)   Un-budgeted items over $10,000. Unbudgeted items over $10,000 but
less than $50,000 must be approved by the Town Manager before the goods or
services are ordered. Any request for an unbudgeted item must include
verification that there are funds available in the department’s budget to
absorb the unbudgeted cost.
      (4)   Purchases requiring Council approval. Any purchase of goods or
services over $50,000 requires Council approval.
      (5)   Town Attorney approval. Purchase orders for goods shall be in a
form approved by the Town Attorney. Purchases of services, regardless of
amount, must be approved by the Town Manager or designee, on forms approved by
the Town Attorney.
      (6)   Contingency funds. Purchases requiring the use of contingency funds
may be approved by the Town Manager up to $25,000. Council approval is required
for all purchases requiring the use of contingency funds totaling $25,000 or
more.
   (B)   Oral bids. For purchases of goods or services totaling less than
$2,500, any number of oral or written bids is sufficient. For purchases of
goods and services totaling more than $2,500, but less than $10,000, 3 informal
written bids shall be obtained whenever possible.
   (C)   Written bids. For purchases of $10,000 up to $50,000 for goods or
services, 3 written bids shall be obtained. In some cases, it may be impossible
to obtain 3 written bids, in which case, as many bids as practical shall be
obtained. The bids received shall be submitted with the purchase order.
   (D)   Formal purchases.
      (1)   Purchases over $50,000. The procurement of supplies and services
when the estimated total annual value will exceed $50,000 shall be made using a
written invitation for bids (IFB), a request for proposals (RFP), a request for
qualifications (RFQ), except as otherwise provided in this chapter or any
method permitted by A.R.S. Title 34. The using department’s director, with the
approval of the Town Manager or designee, shall determine which procurement
method (RFP, RFQ or IFB) will be most practical and advantageous to the town
for the procurement of the supplies or services.
      (2)   General.
         (a)   Notice of an IFB, RFP or RFQ shall include a description of the
goods or services required, shall state where the IFB, RFP or RFQ forms and
specifications may be obtained, the deadline for submitting a bid, proposal or
submittal, and shall include the location for opening the bids, proposals or
submittals. The notice of an IFB, RFP or RFQ shall be published pursuant to the
procedures set forth in A.R.S. § 39-204.
         (b)   Unless specifically required by Title 34, the Town Manager or
designee or using department director shall have authority to require that a
bid or proposal guarantee be submitted with any and all bids or proposals, and
performance bonds and payment bonds be submitted prior to execution of any
contract.
         (c)   Late bids, proposals or submittals shall be rejected and
returned unopened to the bidder or proposer.
         (d)   The due date and time for bids, proposals or submittals may be
extended by the Town Manager or designee after the published due date if the
Town Manager or designee determines it is in the town’s best interest.
         (e)   The IFB, RFP or RFQ may be delayed or cancelled by the Town
Manager or designee if the Town Manager or designee determines it is in the
town’s best interest.
         (f)   If the Town Manager or designee anticipates that a multiple
award will be made, and it is in the town’s best interest to do so, the IFB,
RFP or RFQ will include a notification of the intent of the town to make such
an award, in whole or in part by line item or group of items, and the criteria
upon which such an award will be based. A multiple award will be limited to the
least number of vendors necessary to meet the requirements of the town’s using
department(s).
         (g)   The Council shall have the authority, in its discretion, to
refuse an award to any bidder or proposer who is in default on the payment of
taxes, licenses or other moneys due the town at the time set for opening the
bid, proposal or submittal. All bidders and proposers must be in compliance, at
the time set for opening the bid, proposal or submittal, with all applicable
state licensing laws, rules and regulations.
         (h)   Awards resulting from an IFB, RFP and RFQ require Council
approval. Council may reject all bids, proposals or submittals at its sole
discretion.
         (i)   No contract or procurement shall be subdivided to avoid
procurement policy requirements.
         (j)   Renewable annual contracts for supplies purchased in large
quantities may be awarded subject to annual budget appropriation by the
Council. The value of such contracts shall be calculated as if all term
extensions are exercised.
         (k)   If 2 or more bids received pursuant to an IFB are for the same
total amount or unit price, quality and services being equal, and if the public
interest will not permit the delay of re-advertising for bids, the Council
shall determine the successful bidder by lot.
         (l)   A contract for professional services shall not be awarded to any
person or firm who participated in the preparation or evaluation that RFP or
RFQ.
         (m)   Formal purchase procedures may be waived with approval of the
Council, except for contracts subject to Title 34 of the Arizona Revised
Statutes.
      (3)   Invitation for bids (IFB).
         (a)   An IFB shall include a description, all contractual
specifications, terms and conditions applicable to the procurement and, for
projects governed by A.R.S. Title 34, Chapter 2, all information set forth in
A.R.S. § 34-201.
         (b)    Bids shall be opened publicly at the time and place designated
in the IFB. The amount of each bid, and such other relevant information as may
be specified by the Town Manager or designee or using department’s director,
together with the name of each bidder shall be recorded. A tabulation of all
bids received shall be posted in Town Hall for public inspection after the bid
opening. Trade secrets or other proprietary data designated in the bid as such
shall remain confidential unless otherwise required to be disclosed pursuant to
public records law.
         (c)    After bid opening, any changes to bid prices or other
provisions of bids or withdrawal of bids that are prejudicial to the interest
of the town or fair competition shall not be permitted. All decisions to permit
the correction of a bid mistake, to permit withdrawal of any bid based on a bid
mistake or, to cancel an award based on a bid mistake after bid opening shall
be supported by a written determination made by the Town Manager or designee.
         (d)   The contract shall be awarded to the lowest responsible and
responsive bidder whose bid conforms in all material respects to the
requirements and criteria set forth in the IFB. In making the determination of
the lowest responsible and responsive bidder, the Council may consider the
following:
            1.   The ability, capacity and experience of the bidder, its
employees and subcontractors to perform the contract.
            2.   Whether the bidder can perform the contract promptly, within
the time specified, without delay or interference.
            3.   The quality of performance of previous contracts.
            4.   The sufficiency of the financial resources of the bidder to
perform the contract.
            5.   The quality and adaptability of the materials, supplies or
services to the particular use required.
         (e)   If an award is not made to the lowest bidder, a statement of the
reason for not awarding to the lowest bidder shall be given in writing and be
placed in the contract file.
      (4)   Requests for proposals (RFP) and requests for qualifications (RFQ).
         (a)   Proposals for which price will be considered shall be solicited
through an RFP. Submittals based entirely on qualifications shall be solicited
through an RFQ.
         (b)   Proposals and submittals shall be opened publicly at the time
and place designated in the RFP or RFQ. The name of each proposer shall be
publicly read and recorded. Trade secrets or other proprietary data designated
in the proposal as such shall remain confidential, unless otherwise required to
be disclosed by the public records law.
         (c)   Discussion may be conducted with responsive proposers who submit
proposals or submittals determined to be reasonably susceptible to being
selected for award for the purpose of clarification to ensure full
understanding of, and responsiveness to, the solicitation requirements.
Proposers shall be accorded fair treatment with respect to any opportunity for
discussion and revision of proposals or submittals and such revisions may be
permitted after submissions and before award for the purpose of obtaining best
and final offers. In conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure of
any information derived from proposals or submittals from competing proposers
during the negotiation process. Where permitted in the RFQ or SOQ, and if the
Town Manager or designee believes it would be in the best interest of the town
to require proposers who are determined to be reasonably susceptible to being
selected for award of a contract, the Town Manager or designee may require such
proposers to submit their best and final offers, whether or not the scope has
been revised.
         (d)   For an RFP, the award shall be made to the responsible and
responsive proposer whose proposal is determined, in writing, to be the most
advantageous to the town and best meets the overall needs of the town taking
into consideration the evaluation of factors set forth in the RFP and this
division (D)(4)(d). The town is not bound to award the contract to the lowest
priced RFP. No other factors or criteria may be used in the evaluation other
than as set forth in the RFP or the following:
            1.   Price.
            2.   The ability, capacity and experience of the proposer, its
employees and subcontractors to perform the contract.
            3.   Whether the proposer can perform the contract promptly, or
within the time specified, without delay or interference.
            4.   The quality of performance of previous contracts.
            5.   The sufficiency of the financial resources of the proposer to
perform the contract.
            6.   The quality and adaptability of the materials, supplies or
services to the particular use required.
            7.   The number and scope of conditions attached to the proposer’s
offer, and conformance of the proposer’s offer to material aspects of the RFP.
         (e)   For an RFQ, the award shall be made based upon the factors in
the RFQ and division (D)(4)(d)2. through 7. above.
   (E)   Adoption of selected provisions of the State Procurement Code.
Pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-2501(C), the town is permitted to adopt all or any part
of the State Procurement Code and abide by its rules in the procurement of
goods and services. When such provisions have been adopted, they will be
specifically set forth in this code.
   (F)   Contracting authority. The Town Manager or designee may approve, and
shall execute, all contracts in amounts less than $50,000. All contracts for
purchases totaling $50,000 or more shall be approved by the Town Council and
executed by the Mayor or the Town Manager. The Town Manager is also authorized
to execute, without further Town Council approval, amendments to contracts
approved by the Town Council so long as such amendments do not, individually or
collectively, exceed $50,000.
(2020-884, passed 8-11-2020)
§ 32.06 LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER.
   (A)   Unless the Council or the Town Manager, as appropriate, exercises the
right of rejection, bids for all supplies, goods and services in an amount in
excess of $50,000 shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, except as
provided in §§
32.05 and
32.08.
   (B)   In determining the lowest responsible bidder, the Council or the Town
Manager may consider:
      (1)   The ability, similar prior work, capacity, and skill of the bidder
to perform the contract or provide the service required in a timely manner;
      (2)   The quality of performance of previous contracts together with
previous and existing compliance with the ordinances of the town or state law;
      (3)   The financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform under
the terms of the contract;
      (4)   The quality, availability, and adaptability of the goods or
services.
(Ord. 2020-884, passed 8-11-2020)
§ 32.07 PERFORMANCE AND PAYMENT BONDS.
   The Town hereby adopts the provisions of A.R.S. § 41-2574, as amended with
regard to performance and payment bonds. Performance and payment bonds, each in
an amount equal to 100% of the contract price, are required for all contracts
in excess of the amount established in A.R.S. § 41-2535. The Town Manager shall
have the authority to determine whether performance and payment bonds are
necessary and, if they are, the amount deemed sufficient for a contract below
the amount established in A.R.S. § 41-2535.
(Ord. 2020-884, passed 8-11-2020)
§ 32.08 EXCEPTIONS.
   The following procurements are exempt from the requirements of this
subchapter to the extent set forth below:
   (A)   Sole source provider. If there is only 1 known person or entity
capable of providing a particular good or service, the requirement of this
subchapter concerning bidding procedures shall not be applicable. Documentation
and justification of the sole source provider shall be included in writing with
submission of the purchase order.
   (B)   Used equipment. Upon recommendation of the Town Manager, the Council
may elect to waive the bid procedures with respect to the purchase of used
equipment.
   (C)   Cooperative purchasing. The Council may approve a cooperative purchase
or award a contract for service without a formal bidding process whenever
another governmental unit or public procurement unit has conducted a formal
bidding process for the same item or service if, in the opinion of the Town
Manager, a separate bidding process is not likely to result in a lower price
for the items or services.
   (D)   Construction projects. Construction projects shall comply with A.R.S.
Title 34, including modifications thereto resulting from the town’s adoption of
A.R.S. § 41-2574, as amended.
   (E)   Brand name compatibility. The town may request brand names for items
used on a regular basis, as long as such designation is for the purpose of
maintaining compatibility of like equipment and the efficiencies associated
with the use of compatible equipment.
   (F)   Intergovernmental agreements. Intergovernmental agreements pursuant to
A.R.S. §§ 11-251 et seq.
   (G)   Emergency purchases. Emergency purchases, as set forth in §
32.04.
(Ord. 2020-884, passed 8-11-2020)
§ 32.09 PROFESSIONAL AND TECHNICAL SERVICES.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of A.R.S. Title 34, the town may procure
professional or technical services provided by licensed professionals such as
engineers, architects, or attorneys, by direct selection, RFP or RFQ.
   (B)   No person or firm practicing in a professional or technical field for
which a license is required by state law shall be engaged by the town unless
possessing a current license in good standing.
(Ord. 2020-884, passed 8-11-2020)
§ 32.10 FORMS AND RULES.
   The Town Manager shall prescribe and maintain the forms and rules as he or
she shall find necessary for the operation of the provisions of this
subchapter.
(2001 Code, Art. 3A-10) (Am. Ord. 13-775, passed 10-22-2013)
§ 32.11 WAIVER BY TOWN COUNCIL.
   Except as otherwise required by Arizona law, the town council may waive the
requirements set forth in this subchapter upon finding that doing so is in the
best interest of the town. Criteria justifying such a finding include but are
not limited to: situations where timing or expediency is critical; special or
unique qualifications of an individual, firm, vendor or item(s); the
procurement of additional goods or services under an existing contract; or to
comply with specific requirements of a gift or grant.
(Ord. 13-775, passed 10-22-2013)
TAX CODE
§ 32.25 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Tax Code is adopted by reference and hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(Am. Res. 614, passed - -2000; Am. Ord. 537, passed - -2003; Am. Res. 614,
passed - -2003; Am. Ord. 04-581, passed 6-24-2004; Am. Ord. 06-658, passed 5-
25-2006; Am. Res. 06-791, passed 5-25-2006; Am. Res. 06-824, passed 12-14-2006;
Am. Ord. 06-681, passed 12-14-2006; Am. Res. 08-876, passed 6-12-2008; Am. Ord.
08-704, passed 6-12-2008; Am. Res. 09-916, passed 9-10-2009; Am. Ord. 09-722,
passed 9-10-2009; Am. Res. 11-967, passed 9-13-2011; Am. Ord. 11-751, passed 9-
13-2011; Am. Ord. 16-826, passed 12-13-2016; Am. Ord. 18-843, passed 2-13-2018)
FEES
§ 32.40 ADOPTED BY RESOLUTION.
   All fees, fines, and charges shall be adopted by resolution of the Council.
CHAPTER 33: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
33.01   Created; composition
   
33.02   Appointment of officers
   
33.03   Compensation of officers
   
33.04   Departmental rules and regulations
   
33.05   Duties
   
33.06   Answering calls outside town
   
33.07   Meet and confer
Cross-reference:
   Powers and duties of animal control officers, see §
90.07
§ 33.01 CREATED; COMPOSITION.
   There is hereby created a Police Department for the town which shall consist
of a Chief of Police, who shall also serve as Town Marshal, and as many police
officers as may from time to time be deemed necessary for the safety and good
order of the town.
(2001 Code, § 4-1-1)
§ 33.02 APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS.
   The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Town Manager.
(2001 Code, § 4-1-2)
§ 33.03 COMPENSATION OF OFFICERS.
   The Chief of Police and the police officers of the town shall be compensated
as determined by the Council. The Chief of Police shall not receive any
perquisites, commissions or compensation for his or her services as Chief of
Police, except as the Council may prescribe.
(2001 Code, § 4-1-3)
§ 33.04 DEPARTMENTAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Chief shall formulate a set of rules and regulations to govern the
department and shall be responsible to the Town Manager for Department
personnel, morale and general efficiency of the Department.
(2001 Code, § 4-1-4)
§ 33.05 DUTIES.
   It is the duty of the Police Department, under the direction of the Chief of
Police, to:
   (A)   Enforce this code and the statutes of the State of Arizona within
jurisdictional limits as conferred by law and to arrest and charge the
violators thereof;
   (B)   Render such account of the Police Department, its duties and receipts
as may be required by the Council, and keep records of the office open to
inspection by the Council at any time, except those records as may be exempted
by stated or federal law;
   (C)   Enforce the traffic regulations of the town as specified herein and
enforce the traffic laws of the state within the limits of the town; and
   (D)   Perform such additional duties as may be required by the Council.
(2001 Code, § 4-1-5)
§ 33.06 ANSWERING CALLS OUTSIDE TOWN.
   The members of the Police Department of the town are duly authorized to
answer calls for aid and assistance beyond the corporate limits of the town
pursuant to mutual aid agreements and state statutes.
(2001 Code, § 4-1-6)
§ 33.07 MEET AND CONFER.
   (A)   Findings and purpose. The town hereby finds and declares that:
      (1)   The town has a fundamental interest in the development of
harmonious and cooperative relations between town management, elected
officials, administrators and the law enforcement employees of the town.
      (2)   Recognition by the town of the fundamental rights of public law
enforcement employees to organize, and full acceptance of the principle and
procedure of full communication between public employers and public law
enforcement employees can alleviate various forms of strife and unrest.
      (3)   The town, its law enforcement employees and law enforcement
employee organization, have a basic obligation to the public to assure the
orderly and continuous operations and functions of government.
      (4)   Strikes, work stoppages, slowdowns and other concerted efforts
designated to disrupt town services, are contrary to the public good and are
strictly prohibited. Participation in such efforts may be grounds for
termination.
      (5)   It is the purpose of this section to obligate the town management,
town law enforcement employees and their representatives, acting within the
framework of the law, to enter into discussions with affirmative willingness to
resolve issues, grievances and disputes relating to working conditions, wages,
benefits and safety regulations. It is also the purpose of this section to
promote harmonious employer-law enforcement employee relations by providing a
uniform basis for recognizing the right of public law enforcement employees to
join, or refrain from joining, an organization of their own choice. Also, it is
their right to be represented by such organization in their dealing with the
town in accordance with the provisions of this section. Additionally, this
section provides that the results of agreements between the employer and its
law enforcement employees shall be drafted into written memorandums of
understanding.
   (B)   Law enforcement employee group.
      (1)   There shall be 1 law enforcement employee group within the town. It
shall include: police officers, field training officers, detectives, sergeants,
animal control officers, dispatch supervisors, dispatchers, and records
employees of the Police Department.
      (2)   Authorized representation of a law enforcement employee group shall
be determined by the presentation of a petition, or signed membership cards, to
the Town Manager containing the signatures of at least 50% plus 1 of the law
enforcement employees in the above-designated law enforcement group. The
petition/membership card shall designate the law enforcement employee group and
the law enforcement employee organization designated to represent those
employees. Upon verification of the signatures, the Town Manager shall
designate the named law enforcement employee organization as the official and
exclusive law enforcement employee organization for representation purposes
provided for by this section. The designated law enforcement employee
organization shall have the right to bi-weekly or monthly dues deductions, if
approved by the law enforcement employees of the organization.
   (C)   Meeting and conferring.
      (1)   The law enforcement employee organization that has been verified by
the Town Manager, may submit a proposal to the Town Manager relating to wages,
benefits, safety regulations and other working conditions, by January 15 each
year.
      (2)   Upon receiving a proposal from a verified law enforcement employee
organization, the Town Manager shall submit a written response to the proposal
to the law enforcement employee organization within 30 days.
      (3)   Within 10 days from the receipt of the Town Manager’s response, the
Town Manager and representatives of the law enforcement employee organization
shall begin meeting and conferring at mutually agreed upon locations and times,
for the purpose of entering into a written memorandum of understanding relating
to the proposal regarding wages, benefits, safety regulations, and/or other
working conditions. Meetings shall be at least 3 hours in duration, unless
mutually agreed otherwise. Meetings shall take place in accordance with a
mutually agreed upon schedule until an agreement is reached or an impasse is
declared.
      (4)   The Town Manager, or a designated representative, and the
representative of the law enforcement employee organization, shall reduce any
areas of agreement to writing and initial the same. Those areas in which an
impasse is declared shall be outlined as areas in dispute.
      (5)   On or before May 1 each year, all areas of agreement, as well as
those areas in dispute, shall be submitted by the Town Manager to the Mayor and
Council for consideration. The Mayor and Council may accept, reject or modify
those areas of agreement. The Mayor and Council may also take whatever actions
they feel appropriate with regard to those areas in dispute. Final action by
the Mayor and Council shall constitute the memorandum of understanding for the
following fiscal year(s).
   (D)   Amendments. The provisions of this section shall only be amended,
changed or altered in accordance with applicable state law.
(Ord. 08-705, passed 8-14-2008)
CHAPTER 34: COURT
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Magistrate Court established; jurisdiction
   
34.02   Presiding officer
   
34.03   Proceedings of Court
   
34.04   Costs of confinement
   
34.05   Home detention program
Municipal Court Fees
   
34.20   Authority to set fee amounts
   
34.21   Establishment of funds and allocation of fees
   
34.22   Establishment of court fees
   
34.23   Court collection fees
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 MAGISTRATE COURT ESTABLISHED; JURISDICTION.
   There is hereby established in the town a Magistrate Court which shall have
jurisdiction of over all cases arising under this code. The Court shall have
jurisdiction, concurrently with justices of the peace of the precinct in which
the town is located, of violations of the state laws within the limits of the
town.
(2001 Code, Art. 5-1) (Am. Ord. 492, passed - -2002; Am. Ord. 12-759, passed 6-
26-2012)
§ 34.02 PRESIDING OFFICER.
   (A)   Presiding Magistrate.
      (1)   The Council shall appoint a presiding Magistrate of the Court who
shall serve a minimum term of 2 years upon initial appointment. Thereafter, the
Council may reappoint the presiding Magistrate for terms of not less than 2 nor
more than 4 years. The beginning and end of each term shall be specified at the
time of appointment or reappointment. The Council shall remove the presiding
Magistrate only for cause, in accordance with the Arizona Constitution and
state law.
      (2)   The presiding Magistrate may appoint associate magistrates, special
magistrates and hearing officers as are necessary for the efficient and
continuing operation of the Court. Those persons who are appointed shall
provide services for the Court in the absence or disability of the presiding
Magistrate, and in those cases where the presiding Magistrate is recused from
any matter or proceeding. Any associate magistrate or special magistrate shall
be a sitting or retired judge, judge pro tempore, or magistrate. Any hearing
officer who does not meet the qualifications of an associate or special
magistrate shall be approved by the Council prior to appointment.
      (3)   Associate or special magistrates and hearing officers appointed by
the presiding Magistrate shall serve on a case-by-case basis or for specific
periods of time as assigned. They may serve on a voluntary basis or are
eligible for compensation from the “other professional services” account of the
Court, subject to the policies and rates of pay established by the Court.
(2001 Code, § 5-2-1)
   (B)   Powers and duties of Town Magistrate. The powers and duties of the
Magistrate shall include:
      (1)   The powers and duties set forth and conferred upon him or her under
the provisions of the state constitution and statutes, this code and the
ordinances and resolutions of the town;
      (2)   The keeping of a docket in which shall be entered each action and
the proceedings of the Court therein;
      (3)   The responsibility for fixing and receiving all bonds and bails and
receiving and accounting for all fines, penalties, fees and other monies as
provided by law;
      (4)   Payment to appropriate town, county or state officials of all fees,
fines, penalties and other monies collected by the Court;
      (5)   Submitting a monthly report to the Council summarizing Court
activities for that month and assuring that the town’s Finance Department
conducts quarterly reviews of the Court financial records;
      (6)   Preparation of a schedule of traffic violations not involving the
death of a person, listing specific bail for each violation; and
      (7)   The Magistrate may hire Court clerks as may become necessary
subject to budget restrictions and the provisions of the personnel policy
manual.
(2001 Code, § 5-2-2)
(Am. Ord. 492, passed - -2002; Am. Ord. 12-759, passed 6-26-2012)
§ 34.03 PROCEEDINGS OF COURT.
   (A)   The proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with the state
constitution, the applicable state statutes and rules of the state’s Supreme
Court pertaining to police courts. The proceedings shall also be conducted in
accordance with the rules of criminal procedure for the Superior Court, unless
otherwise prescribed, and providing this code and resolutions of the town are
not in conflict therewith.
   (B)   The Magistrate Court proceedings shall be commenced by complaint under
oath and in the name of the state setting forth the offense charged with and
such particulars of time, place, person and property as to enable the defendant
to understand distinctly the character of the offense complained of and to
answer the complaint.
   (C)   If the Magistrate is satisfied that the offense complained of has been
committed by the person charged, he or she shall issue a summons or a warrant
of arrest. Before issuing a summons or warrant of arrest on a complaint, the
Magistrate may subpoena and examine witnesses as to the truth of the complaint.
(2001 Code, Art. 5-3) (Am. Ord. 492, passed - -2002)
§ 34.04 COSTS OF CONFINEMENT.
   (A)   Payment of costs of confinement.
      (1)   Any person who is convicted of a misdemeanor criminal offense in
the Municipal Court and who, as a consequence, is incarcerated in the Yavapai
County Jail, may as part of any sentence imposed by the Municipal Court be
required to reimburse through the Municipal Court to Yavapai County for actual
expenses incurred by reason of such confinement at the daily prisoner cost rate
or fee imposed by Yavapai County. The fees, if collected by the Municipal
Court, shall be forwarded to Yavapai County.
      (2)   In the event the daily prisoner cost charges, rate or fee by
Yavapai County should increase or decrease following August 28, 1992, then the
fee imposed herein shall similarly be increased or decreased.
(2001 Code, § 5-4-1)
   (B)   Waiver of costs for indigents. No person shall be required to pay the
fee established by this chapter who is found by the Municipal Court to be
indigent.
(2001 Code, § 5-4-2)
   (C)   Collection of fee. In addition to any other remedies which may be
allowed by law, the Town Attorney is authorized to institute any appropriate
civil suit in a court of competent jurisdiction for recovery of the fee
referred to in this chapter.
(2001 Code, § 5-4-3)
(Am. Ord. 492, passed - -2002)
§ 34.05 HOME DETENTION PROGRAM.
   (A)   There is hereby established in the town a prisoner work, community
restitution work, and home detention program for eligible sentenced prisoners,
as authorized by and in compliance with A.R.S. § 9-499.07. This program shall
be implemented only after approval by the Presiding Magistrate of the
Magistrate Court, and shall operate only in compliance with A.R.S. § 9-499.07.
Home detention shall not be granted in a sentence imposed for an offense
involving domestic violence as defined by A.R.S. § 13-3601, in a sentence
imposed for an offense involving prostitution as defined by A.R.S. § 13-3214 or
solicitation thereof, in a sentence imposed upon a person who constitutes a
risk to himself or other members of the community, in a sentence imposed upon a
person with a history of violent behavior, or in any situation in which a
prisoner is ineligible for home detention pursuant to the terms of A.R.S. § 9-
499.07.
   (B)   There is hereby established, within the overall structure of the
prisoner work, community restitution work, and home detention program for
eligible sentenced prisoners, a home detention program for persons who are
sentenced to jail confinement pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 28-1381 or 28-1382. A
person placed under such program shall bear the cost of all testing,
monitoring, and enrollment in alcohol or substance abuse programs unless, after
determining the inability of the prisoner to pay the cost, the court assesses a
lesser amount. A person placed under such program shall not be eligible for
home detention until the person has served a minimum of one day in jail or 20%
of the initial term of incarceration in jail, as applicable pursuant to A.R.S.
§ 9-499.07.N.
   (C)   There is hereby established a continuous alcohol monitoring program
for persons who are sentenced to jail confinement pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 28-1381
or 28-1382. This program shall be implemented only after approval by the
Presiding Magistrate of the Magistrate Court, and shall operate only in
compliance with A.R.S. § 9-499.07.
   (D)   The Presiding Magistrate of the Magistrate Court shall maintain
detailed criteria for the town’s prisoner work, community restitution work,
home detention, and continuous alcohol monitoring program or programs,
including eligibility criteria (the “Program”). The initial Program, as
reflected in Exhibit A to Ordinance No. 2021-905, is hereby adopted as if fully
set forth herein. The Program shall be subject to amendment, from time to time,
by the Presiding Magistrate at her own discretion, provided that it shall
comply at all times with the provisions of this section and with the provisions
of A.R.S. § 9-499.07.
(Ord. 2021-905, passed 9-28-2021; Am. Ord. 2022-922, passed 9-13-2022)
MUNICIPAL COURT FEES
§ 34.20 AUTHORITY TO SET FEE AMOUNTS.
   (A)   Presiding magistrate to set and submit to Council. The amount to be
charged by Municipal Court for all fees set forth in this chapter is to be set
by the presiding Magistrate of the Municipal Court and submitted by resolution
to the Town Council for approval. Fees can not be changed more often than every
six months.
   (B)   Resubmission. If the Town Council does not approve the fee schedule
submitted by the presiding Magistrate, the presiding Magistrate may resubmit a
new fee schedule for approval as often as deemed necessary. The most recent fee
schedule will remain in effect until a new fee schedule is approved.
   (C)   Automatic annual adjustment. On July 1 of each year, commencing in
2007, the amount of the Municipal Court fees to be paid to the town pursuant to
this section shall be increased by the percentage change in the annual average
of the Engineering News Record (ENR) index between the prior 2 calendar years.
The Finance Director shall make the required calculation by April 1 of each
year, and the amount of the Municipal Court fees for the next 12-month period,
beginning July 1 of that year, as calculated by the Finance Director based upon
such calculation, without the necessity of further action by the Council. In no
event shall the amount of the Municipal Court fees be reduced based upon a
change in the ENR index. No later than 60 days prior to the Municipal Court
fees being adjusted each year as provided in this section, the Town Clerk shall
cause the proposed fees to be posted on the town’s home page. In the event the
ENR index information for the prior calendar years is unavailable by April 1,
the Municipal Court fees as previously fixed for the prior fiscal year (July 1
to June 30) shall continue in effect until such time as the ENR index for the
prior year is available; the Finance Director makes the required calculation;
and the proposed fees are posted on the town’s home page for at least 60 days
prior to becoming effective.
(2001 Code, Art. 5-5-1) (Ord. 06-656, passed 4-13-2006; Am. Ord. 16-809, passed
1-26-2016)
§ 34.21 ESTABLISHMENT OF FUNDS AND ALLOCATION OF FEES.
   (A)   Municipal Court Improvement Account. There is hereby established a
Municipal Court Improvement Account, which shall be used exclusively to enhance
the technological, operational, and security capabilities of the Municipal
Court. The Municipal Court Improvement Account shall be established as an
interest bearing account in accordance with town policies and procedures. The
Municipal Court shall collect the court improvement fees as defined in this
section and deposit them in the court improvement account on a monthly basis.
   (B)   Municipal Court Collection Account. There is hereby established a
Municipal Court Collection Account, which shall be used exclusively to enhance
the technological, operational, and security capabilities of the Municipal
Court collection program. The Court Collection Account shall be established as
an interest bearing account in accordance with town policies and procedures.
The Municipal Court shall collect warrant and suspended license fees, as set
forth in §
34.22 and deposit them in the court collection account on a monthly basis.
   (C)   Traffic case processing fee. All such fees shall be distributed to the
town’s General Fund.
   (D)   Allocation of fees. All current and future fees not designated to be
deposited in a specific account, as defined in this section, are to be included
in the court’s monthly remittance to the town’s general account as
reimbursement for costs of court operations.
(2001 Code, Art. 5-5-2) (Ord. 06-656, passed 4-13-2006; Am. Ord. 06-662, passed
6-8-2006; Am. Ord. 09-717, passed 3-12-2009; Am. Ord. 16-809, passed 1-26-2016)
§ 34.22 ESTABLISHMENT OF COURT FEES.
   (A)   The following fees are hereby established to be collected by the
Municipal Court:
      (1)   Court improvement fee. A court improvement fee shall be applied to
each case in which fines, sanctions, penalties, and assessments are imposed by
the Municipal Court. The improvement fee shall also apply to fees collected for
court authorized diversion programs. COURT AUTHORIZED DIVERSION PROGRAM, as
used in this section, means a program in which an individual charged with any
civil, criminal, or petty offense is not prosecuted for the offense on
successful completion of an authorized diversion program and includes
authorized defensive driving courses.
      (2)   Warrant fee. A warrant fee shall be imposed for each warrant issued
by the court. Any person who has a warrant issued by the court for failure to
appear, failure to comply with a court order, or any other warrant from the
bench shall be required to pay this fee to the town for the cost of issuing and
servicing the warrant.
      (3)   Suspended license fee. A suspended license fee shall be imposed for
each driver’s license suspension issued by the court. Any person who has had a
suspension issued by the court for failure to pay a civil traffic fine or for
any other reason shall be required to pay this fee to the town for the cost of
issuing and servicing the suspension.
      (4)   Traffic case processing fee. The Municipal Court shall collect a
traffic case processing fee, in addition to the fine imposed by the Court, upon
the finding of responsibility or guilt for a traffic violation. For purposes of
this section, TRAFFIC VIOLATION means a violation of Title VII of this code of
ordinances, entitled “Traffic Code,” relating to traffic movement or control;
or Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 28, as follows: (i) Chapter 3, Articles 1-
15; (ii) Chapter 4; (iii) Chapter 5; (iv) Chapter 7, Article 5; (v) Chapter 8,
Articles 4, 6 and 8; (vi) Chapter 9, Article 4; or (vii) Chapter 25, Article
3, except for federal licensing, registration and insurance disclosure
requirements pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 28-8271, 28-8272 and 28-8275, as may be
amended from time to time. The Court shall impose a single traffic case
processing fee per case, regardless of the number of traffic violations arising
out of any one case or complaint.
      (5)   NSF service fee. An NSF service fee shall be applied to any person
who issues a check to the court in payment of a fee or fine where the check is
returned by the financial institution for insufficient funds.
      (6)   Research fee. A research fee shall be required of any person who
requests extensive records searches and case file copying who is not a victim
of the crime alleged by the case or complaint for which he is requesting
records. The fee shall be paid prior to the person receiving the records
requested unless prior arrangements have been made with the court administrator
due to extenuating circumstances.
      (7)   Case file copies fee. A case file copies fee shall be charged to
any person who is a non-party to a lawsuit who requests a copy of the case
file. The case file copies fee shall be per page of copies provided.
      (8)   Deferred prosecution fee. A deferred prosecution fee shall be
assessed on every defendant who enters a deferred prosecution agreement with
the municipal court.
      (9)   Suspended sentencing fee. When a person's sentence is suspended by
the court, the person shall pay to the court a suspended sentencing fee.
      (10)   Indigent defense fee. An indigent defense fee shall be added by
the court to sentencing terms when a defendant is represented in court by a
public defender.
   (B)   If a person has been found by the Municipal Court to be indigent, the
Municipal Court Magistrate may reduce the amount of any fee set forth in this
section based upon the individual's ability to pay.
   (C)   In addition to any other remedies which may be allowed by law, the
Town Attorney is authorized to institute civil legal proceedings in any court
of competent jurisdiction to recover any fee owing under this section.
(2001 Code, Art. 5-5-3) (Ord. 06-656, passed 4-13-2006; Am. Ord. 09-717, passed
3-12-2009; Am. Ord. 16-809, passed 1-26-2016)
§ 34.23 COURT COLLECTION FEES.
   (A)   The Municipal Court is hereby authorized to assess a “court collection
service fee” or may authorize the payment by a defendant of collection costs
directly to a collection agency or attorney. The fee imposed or payment
authorized is to be in an amount, determined by the Court, based on the actual
costs of collection, and explained as follows:
      (1)   A defendant who defaults in his or her obligation for the payment
of monies owed or due to the Municipal Court, including but not limited to
restitution, fines, sanctions, surcharges, assessments, penalties, bonds,
costs, and/or fees, is liable for any and all fees and charges assessed by a
collection agency that is licensed, pursuant to A.R.S. 32-1021 et seq. (Title
32, Chapter 9, Article 2), or a duly licensed attorney, that has been engaged
by the Municipal Court to collect and enforce such payment.
      (2)   The collection fees and charges assessed by the collection agency
or the attorney shall be added to the sum or sums due from and chargeable
against the defendant.
   (B)   The Magistrate is authorized to enter into an agreement or agreements
on behalf of the Municipal Court with any collection agency that is licensed,
pursuant to A.R.S. 32-1021 et seq. (Title 32, Chapter 9, Article 2), and/or any
duly licensed attorney, for the purpose of providing collection services for
the Court. Said agreement(s) is to be authorized without cost to the Municipal
Court or to the town, unless otherwise specifically budgeted and approved for
payment from the Municipal Court’s other professional services account.
   (C)   The effective date of any assessments authorized herein shall be May
12, 2002. All defendants who are in default in his or her obligation(s) for the
payment of monies owed or due to the Municipal Court, including but not limited
to restitution, fines, sanctions, surcharges, assessments, penalties, bonds,
costs, and/or fees, prior to the above date shall be provided with written
notice to the defendant’s last known address that they shall have a 30-day
grace period to satisfy said obligation(s) before assessments are imposed upon
them.
(2001 Code, Art. 5-5-4) (Am. Ord. 492, passed - -2002; Ord. 06-656, passed 4-
13-2006)
CHAPTER 35: CODE OF ETHICS
Section
   
35.01   Generally
   
35.02   Responsibilities of public office
   
35.03   Conflict of interest
   
35.04   Conduct in public office
   
35.05   Code of ethics complaints; filings and procedures
§ 35.01 GENERALLY.
   (A)   ETHICS is defined here as the rules or standards governing those
persons functioning as representatives of the town. These rules and standards
are based upon a set of values judged to be moral to the extent that they
enhance society and an individual’s relationship to others.
   (B)   A representative of the town is defined here as a public official,
elected or appointed, salaried or unpaid, including the Mayor, Council members
and any board or commission member.
   (C)   The purpose of this code is to establish ethical standards of conduct
for these public officials acting in their official public capacity.
(2001 Code, § 2-6-1)
§ 35.02 RESPONSIBILITIES OF PUBLIC OFFICE.
   (A)   By oath of office each representative is responsible to uphold the
Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of Arizona and
the ordinances and regulations of the town. The public official shall perform
his obligations in a manner that is impartial and responsible to all people.
   (B)   The public official shall not use his position for personal or
monetary gain.
   (C)   The public official shall not disclose confidential information
concerning the property, government or affairs of the town without proper legal
authorization.
(2001 Code, § 2-6-2)
§ 35.03 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   (A)   This code shall reinforce any existing affirmation regarding conflict
of interest contained in the public official’s oath of office. When acting in a
public capacity, the public official shall abstain from participating in
discussion and vote on any pending matter that would result in his or her
financial or private gain.
   (B)   The public official shall not directly or indirectly solicit, accept
or receive any gift, whether it be money, services, loan, travel,
entertainment, hospitality, promise or any other form that could be reasonably
inferred to influence the performance of his or her official duties and actions
or serve as a reward for any official action.
(2001 Code, § 2-6-3)
§ 35.04 CONDUCT IN PUBLIC OFFICE.
   (A)   The public official shall not discuss or divulge confidential
information acquired by him or her in the course of his or her official duties
nor shall he or she use this information for his or her own personal interest
or aggrandizement.
   (B)   The public official shall respect the rights, privileges and opinions
of his or her fellow officials, staff and the public at large. Council members
shall exhibit respect for the public, other governmental units and agencies,
and the professional and ethical conduct of the Town Manager and staff.
Propriety dictates that the public official be sensitive to the possible
confidential or personal nature of directives addressed to other individuals.
In bringing honor to the title and in recognition of the weighty respect due
the role of public official, those elected to public office shall:
      (1)   Lead by example;
      (2)   Demonstrate civil and courteous conduct at all times;
      (3)   Seek and speak the truth;
      (4)   Respect all people;
      (5)   Accept respectful dissension as a civic right.
   (C)   In his or her dealings with town employees, the public official shall
maintain professional conduct with respect to the employee’s work assignments
and obligations, and shall refrain from directly influencing the professional
management of the town's administration by any means other than direct
communication with the Town Manager. The office of the public official shall in
no situation be used to wrongfully obtain information or administrative
outcomes, either by intimidation or by deliberately violating the privacy of an
employee’s work station.
   (D)   All public officials shall comply with this code of ethics.
(2001 Code, § 2-6-4) (Am. Ord. 13-768, passed 4-9-2013; Am. Ord. 15-796, passed
4-28-2015)
§ 35.05 CODE OF ETHICS COMPLAINTS; FILINGS AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Code of ethics violations are Council matters and complaints shall
only be made by members of the Town Council.
   (B)   Complaints alleging violations to this chapter shall be in writing and
filed by the complainant with the Mayor and/or Vice Mayor, unless the Mayor
and/or Vice Mayor file or are named in the complaint. In that event, the
complaint shall be filed with the Town Attorney. Any and all documents in
support of the complaint shall be attached to the complaint at the time it is
filed.
   (C)   Complaints will be addressed by the council within 60 days of receipt
by the Mayor, Vice Mayor or Town Attorney in compliance with the procedures set
forth in this section.
   (D)   The Mayor, Vice Mayor or Town Attorney who receive a complaint shall
forward it and all attachments to the Town Clerk within 3 business days of
receipt and at least 3 weeks prior to the complaint being placed on council's
agenda.
   (E)   At least 2 weeks prior to the Council's consideration of the
complaint, the Town Clerk shall provide a copy of the complaint and all
supporting documents to the respondent.
   (F)   Only one complaint alleging a violation of the ethics code shall be
addressed at any 1 Council meeting.
   (G)   Only 1 person may be accused of a code of ethics violation per
complaint.
   (H)   If the Mayor is either the complainant or the respondent, the
Council's consideration of the ethics complaint shall be chaired by the Vice
Mayor.
   (I)   Council's procedure for addressing the complaint during its meeting
shall be as follows:
      (1)   Introduction of item;
      (2)   Presentation by complainant (10 minutes maximum);
      (3)   Presentation by respondent (10 minutes maximum);
      (4)   Additional information by complainant (if any) (5 minutes maximum);
      (5)   Additional information by respondent (if any) (5 minutes maximum);
      (6)   Council discussion; and
      (7)   Council decision.
(Ord. 15-796, passed 4-28-2015; Am. Ord. 15-800, passed 6-9-2015)
CHAPTER 36: LEGISLATIVE PROVISIONS
Section
Ordinances, Resolutions, and Contracts
   
36.01   Prior approval
   
36.02   Introduction
   
36.03   Requirements for an ordinance
   
36.04   Effective date of ordinances
   
36.05   Signatures required
   
36.06   Publishing required
   
36.07   Posting required
ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, AND CONTRACTS
§ 36.01 PRIOR APPROVAL.
   All ordinances, resolutions and contract documents shall, before
presentation to the Council, have been reviewed as to form by the attorney and
shall, when there are substantive matters of administration involved, be
referred to the person who is charged with the administration of the matters.
Such person shall have an opportunity to present his or her objections, if any,
prior to the passage of the ordinance, resolution or acceptance of the
contract.
(2001 Code, § 2-5-1)
§ 36.02 INTRODUCTION.
   Ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects requiring action by
the Council shall be introduced and sponsored by a member of the Council,
except that a town employee with the approval of the Town Manager or the Town
Attorney may present ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects to
the Council, and any member of the Council may assume sponsorship thereof by
moving that such ordinance, resolution, matter, or subject be adopted;
otherwise, they shall not be considered.
(2001 Code, § 2-5-2)
§ 36.03 REQUIREMENTS FOR AN ORDINANCE.
   Each ordinance should have but 1 subject, the nature of which is clearly
expressed in the title. Whenever possible, each ordinance shall be introduced
as an amendment to this code or to an existing ordinance, and, in such case,
the title of the sections to be amended shall be included in the ordinance.
(2001 Code, § 2-5-3)
§ 36.04 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   No ordinance, resolution or franchise shall become operative until 30 days
after its passage by the Council and approval by the Mayor, except measures
necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health or safety of the
town, but such an emergency measure shall not become immediately operative
unless it states in a separate section the reason why it is necessary that it
should become immediately operative, and unless it is approved by the
affirmative vote of 3/4 of all the members elected to the Council, taken by
ayes and nays and approved by the Mayor.
(2001 Code, § 2-5-4)
§ 36.05 SIGNATURES REQUIRED.
   Every ordinance passed by the Council shall, before it becomes effective, be
signed by the Mayor and attested by the Clerk.
(2001 Code, § 2-5-5)
§ 36.06 PUBLISHING REQUIRED.
   Only such orders, resolutions, motions, regulations or proceedings of the
Council shall be published as may be required by state statutes or expressly
ordered by the Council.
(2001 Code, § 2-5-6)
§ 36.07 POSTING REQUIRED.
   Every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, forfeiture, or other punishment
shall, after passage, be posted by the Clerk in 3 or more public places within
the town, and a declaration of the person who posted the ordinance shall be
filed in the office of the Clerk as proof of posting.
(2001 Code, § 2-5-7) (Am. Ord. 05-617, passed 8-11-2006)
CHAPTER 37: ELECTIONS
Section
General
   
37.001   Election day
Council Elections
   
37.020   Non-political ballot
   
37.021   Election of Mayor or Councilmember
   
37.022   General election nomination
   
37.023   Election to office
   
37.024   Candidate financial disclosure
Initiative and Referendum Elections
   
37.030   Power reserved
   
37.031   Time of election
   
37.032   Number of signatures
GENERAL
§ 37.001 ELECTION DAY.
   Commencing with the elections in 2014, the primary election shall be held on
the date of the primary election of the State of Arizona. The general election
shall be held on the date of the general election of the State of Arizona.
(Ord. 14-783, passed 4-22-2014)
COUNCIL ELECTIONS
§ 37.020 NON-POLITICAL BALLOT.
   Nothing on the ballot in any election shall be indicative of the source of
the candidacy or support of the candidate.
(Ord. 14-783, passed 4-22-2014)
§ 37.021 ELECTION OF MAYOR OR COUNCILMEMBER.
   (A)   At the primary election, any candidate for the office of Mayor or Town
Council who receives a majority of all votes cast for that office at such
election shall be declared elected to the office for which he or she is a
candidate, effective as of the date of the general election, and no further
election shall be held as to such candidate.
   (B)   If more candidates receive a majority of votes cast than there are
seats to be filled for the office, then the candidates who receive the highest
number of votes equal to the number of seats to be filled for the office shall
be declared elected to that office.
   (C)    The majority of votes cast shall be as determined by state law.
(Ord. 14-783, passed 4-22-2014; Am. Ord. 16-807, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 37.022 GENERAL ELECTION NOMINATION.
   If at a primary election there is any office for which no candidate was
elected, then as to that office, the election shall be considered to be a
primary election for nomination of candidates for the office, and a general
election shall be held to vote for candidates to fulfill the office. Candidates
to be placed on the ballot at the general election shall be those not elected
at the primary election, shall be equal in number to twice the number to be
elected to any given office or less than that number if there are fewer than
that number named on the primary election ballot, and persons who receive the
highest number of votes for the respective offices at the primary election
shall be the only candidates at the general election; provided, that if there
is any person who, under the provisions of this subchapter, would have been
entitled to become a candidate for any office except for the fact that some
other candidate received an equal number of votes therefor, then all such
persons receiving an equal number of votes shall likewise become candidates for
the office.
(Ord. 14-783, passed 4-22-2014)
§ 37.023 ELECTION TO OFFICE.
   The candidates equal in number to the persons to be elected who receive the
highest number of votes shall be declared elected.
(Ord. 14-783, passed 4-22-2014)
§ 37.024 CANDIDATE FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE.
   Each candidate for the Office of Mayor or Councilmember shall file a
financial disclosure statement when the candidate files a nomination paper. The
statement shall contain such information as required by resolution of the
council pursuant to state law.
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM ELECTIONS
§ 37.030 POWER RESERVED.
   There is reserved to the qualified electors of the town the power of the
initiative and referendum as prescribed by the state constitution.
(Ord. 14-783, passed 4-22-2014)
§ 37.031 TIME OF ELECTION.
   (A)   When a referendum or initiative is required to be placed upon the
ballot, the Council shall do so either:
      (1)    At the next regularly scheduled town primary or general election
or state general election; or
      (2)   At its discretion, the council may call a special election to be
held on any date authorized by A.R.S. § 16-204 to place a referendum or
initiative upon the ballot.
   (B)   At all times the citizens shall retain the right to vote by absentee
ballot.
(Ord. 14-783, passed 4-22-2014)
§ 37.032 NUMBER OF SIGNATURES.
   (A)   The basis upon which the number of qualified electors of the town
required to file an initiative petition shall be the total number of registered
voters qualified to vote in the last town election, whether primary, general,
or special, immediately preceding the date upon which any initiative petition
is filed.
   (B)   The basis upon which the number of qualified electors of the town
required to file a referendum petition shall be as determined by state law.
(Ord. 14-783, passed 4-22-2014)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
      Chapter
         
50.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
51.   WATER AND SEWERS
         
52.   GARBAGE AND TRASH REMOVAL AND COLLECTION; CULVERT MAINTENANCE
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   On-site restroom facilities
Utility Department
   
50.15   Public Works Director and Finance Director
   
50.16   Duties of the Department
   
50.17   Right of entry for inspection; credentials
   
50.18   Records to be kept
Prohibitions
   
50.30   Ownership of main extensions, service pipes and appurtenant equipment
   
50.31   Interference, digging and tampering prohibited
   
50.32   Water system shut-off valves
   
50.33   Obstruction of waster and sewer system
   
50.34   Only authorized persons to connect and disconnect service
   
50.35   Fire hydrants
General Regulations
   
50.50   Application for service, activation or reactivation of service;
information required
   
50.51   Interruption of service
   
50.52   Street works; utility relocation; notice to Utility Department
   
50.53   Protection of water supply and sewerage systems
   
50.54   Services and materials to be property of Utility Department; consumers
to pay for damages
   
50.55   Permit required for consumer to supply water or sewer service to others
   
50.56   Effluent collection, treatment and recharge policy
   
50.57   Water quality; potable, non potable and wastewater
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADEQ. The Arizona Department of Environmental Quality.
   ADWR. The Arizona Department of Water Resources.
   APPROACH MAIN. The extension of a water or sewer main from a distant point
to serve a development, parcel, or project.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Director of the Arizona Department of Environmental
Quality.
   APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY (ASSEMBLY). Any testable assembly,
with the exception of an approved air gap, which has been issued a certificate
of approval by the USC- FCCCHR or such other third party certifying entity,
unrelated to the product’s manufacturer or vendor, which may be acceptable to
ADEQ. A list of assemblies shall be maintained by the Utility Department.
   APPROVED LABORATORY PROCEDURES. The measurements, tests and analyses of the
characteristics of water and wastes in accordance with analytical procedures as
established in Title 40 C.F.R. part 136, as revised, that are performed by an
environmental laboratory licensed by the state pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 36-495 et
seq. Alternative procedures may be approved by the Public Works Director in
accordance with applicable federal regulations.
   AT THE PROPERTY LINE. Within the right-of-way or easement adjacent to the
property.
   AVERAGE QUALITY. The arithmetic average (weighted by flow value) of all the
“daily determinations of concentrations”, as that term is defined herein, made
during a calendar month.
   AVERAGE DAILY EFFLUENT LIMITATION. The maximum allowable concentration in
the discharge as measured in a representative sample during a sampling day. In
determining compliance with the DAILY AVERAGE EFFLUENT LIMITATION, town samples
shall not be combined with non-town samples.
   AWWA. American Water Works Association.
   BACKFLOW. The undesirable reversal of flow of water or mixtures of water and
other liquids, gasses or other substances into the distribution system of the
public potable water supply.
   BACKPRESSURE. A form of backflow due to any elevation of pressure in the
downstream piping system (by pump, elevation of piping or steam and/or air
pressure) above the supply pressure at the point of service delivery which
would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the normal direction of flow
through the backflow prevention assembly.
   BACKSIPHONAGE. A form of backflow due to a reduction in system pressure
which causes a negative or sub-atmospheric pressure to exist at a site in the
water system.
   BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES). Measures or practices used to reduce the
amount of pollution entering the sanitary sewer system, surface water, land or
groundwaters.
   BOD (BIOLOGICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions
for 5 days at a temperature of 20 degrees Centigrade, expressed in milligrams
per liter.
   BODY OF WATER. A manmade lake, pond, lagoon or swimming pool that has a
surface area greater than 12,320 square feet, and that is used wholly or partly
for landscape, scenic or recreational purposes, but is not a manmade lake or
basin used for groundwater recharge pursuant to A.R.S. § 45-565(A)(6). For
purposes of this title, 2 or more bodies of water that are connected, or that
are designed to function as a unit shall be considered 1 BODY OF WATER.
   BRANCH SEWER. A sewer that receives sewage from more than 1 public sewer
from a relatively small area.
   BUILDING CONNECTION. The extension from a sewer tap to the property line, or
to the easement line, of the property to be served.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The officer or other designated authority charged with
the administration and enforcement of the building codes adopted by the town.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the building
connection or other place of disposal.
   BYPASS. The intentional diversion of wastes from any portion of a treatment
facility.
   CATEGORICAL STANDARDS (NATIONAL/FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS).
Those standards promulgated by the EPA under the authority of § 307(b) and (c)
of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C § 1317) which apply to a specific category of
industrial user and which are published in Title 40 C.F.R. chapter I,
subchapter N (parts 405-471) and are incorporated in this chapter by reference.
   CERTIFIED TESTER. An individual certified to test backflow prevention
assemblies by the California-Nevada Section of the AWWA or the Arizona State
Environmental Technology Training (ASETT) Center or other agencies or
organizations involved with the training and certification of testers if they
are acceptable to ADEQ.
   C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.
   C.I.P. Capital Improvement Plan.
   COD (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen consumed from a
chemical oxidation of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or
wastewater, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   COMMERCIAL USER. Any nonresidential user which provides a service or one
connected with commerce and which is not classified as an industrial user.
   COMMON AREA. A recreational or open space or area that is maintained for the
benefit of the residents of a housing development and is owned and operated as
a single integrated facility.
   COMPOSITE SAMPLE. A combination of individual samples obtained at regular
intervals over a specified time period. The volume of each individual sample
shall be either proportional to the flow rate during the sample period (flow
composite) or constant and collected at equal time intervals during the
composite period (time composite) as defined in the aquifer protection permit.
   COMPOSITE SAMPLE QUALITY. The concentration of some parameter tested in a
composite sample.
   CONTIGUOUS. In contact at any point along a boundary or part of the same
master planned community. Two parcels of land are contiguous even if they are
separated by 1 or more of the following: a road, easement, or right-of-way.
   COOLING WATER. The clean wastewater discharged from any heat transfer system
such as condensation, air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration.
   CROSS CONNECTION. Any unprotected or potential connection or structural
arrangement between a public or a customer’s potable water system and any other
source or system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the
potable water system any used water, industrial fluid, gas or substance other
than the intended potable water with which the system is supplied. Bypass
arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover
devices and other temporary or permanent devices through which, or because of
which, “backflow” can or may occur are considered to be CROSS CONNECTIONS.
Compliance with the town’s Plumbing Code creates a rebuttable presumption that
a CROSS CONNECTION does not exist.
   CTR (OR COLLECTION, TREATMENT AND RECHARGE SYSTEM). The sanitary sewer
system.
   CTR RESIDUALS. All effluent and/or solids, including sludge, scum,
screenings and grit, which are the byproduct of wastewater treatment operations
and which must be discharged to the environment for ultimate disposal and/or
reuse.
   CUSTOMER. Any person, partnership, association, company, private
corporation, public corporation, political subdivision, the United States and
the State of Arizona who receives potable water and/or sewage service from the
town.
   DEPARTMENT. The Utility Department of the town.
   DEVELOPER. Any person engaged in the organizing and financing of a
wastewater collection system within an area contributing to a branch, main or a
trunk sewer of the town sewer system, including, but not limited to, a property
owner, a subdivider or a legally constituted improvement district.
   DIRECTOR, FINANCE. The Finance Director, or his or her authorized deputy,
agent, or representative.
   DIRECTOR, PUBLIC WORKS. The Public Works Director, or his or her authorized
deputy, agent or representative.
   DISCHARGE. The disposal of any sewage, pollutant(s), water or any liquid
from any sewer into the town sewer system.
   DOMESTIC USER. A typical user who discharges only domestic wastewater.
   DOMESTIC WASTE. A typical residential-type waste which requires no
pretreatment under the provisions of this chapter before discharging into the
sanitary sewer system, excluding all commercial, manufacturing and industrial
wastes.
   DOMESTIC WASTEWATER. Any waterborne wastes, derived from the ordinary living
processes in a residential dwelling unit, of such character as to permit
satisfactory disposal, without special treatment, by conventional CTR
processes.
   EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
   ESTABLISHMENT; PLANT. Any establishment or facility producing liquid waste,
with or without suspended solids, required to be discharged into the town sewer
system.
   FREE ACCESS. The ability of town personnel to enter user facilities under
safe and non-hazardous conditions with a minimum of delay to inspect any and
all parts of the user’s facility in accordance with A.R.S. §§ 9-832 through 9-
834.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food
and from the handling, storage and sale of produce and other foodstuffs.
   GENERATOR. A person who generates septage.
   GRAB SAMPLE. An individual sample of effluent collected in less than 15
minutes without regard to flow or time of day.
   GRAB SAMPLE QUALITY. The concentration of some parameter tested in a grab
sample.
   INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE. Any introduction into the sanitary sewer system of a
non-domestic pollutant which:
      (1)   Is produced by a source which would be subject to any categorical
standards or pretreatment requirements if such source were to be discharged
into the sanitary sewer system; or
      (2)   Contains any substance or pollutant for which a discharge
limitation or prohibition has been established by any categorical standard or
pretreatment requirement.
   INDUSTRIAL USER.
      (1)   A source of industrial discharge; or
      (2)   Any non-residential user of the sewer system which discharges more
than the equivalent strength of 25,000 gallons per day of domestic wastes; or
      (3)   Any significant industrial user; or
      (4)   Any user who has control over the disposal of a waste as described
in divisions (1), (2) or (3) of this definition; or
      (5)   Any user who has the right of possession and control over any
property which produces a waste described in divisions (1), (2), (3) or (4)
above.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any liquid, free-flowing waste, including cooling water,
resulting from any industrial or manufacturing process or from the development,
recovery or processing of natural resources, with or without suspended solids,
excluding uncontaminated water.
   INFLOW. Water other than wastewater that enters a sewerage system (including
sewer service connections) from sources such as roof leaders, cellar drains,
foundation drains, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross
connections between storm sewers and sanitary sewers, catch basins, cooling
towers, storm waters, surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage.
   INSTANTANEOUS EFFLUENT LIMITATION. The maximum allowable concentration in
the discharge at any time as measured in a grab sample. In determining
compliance with the instantaneous limitation, town samples shall not be
combined with non-town samples.
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources both:
      (1)   Inhibits or disrupts the sanitary sewer system, its treatment
processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
      (2)   Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of any
environmentally related permit issued by a governmental entity (including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of
sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory
provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent
state and local regulations): § 405 of the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§
1251 et seq.); the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et
seq.) (including title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) and including state regulations contained
in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the
SWDA; The Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§
2601 et seq.); and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act, being
33 U.S.C. §§ 1401 et seq.
   IPC. The edition of the International Plumbing Code as adopted by the town.
   LANDSCAPE PLANT. Any member of the kingdom plantae, including any tree,
shrub, vine, herb, flower, succulent, ground cover or grass species that grows
or has been planted out-of-doors and is used for landscaping purposes.
   LANDSCAPE WATERING. The application of water from any source, including
effluent, by a turf related facility to a water intensive landscaped area, a
low water use area or revegetation acres.
   LINE CHARGE. A charge levied by the town against a parcel of real property
and due at the time of the parcel’s connection to public infrastructure, as
payment for town-installed improvements or to collect a repayment amount.
   LIQUID WASTE HAULER, HAULER or WASTE HAULER. Any person carrying on or
engaging in vehicular transport of wastewater or wastes as part of, or
incidental to, any business for the purpose of discharging such waste into the
town’s treatment works.
   LOT. A parcel of land or 2 or more contiguous parcels to be used as a unit.
   MAIN SEWER. A sewer which receives sewage from 2 or more branch sewers as
tributaries.
   MAINTENANCE. Keeping the water or sanitary sewer system in a state of
repair, including expenditures necessary to maintain the capacity (capability)
for which said works were designed and constructed.
   NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD. Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with § 301(b) and (c) of
the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1317 et seq.) which applies to industrial
users, including, but not limited to, prohibitive discharge limits established
pursuant to Title 40 C.F.R. § 403.5.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch or other body of
surface water or ground water, or into a dry channel, wash or tributary of any
of the above.
   NET LOT AREA. That portion of a lot excluding all dedicated streets or
alleys and roadway or alley easements.
   NEW SOURCE. Any building, structure, facility or installation from which
there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed standards under § 307(c) of the
Clean Water Act which will be applicable to the source if the standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, and as stated in detail
in Title 40 C.F.R. § 403.3(k).
   NHLW (NON-HAZARDOUS LIQUID WASTES). The wastes specifically identified
herein.
   NON-POTABLE WATER. Reclaimed water, storm water runoff that is not subject
to appropriation under A.R.S. § 45-141; water withdrawn pursuant to poor
quality groundwater withdrawal permit pursuant to A.R.S. § 45-516; groundwater
withdrawn pursuant to Type 1 or Type 2 non-irrigation certificates of
grandfathered right issued pursuant to ADWR, or other non-potable water source
of a quality suitable for landscape irrigation, which meets all local, state
and federal water quality requirements for full body contact, except untreated
Central Arizona Project water.
   NPDES PERMIT. A national pollutant discharge elimination system permit,
issued to the town by the EPA, which imposes federal standards governing the
quality of the treated effluent discharged from the sewage treatment plant.
   OIL AND GREASE. The measure of oil and grease content of a sample as
determined by EPA Method 413.1, or other equivalent method approved by the
Public Works Director.
   OIL AND GREASE (TPH). For purposes of determining compliance with the oil
and grease limitation contained herein, oil and grease is defined as the
measure of a petroleum and mineral oil (total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH)
content of a sample as determined by EPA Method 418.1, or other equivalent test
method approved by the Public Works Director.
   PASS-THROUGH. A discharge which exits the treatment plant into waters of the
United States, or groundwaters, in quantities or concentrations which, alone or
in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of
a violation of any requirement of the treatment plant NPDES permit (including
an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or which causes or
contributes to a violation of an applicable numeric or narrative water quality
standard.
   PAYMENT PLAN. An agreement for payment made by the Finance Department or its
designee between the town of chino valley and a Chino Valley utility customer.
   PERMIT. A written control mechanism that the Public Works Director issues to
particular users or class of users under the authority of this chapter, also
similar control mechanisms issued by state or federal regulatory agencies.
   PERMITTEE, PERMIT HOLDER. Any person, firm, association, corporation, trust
or governmental body which owns, operates processes or controls an
establishment or plant operated under a valid permit to discharge wastewater
into the town sanitary sewer system.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, state, municipality,
Indian tribe, political subdivisions of the state or federal governmental
agency or any other legal entity, including their legal representatives, agents
or assigns.
   pH. The logarithm of reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions per liter of
solution.
   POINT OF SERVICE DELIVERY. The terminal end of a service connection from the
public water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service
connection, then the point of service delivery shall mean the downstream end
(i.e., customer’s side) of the meter.
   POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage
sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive
materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and
industrial, municipal and agricultural wastes.
   POLLUTION PREVENTION. Source reduction and other practices that reduce or
eliminate the creation of pollutants through:
      (1)   Increased efficiency in the use of raw materials, energy, water or
other resources; or
      (2)   Protection of natural resources by conservation.
   POTABLE WATER. Water delivered through the town’s domestic water delivery
system after treatment designed to meet EPA and ADEQ drinking water standards.
   PRETREATMENT. The physical, chemical, biological or other treatment of any
industrial discharge, prior to discharge to the sanitary sewer system, for the
purpose of:
      (1)   Reducing the amount of concentration of any pollutant; or
      (2)   Eliminating the discharge of any pollutant; or
      (3)   Altering the nature of any pollutant characteristic to a less
harmful state.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. All of the duties or responsibilities imposed
upon sanitary sewer system users by this chapter.
   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. A septic tank system with leach field.
   PRIVATE WELL. A domestic well serving a single family only.
   PRODUCER. Any person, firm, association, corporation or trust which owns,
operates, possesses or controls an establishment or plant, whether or not a
permittee.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. Garbage that has been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/4 of an inch in
any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. The sanitary sewer system or any branch, main, or trunk line
thereof.
   RECYCLING. A material is recycled if it is used, reused or reclaimed. A
material is used or reused if it is either:
      (1)   Employed as an ingredient (including its use as an intermediate) to
make a product; however a material will not satisfy this condition if distinct
components of the material are recovered as separate end products (as when
metals are recovered from metal containing secondary materials); or
      (2)   Employed in a particular function as an effective substitute for a
commercial product. A material is reclaimed if it is processed to recover a
useful product or if it is regenerated. Examples include the recovery of lead
values from spent batteries and the regeneration of spent solvents.
   REPAYABLE COSTS. The actual costs, pre-approved by the town and related to
the construction, development, or installation of a public improvement, which
may be fixed, levied, or assessed against real property benefitted by that
public improvement.
   REPAYMENT AGREEMENT. A development agreement between the town and a
developer, governing the calculation and payment of repayable costs for a
particular public improvement.
   REPAYMENT AMOUNT. The portion of repayable costs, apportioned per frontage
foot, to be fixed, levied, or assessed against a parcel of real property.
   REPLACEMENT. Those expenditures made for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories and/or appurtenances during the useful life of the treatment works
which are necessary to maintain the capacity and performance of the treatment
works for which they were designed and constructed.
   REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLE. A composite sample obtained by flow proportional
sampling techniques where feasible or when the Public Works Director has
determined that flow proportionate sampling is not feasible by time-
proportional techniques or by the compositing or averaging of 1 or more grab
samples.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm waters,
surface waters and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
   SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM. The publicly owned sewer collection, treatment works
and effluent recharge system which is owned and/or operated, in whole or in
part, by the town and which provides the town with wastewater collection,
treatment and recharge services.
   SCHOOL. A place of general instruction including colleges, but not including
business colleges, nursery schools, dancing schools, riding academies or
specialized trade or vocational schools.
   SEPTAGE. Aerobic wastewater originating from a domestic source, be it from a
residential, commercial or industrial facility that is not hazardous waste and
is compatible with the biological wastewater treatment plant process.
   SEWAGE. A combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such
ground waters, surface waters and storm waters as may be present.
   SEWAGE WORKS. As used in this title the terms SEWER SYSTEM, and SEWAGE WORKS
shall have the same meaning and definition as SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   SEWER TAP. The wye, saddle or other device placed on a public sewer to
receive a building connection.
   SIU (SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER).
      (1)   All users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under Title
40 C.F.R. § 403.6 and Title 40 C.F.R. chapter I, subchapter N (parts 405-471).
      (2)   Any other user that:
         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of
process wastewater to the CTR facility (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling
and boiler blow-down wastewater); or
         (b)   Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the CTR system; or
         (c)   Is designated as such by the Public Works Director on the basis
that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the sanitary sewer
system’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
   SNC (SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE). Violations meeting 1 or more of the
following criteria:
      (1)   66% or more of all of the measurements taken during a 6-month
period exceeded (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit
for the same pollutant parameter (“chronic violation”):
      (2)   33% or more of all measurements for each pollutant taken during a
6-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the
average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC equals 1.4 for BOD, TSS,
fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH)(“Technical
Review Criteria violations or TRC”).
      (3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum
or longer-term average) that the Public Works Director determines has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through
(including endangering the health of CTR personnel or the general public);
      (4)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the CTR’s
exercise of its emergency authority under this chapter to halt or prevent such
a discharge;
      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a permit or enforcement order for
starting construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance;
      (6)   Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
      (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
      (8)   Any other violation, or group of violations, which the Public Works
Director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the local pretreatment program.
   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT. A detached residential dwelling unit designed
for and occupied by 1 family only.
   SLUG DISCHARGE. Any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including
but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge.
   SOURCE REDUCTION. Any practice which:
      (1)   Reduces the amount of any pollutant or contaminant entering any
waste stream or otherwise released into the environment (including fugitive
emissions) prior to recycling, treatment or disposal; and
      (2)   Reduces the hazards to public health and the environment associated
with the release of such substances, pollutants or contaminants.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC). A coded classification of
industries based upon economic activity developed by the U.S. Department of
Commerce as published in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972,
Office of Management and Budget.
   STANDARD METHODS. The procedure as described in the most current edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater published by the
American Health Association, or the most current edition of Manual Methods for
Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes published by the EPA.
   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters
and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
   SUBDIVISION. Improved or unimproved land as further defined in Chapter 154.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS). Solids measured in milligrams per liter that either
float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, wastewater or other
liquids and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device, as
defined in the Standard Methods, as defined herein.
   SWIMMING POOL. An artificially constructed pool for swimming purposes that
meets the applicable design standards and specifications for swimming pools
provided by the Arizona Department of Health Services pursuant to A.R.S. § 36-
136(H)(10).
   SYSTEM DESIGN CAPACITY. The design capacity for normal domestic wastewater
as established by accepted engineering standards.
   TOTAL ORGANIC CARBON (TOC). The total of all organic compounds expressed in
milligrams per liter as determined by the combustion-infrared method prescribed
by approved laboratory procedures.
   TREATMENT PARAMETER. A fundamental characteristic of sewage around which
treatment is designed, such as, but not limited to: flow, BOD and suspended
solids.
   TRUNK SEWER. A sewer which receives sewage from many tributary main sewers
and serves as an outlet for a large territory.
   UPSET. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with technology-based permit effluent limitations because of
factors beyond the reasonable control of the permittee, excluding such factors
as operational error, improperly designed or inadequate treatment facilities or
improper operation and maintenance thereof.
   USC-FCCCHR or USC MANUAL. University of Southern California Foundation for
Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research.
   USED WATER. Any water supplied by the town from the public potable water
system to a customer’s water system, after it has passed through the point of
service delivery.
   USER. Any person, lot, parcel of land, building, premises, municipal
corporation or other political subdivision that discharges, causes or permits
the discharge of wastewater into the sewage system.
   UTILITY. Public service of water and or sewer provided by the town.
   WASTE MINIMIZATION. An activity which eliminates or reduces the amount of
any pollutant from entering the waste stream or the environment. This may
include a change in raw materials, operational improvement, process
improvement, product reformulation reuse or reclamation.
   WASTEWATER. Any liquid or water-carried pollutant, including an industrial
discharge, which is introduced into the sanitary sewer system from any source.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT. A water pollution control plant owned by the
town.
   WATER FEATURE. Use of water in a landscaped area other than for irrigation
and includes but is not limited to fountains, artificial streams, ponds and
waterfalls.
   WATER FROM ANY SOURCE. Any water, including reclaimed wastewater from a
wastewater treatment facility or cooling tower.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which the flow of water occurs either continuously
or intermittently.
   ZERO PROCESS DISCHARGE USER. Those users that only discharge domestic wastes
or have no discharge, but have significant quantities of hazardous material or
high strength wastes which, if discharged, would be regulated by this chapter.
The facilities may be regulated by requiring them to have zero discharge of
process wastes, thus allowing only domestic wastes to be discharged.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-1) (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed
2-22-2022; Ord. 2024-940, passed 7-9-2024)
§ 50.02 ON-SITE RESTROOM FACILITIES.
   All construction sites shall provide on-site restroom facilities for
employees while construction is occurring in conformance with all of the
following provisions:
   (A)   There shall be a minimum of 1 toilet provided on-site for every
single-family residential construction project. When the same general
contractor has 2 single-family residential construction projects on adjoining
lots with the same street frontage, 1 toilet located as close as possible to
the common property shall fulfill the requirements of this section for both
sites.
   (B)   When there is a non-single-family residential construction site, there
shall be 1 toilet facility for every 5,000 square feet of building area. Any
fraction thereof shall be rounded up to require the additional toilet facility.
(2001 Code, Art. 9-6) (Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
UTILITY DEPARTMENT
§ 50.15 PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR AND FINANCE DIRECTOR.
   (A)   Public Works Director authority and responsibilities.
      (1)   The Public Works Director shall supervise all personnel and the
operation, equipment and facilities of the Utility Department (water and
wastewater).
      (2)   The Public Works Director shall be responsible for the enforcement
of the policies regarding water and wastewater contained in this title. Civil
citations may be used to provide a timely and efficient means to address
ordinance violations. The Public Works Director shall designate those
Department employees who may issue civil citations under this title. The rules
of procedure in civil traffic cases shall apply to civil citations written
under this title.
      (3)   The Public Works Director shall have general supervision over,
subject to the approval of the Town Manager, departmental policies,
implementation of agreements, new connections, repairs and the like.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-2)
      (4)   The Public Works Director shall be responsible for the water supply
and shall at all times insure the sufficiency thereof.
      (5)   The Public Works Director shall notify the public, unless an
emergency requires otherwise, of the necessity to shut off any pipeline for the
purpose of making repairs, extensions or connections, in the event he or she
has cause to expect or to know beforehand of the necessity to so shut off water
from any line.
      (6)   The Public Works Director shall maintain a list of the types of
businesses that are commercial users and is authorized to classify specific
users as commercial users.
      (7)   The Public Works Director shall have the authority to decide any
questions that may arise within the scope of this chapter which are not fully
covered by the provisions contained in this chapter, and his or her decision in
such cases shall be final subject only to the general direction of the Town
Manager.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-3)
   (B)   Finance Director responsibilities.
      (1)   Collection of all charges for water and sewer services.
      (2)   The Finance Director shall have the authority to develop payment
plans with town utility customers.
      (3)   The Finance Director shall have the authority to waive the
collection or imposition of risk deposits, delinquent monthly fees,
miscellaneous fees or late charge fees imposed by the provisions of this title.
      (4)   The Finance Director shall have the authority to participate in
rate plan development and decisions, and make recommendations to the Town
Council regarding the solvency of the utility systems.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 50.16 DUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT.
   The Department shall make all water and sewer service connections with a
diameter of 2 inches or less for water and 6 inches or less for sewer for
single-family dwelling units and inspect all other water and sewer service
connections, set and read all meters for service, make all repairs on mains,
meters and services, and check all valves and fire hydrants, and maintain them
in good working order, change all meters as necessary to maintain good working
order and accuracy, shall operate and maintain all water and sewer system
facilities, shall maintain compliance with local, state and federal regulations
and shall perform such other duties as required by the Public Works Director,
subject to the approval of the Town Manager.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-4) (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed
2-22-2022)
§ 50.17 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION; CREDENTIALS.
   (A)   By accepting utility services from the town, customers acknowledge and
agree that any authorized employee of the Public Works or Utility Department,
upon presentation of his or her credentials, shall have free access at all
reasonable hours to any residential, commercial or industrial premises
connected to the town’s water service area and/or connected to the town’s sewer
system for purposes of assessing applicability and/or compliance with the
requirements of this title, subject to A.R.S. Title 9, Chapter 7, Article 4.
   (B)   Any user or potential user shall allow all inspection, monitoring,
copying of records and the like, reasonably needed by the Public Works Director
to perform the duties required or needed under this title.
   (C)   In case any authorized employee of the Department is refused or
delayed admittance to any premises, or, upon being admitted, shall be hindered
or prevented from making the inspection, examination or review of records the
Public Works Director may cause the water to be turned off from the premises
after giving 24 hours’ notice to the owner or occupant of the premises of his
or her intention to do so.
   (D)   Service persons and other employees of the Department whose duty it
may be to enter upon private premises to make inspections, collect samples,
examine pipes, fixtures or attachments or to measure the quantity or quality of
wastes delivered to the town sewer, shall be provided with credentials to
identify the employees as authorized representatives of the Department.
   (E)   (1)   Only authorized employees of the Department shall have or
exhibit credentials of the Department.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of each employee of the department upon
resignation or dismissal to surrender and deliver, at the office of the Human
Resources Director, all credentials of the Department.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-5) (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed
2-22-2022)
§ 50.18 RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
   The Department shall keep a record of all water and sewer taps, the exact
locations, the purpose for which they are to be used, together with the name of
the owner of the property, his or her agent or representative, date of
installation, repair history and other pertinent data for all water and sewer
infrastructure as it is constructed, repaired or modified.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-6) (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed
2-22-2022)
PROHIBITIONS
§ 50.30 OWNERSHIP OF MAIN EXTENSIONS, SERVICE PIPES AND APPURTENANT EQUIPMENT.
   The ownership of all water mains, sewer mains, fire lines, service pipes and
appurtenant equipment maintained by the Department shall be vested in the town
and in no case shall the owner of any premises have the right to claim any part
thereof except where otherwise provided.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-7) (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed
2-22-2022)
§ 50.31 INTERFERENCE, DIGGING AND TAMPERING PROHIBITED.
   Any person who in any way interferes with any employee of the Department in
the discharge of the employees duties, either in the tapping of a water or
sewer pipe, main or lateral belonging to the town, or the cleaning, laying or
connection of a pipe or main or lateral, or inspection of a construction or
discharging facility, or who digs up, or causes to be dug up, any street, alley
or easement in the town for the purpose of connecting with the water or sewer
system of the town without first obtaining a permit from the Department, or
who, having a permit, digs up any portion of any street, alley or easement of
the town for the purpose of connecting to the water or sewer system of the town
and fails or neglects to place the street, alley or easement in its original or
better condition, or who shall maliciously or willfully break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the municipal water and sanitary sewer system shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, except where the damages or/and penalties as may be assessed on
the town total over $5,000 in which case the person shall be guilty of a
felony.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-8) (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed
2-22-2022)
§ 50.32 WATER SYSTEM SHUT-OFF VALVES.
   All shutoff valves on the public water system are installed by the town for
the use of the Department. The shutoff valves shall not be used or in any way
operated, tampered with or manipulated by consumers of water or any member of
the public. All consumers shall provide their own valve for ordinary usage.
This valve shall be located on the consumer’s side of the meter ahead of the
first water outlet.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-9) (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed
2-22-2022)
§ 50.33 OBSTRUCTION OF WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM.
   No person shall place upon or about any valve, valve box, curb stop, water
meter box, water gate, manhole or cleanout with the water or sewer system of
the town any object, materials, debris, fence or structure of any kind that
shall prevent free access to the same at all times or in any manner tamper with
or injure the appurtenances. No person shall deposit any material in, fill up
or cover over any valve or meter box, or any manhole or cleanout.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-10) (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913,
passed 2-22-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
  § 50.34 ONLY AUTHORIZED PERSONS TO TURN ON WATER.
   (A)   No person other than an official or employee of the Department shall
connect or disconnect service from the town sewer or water mains without
written permission from the Public Works Director.
   (B)   Should the water service be made to function to the premises by anyone
except an employee of the Department, after it has been turned off at the
town’s point of connection, it will be turned off at the main and will not be
turned on again until a flat charge covering the cost of excavation and
replacing the paving, as established by the town has been paid in full.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-11) (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913,
passed 2-22-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.35 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   Fire hydrants are provided for the primary purpose of extinguishing
fires and shall be opened and used only by the Department, the Fire Department,
or such persons as may be authorized by the Department. No permit shall be
issued and existing permits shall be cancelled to any person who has violated
any of the provision of this title or whose indebtedness to the town for water
used or damage to hydrants is delinquent. Every person authorized to open fire
hydrants will be required to replace caps on the outlets when such are not in
use and will keep hose connections in good repair. Failure to do so will be
sufficient cause to prohibit further use of the hydrants and the refusal to
grant subsequent permits for the use of the fire hydrants.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-12)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the access to any fire
hydrant by placing around, on or within 20 feet of the hydrant any stone,
brick, lumber, dirt, rubbish, fence or other material or to open or operate any
fire hydrant or to draw or attempt to draw water or to willfully or carelessly
injure the hydrants or in any manner to tamper with or injure the hydrants.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-13)
   (C)   (1) When water for construction is required by a contractor, it shall
be supplied through a meter whenever possible. When an existing service
connection is not available, or is of insufficient size, the contractor may
apply to the Department for a fire hydrant meter. The application may be
approved subject to the applicant’s compliance with all rules and regulations
established by the Department pertaining to the use of construction water from
fire hydrants and the payment of applicable deposits, fees and charges. The
contractor shall be responsible for any damage to the hydrant meter, costs of
which shall be determined by the Public Works Director.
      (2)   Whenever the use of un-metered water on a street, pipeline or other
public improvement project is approved by the Public Works Director, it shall
be the duty of the Department to furnish the Finance Department with an
estimate of all un-metered water used. The water shall be billed to the
contractor at the same rate as water taken through a fire hydrant meter. In
addition, there will be a charge equal to the cost plus overhead for any work
performed, and materials used by the town to provide construction water access
for the contractor.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-14)
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022) Penalty,
see §
10.99
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 50.50 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE, ACTIVATION OR REACTIVATION OF SERVICE;
INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Each person applying for a water and/or sewer connection shall present
a valid plumbing permit issued by the town’s Building Department to the Utility
Department as a prerequisite for the approval of the requested service
connection.
   (B)   The applicant shall state the following in his or her application for
a new service tap:
      (1)   Name;
      (2)   Description of the lot, block and addition;
      (3)   The desired location where the town main is to be tapped;
      (4)   The desired tap size to be made;
      (5)   The official house or building address assigned to the premises;
and
      (6)   The purpose for which the water will be used.
   (C)   The Department, as a condition to granting the application and
furnishing water and/or sewer to the premises, is authorized to and shall
require payment for the installation of service connections and meters.
   (D)   Service applications are required of all customers requesting
activation or reactivation of water and/or sewer service. Application
information must be submitted for each service address. An application must
also be submitted when requesting the transfer of service from one customer to
another. Service applications will require the information the finance director
deems appropriate, in compliance with applicable state laws.
   (E)   Activation or reactivation of water service shall not be performed
until an initial water meter reading has been completed and the town has
received payment in full of an activation or reactivation fee as established by
the Town Council by resolution.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-15) (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913,
passed 2-22-2022)
§ 50.51 INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE.
   By accepting utility service from the town, customers acknowledge and accept
that the water may at any time be shut off from the town’s mains without notice
due to emergencies or for the purpose of making repairs, extensions or any
other necessary work. The town will not be liable for any damage that may occur
on account of the water cut off for any purpose or on account of the breaking
of any pipe or fixtures by the water from the town’s mains. Water consumers who
have any machinery, material, process or plant which requires a constant supply
of water shall install upon the premises such water storage facilities as will
prevent any damage in case the town water supply may, for any reason, be
interrupted or discontinued.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-16) (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913,
passed 2-22-2022)
§ 50.52 STREET WORKS; UTILITY RELOCATION; NOTICE TO UTILITY DEPARTMENT.
   All persons performing street work, such as grading, re-grading, filling and
trenching or paving and the like, shall give the Public Works Director written
notice in case it becomes necessary during the work to remove, displace or
change any water or sewer mains, taps, pipes, fittings, meters, gates, valves
or other appurtenances that may interfere with the performance of the work.
Where the value of work to be done does not exceed the amount of $300, the
notice shall be delivered not less than 48 hours before the services of the
Department are required. Where the value of work to be done does exceed the
amount of $300, notice shall be delivered not less than 5 days before the
services of the Department are required. Failure to furnish the notice shall
make the person liable to the Department in case damages result from the
failure. Costs and responsibility for the protection and relocation of existing
utilities shall be borne by the person or firm requiring the relocation.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-17) (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913,
passed 2-22-2022)
§ 50.53 PROTECTION OF WATER SUPPLY AND SEWERAGE SYSTEMS.
   The Public Works Director and the town’s Building Official may, with the
approval of the Town Manager, make such additional rules and regulations in
furtherance of the purposes of this code, and not inconsistent with specific
provisions of this code, as may be deemed necessary to properly protect the
town water supply system or the sewage collection, treatment and recharge
facilities.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-18) (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913,
passed 2-22-2022)
§ 50.54 SERVICES AND MATERIALS TO BE PROPERTY OF UTILITY DEPARTMENT; CONSUMERS
TO PAY FOR DAMAGES.
   All water and/or sewer service and water meters and all materials supplied
by the Department in the installation or repair of any meter and all materials
supplied in the installation of any service connection with town water and/or
sewer mains shall remain at all times the property of the Department and shall
be maintained, repaired and renewed by the Department when rendered
unserviceable through normal use. Where replacements, repairs to pipes, meters
or other materials are rendered necessary by the acts, negligence or
carelessness of the customer or any member of his or her family, guest or
person in his or her employ, any expenses caused to the Department for the
repair shall be charged against and collected from the customer. The Department
may refuse to furnish water through the service until the account is paid in
full.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-19) (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913,
passed 2-22-2022)
§ 50.55 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CONSUMER TO SUPPLY WATER OR SEWER SERVICE TO
OTHERS.
   No owner or lessee of property supplied with water and/or sewer service from
town mains shall furnish water or sewer service to other persons or property
without first obtaining written permission to do so from the Public Works
Director. The permit may be issued only for emergencies or other unusual
circumstances on a temporary basis. No permit will be issued until the person
desiring to use the water or sewer has obtained and filed with the Public Works
Director the written consent of the owner or lessee of the property from which
the service is to be taken, stating the location of the property by street and
address number and the location by street and address number of the property to
be supplied and stating the purpose for which it will be used. Upon receipt of
a proper permit from the owner or lessee of the property from which the water
or sewer service is to be taken, the Public Works Director may issue a
temporary permit for a specific time frame allowing the service to be supplied
to other persons or property.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-20) (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913,
passed 2-22-2022)
§ 50.56 EFFLUENT COLLECTION, TREATMENT AND RECHARGE POLICY.
   (A)   The town will design, build and operate an effluent sanitary sewer
system on its own schedule. If a development requires additional effluent
collection, treatment and recharge capacity prior to the time such service or
capacity is available from the town, the development shall provide financial
resources sufficient to construct the additional capacity as requested, at its
own expense, at the town’s facilities only. The developer may receive
reimbursement of the cost for additional capacity pursuant to an agreement
between the town and developer.
   (B)   At the time of building permit application for a new residence or a
new commercial building, the permitee shall pay an effluent sanitary sewer
system hookup fee as adopted in the fee schedule(s), which may be amended from
time to time.
   (C)   All new developments, subdivided and unsubdivided, shall be required
to demonstrate adequate financial capability and assurance, as approved by the
town, to design and construct the effluent sanitary sewer system components
sufficient to serve the new development and other areas as approved by the
town.
   (D)   Package wastewater treatment plants shall not be allowed, unless
approved at the discretion of the Public Works Director and Town Engineer.
   (E)   The town reaffirms its ownership and control of all effluent produced
within the town’s Regional 208 Planning Area.
(Ord. 485, passed 12-13-2001; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 50.57 WATER QUALITY; POTABLE, NON POTABLE AND WASTEWATER.
   Water quality shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations of EPA,
ADEQ, and ADWR.
(Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
CHAPTER 51: WATER AND SEWERS
Section
Private Water and Sewer Systems
   
51.001   [Reserved]
   
51.002   Private sewer systems; general prohibition
   
51.003   Private sewer systems; permit required
   
51.004   Violation
Water Wells
   
51.020   Land boundaries
Water Use Policy
   
51.035   Commercial water credits
   
51.036   Residential assured water supply
   
51.037   Development; allocation of water credits
   
51.038   Development non-performance; forfeiture of water rights
   
51.039   Assured water supply; application of existing rights and transfer to
town
   
51.040   Limitation of usage
   
51.041   Development of water system master plan
Water and Sewer Main Extensions
   
51.055   Approval by Town Engineer and Public Works Director required
   
51.056   Main extensions; connection with distribution system and collection
systems
   
51.057   Extensions; construction, ownership and maintenance
   
51.058   Extensions; policy of town generally
   
51.059   Approach mains; construction by developers; repayment agreement
   
51.060   Approach mains; length of extensions
   
51.061   [Reserved]
   
51.062   Extensions; inapplicability of provisions to existing agreements; no
interest to be paid
Water Service Connections
   
51.075   Required water main connections
   
51.076   Buildings to have separate service connections; exceptions
   
51.077   Unauthorized connections with water mains
   
51.078   Service connections on existing mains
   
51.079   Developer to install service connections on new mains in new
subdivisions
   
51.080   Connection of existing service to new main
   
51.081   Changes to existing service connection
Meters
   
51.095   Services to be metered
   
51.096   Location of meters
   
51.097   Cost of changing size of meter of service
   
51.098   Removal of meters
   
51.099   Replacement of meters
   
51.100   Maintenance and repair; consumer to pay for damages
   
51.101   Testing meter accuracy
Backflow Prevention
   
51.115   Declaration of policy; authorization
   
51.116   Cross connections from or to source of water supply other than that of
town
   
51.117   Responsibility for backflow prevention control
   
51.118   Backflow prevention methods
   
51.119   Appeals
   
51.120   Remedies
Wastewater Collection, Treatment, and Recharge Policy
   
51.135   [Reserved]
   
51.136   Wastewater collection; treatment and recharge; schedule of
construction
   
51.137   [Reserved]
   
51.138   Sanitary sewer system buy-in fee
   
51.139   Construction financial capabilities
   
51.140   [Reserved]
   
51.141   [Reserved]
   
51.142   Effluent; control and ownership
Connections to Public Sewers, Pumping
   
51.155   Required sewer connections
   
51.156   Permit required
   
51.157   Application for sewer tap, sewer dye test
   
51.158   Public Works Director to approve design, quantity, location, size and
construction of sewer services
   
51.159   Special provisions for installing sewer taps in new subdivisions and
developments
   
51.160   Installation of sewer taps
   
51.161   Property owner responsible for cleaning, repair and replacement of
building sewers and connections
   
51.162   [Reserved]
   
51.163   Pumping charges
Use of Public Sewers and Limitations
   
51.175   [Reserved]
   
51.176   Treatment of polluted wastes required
   
51.177   Sewer discharge, general use requirements and pretreatment
   
51.178   Authority of Public Works Director to establish prohibitions and
effluent limitations
   
51.179   Preliminary treatment; required approval; maintenance of facilities
   
51.180   Interceptors; requirements; type, capacity, location; construction of
grease and oil interceptors; maintenance
   
51.181   Control manholes
   
51.182   Discharges to be reported
   
51.183   Tests and analyses
Industrial and Pretreatment Requirements
   
51.195   General industrial user requirements
   
51.196   Significant industrial user requirements
   
51.197   Special discharges
   
51.198   [Reserved]
   
51.199   [Reserved]
   
51.200   [Reserved]
Accidental Discharge
   
51.215   Permittee provides protection
   
51.216   Permittee shall notify town of accidental discharge
   
51.217   Permittee will notify employees
   
51.218   Permittee shall label accidental discharge points
Haulage of Non-Hazardous Liquid Wastes
   
51.230   Prohibition on wastes from industrial sites discharged to sanitary
sewer system
   
51.231   Permit required
   
51.232   Exemption
   
51.233   Authority of the Public Works Director; permittee limitations and
requirements
   
51.234   Mixing of non-hazardous liquid waste
   
51.235   Hazardous liquid waste
   
51.236   Non-hazardous liquid waste fees
   
51.237   Cessation of acceptance of non-hazardous liquid wastes
   
51.238   Violation
Utility Fees
   
51.250   Utility service deposits
   
51.251   Water system new service buy-in fee
   
51.252   Water service connection and meter installation charges
   
51.253   Sewer system new service buy-in fees
   
51.254   Determination of wastewater quality
   
51.255   Other user charge provisions
   
51.256   Other sewer service charges
   
51.257   [Reserved]
   
51.258   Residential water rates
   
51.259   Commercial and industrial water rates
   
51.260   Rates for private fire connections
   
51.261   Fees and assessments due
Enforcement
   
51.275   Interference with or obstructing facilities
   
51.276   Authority of Utility Department to turn off water and/or sewer service
   
51.277   Rules and regulations to be enforced, exception
   
51.278   Criminal penalty
   
51.279   Civil penalty
   
51.280   Remedies
Lien Enforcement
   
51.290   Lien enforcement for unpaid utility user fees
PRIVATE WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS
§ 51.001 [RESERVED].
§ 51.002 PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEMS; GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or maintain
within the town any privy, vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage, except a private sewage disposal
system constructed and maintained according to standards prescribed by the town
or appropriate county agency.
(2001 Code, § 9-7-2) (Am. Ord. 16-815, passed 3-22-2016; Am. Ord. 2022-913,
passed 2-22-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.003 PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEMS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available within the town, the
building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system, in full
compliance and as approved by the Yavapai County Health Department and ADEQ.
   (B)   Before construction of a private sewage disposal system within the
town may begin, the owner shall first obtain a written permit furnished and
signed by the town or appropriate county agent. A permit for operation of a
private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the
installation is completed to the satisfaction of the town or county inspector,
as appropriate.
   (C)   The appropriate town or county agency shall be allowed to inspect the
work at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the
permit shall notify the property agency when the work is ready for final
inspection, and before any underground portions are covered.
   (D)   A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the town or appropriate
county agency at the time the application is filed.
   (E)   On-site wastewater treatment systems may be allowed, at the town’s
discretion, in areas beyond the 10-year limits of the town’s main extension
plan as detailed in the capital improvement plan. The design, construction and
operation of any such system shall be at the sole expense of the developer. At
such time as the town’s collection lines are extended to the subject
development, the developer shall connect to the town’s line, pay the
appropriate buy-in fee and close the system in accordance with ADEQ procedures,
all at the developer’s sole expense.
(Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.004 VIOLATION.
   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this subchapter
shall be served by the town or county with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof.
   (B)   The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice,
permanently cease all violations.
   (C)   If the violation continues past the date or period of time shown on
the notice, a civil citation may be issued. Thereafter, each day constitutes a
separate violation.
(Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
  WATER WELLS
§ 51.020 LAND BOUNDARIES.
   From and after December 15, 1972, no further land within the boundaries of
the town shall be purchased or leased for the purpose of drilling a water well,
or for pumping from an existing well, to secure water for transmission or
carriage to another city, town or using agency outside the Granite Creek
Critical Water Basin, Yavapai County, Arizona.
(2001 Code, Art. 9-8) (Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
WATER USE POLICY
§ 51.035 COMMERCIAL WATER CREDITS.
   Non-residential commercial water users may lease water credits from the
town’s water portfolio provided that (A) such developments allocate at least
75% of their square footage to retail sales tenants, and (B) sewer collection
services are either already available or will be constructed and made available
with the development. The entire commercial development shall be required to
connect to the sanitary sewer system and pay all fees and satisfy additional
conditions as approved by the town.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022; Am. Ord.
2024-940, passed 7-9-2024)
§ 51.036 RESIDENTIAL ASSURED WATER SUPPLY.
   All new residential subdivisions shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the town that an application has been submitted to the Arizona Department of
Water Resources for a 100-year assured water supply for any new development in
the Prescott Active Management Area with the filing for preliminary plat
approval with the town. The 100-year assured water supply certificate, issued
by ADWR, shall be submitted with the final plat application.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.037 DEVELOPMENT; ALLOCATION OF WATER CREDITS.
   Allocation of water credits to development from the town’s water portfolio
will only be considered using the following minimum criteria (additional
conditions may be required):
   (A)   The development must provide a water budget that meets or exceeds the
water use and water conservation goals of the Arizona Department of Water
Resources.
   (B)   The development shall participate in the town’s sanitary sewer system,
or be able to participate within 5 years per the towns then current and adopted
Capital Improvement Plan, at the town’s discretion, and construct dry service
laterals and wastewater collection main lines.
   (C)   The development shall pay the effluent sanitary sewer system buy-in
fees, according to the then adopted fee schedule(s).
   (D)   The development shall pay a water portfolio access fee according to
the then adopted fee schedule(s).
   (E)   The initial water portfolio access fee shall be paid at the rate set
by Council resolution per acre-foot for a 100 year assured water supply. The
Town Council may adjust this rate from time to time by resolution.
   (F)   The development shall construct, as approved by the Town Engineer and
Public Works Director, a central water delivery system, in accordance with the
current master plan, including production and storage as required, at their own
expense, which ownership shall transfer to the town at no cost to the town at
the final acceptance of the development infrastructure or at a date negotiated
by the developer and the town at the time of request for development.
   (G)   The development shall provide, to the town’s satisfaction, the
financial capability and assurances to complete the development in a timely
manner, as approved by the town.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.038 DEVELOPMENT NON-PERFORMANCE; FORFEITURE OF WATER RIGHTS.
   Once a development has received a water allocation from the town’s water
portfolio, the developer shall perform as per the development agreement. If the
developer does not perform as per the development agreement, and begin
construction within 2 years, the developer’s town water allocation shall be
forfeited and no fees shall be refunded.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.039 ASSURED WATER SUPPLY; APPLICATION OF EXISTING RIGHTS AND TRANSFER TO
TOWN.
   (A)   All water rights applicable to a specific parcel of land must be
utilized to demonstrate a 100-year assured water supply for that parcel, before
the developer is allowed to acquire any water rights or credits from the town
for that parcel.
   (B)   Parties seeking access to the town’s water portfolio are required to
transfer to the town, at no cost to the town, prior to the recording of final
plat, all water rights and credits used by the developer to demonstrate a 100-
year assured water supply for that subdivision.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
  § 51.040 LIMITATION OF USAGE.
   The town at its discretion may make its water, effluent rights and credits
available for purchase by developers submitting a preliminary subdivision plat.
The purchased water rights shall be utilized only for the platted subdivision,
and may not be sold or transferred without the town’s express written
permission.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.041 DEVELOPMENT OF WATER SYSTEM MASTER PLAN.
   (A)   The town will develop a water system master plan to identify the
general location and sizing of all central water system infrastructure required
throughout certain designated areas of the community.
   (B)   The developer will be responsible for all costs for the design, and
construction of all water system infrastructure in general conformance with the
master plan, or any revisions thereto.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
WATER AND SEWER MAIN EXTENSIONS
§ 51.055 APPROVAL BY TOWN ENGINEER AND PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR REQUIRED.
   No public water or sewer extensions shall be made until the plans and
specifications are approved by the Town Engineer and the Public Works Director.
Water and sewer main extensions shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with ADEQ Bulletin 10, ADEQ Bulletin 11, AWWA Standards, Town of Chino Valley
Standards, YAG Standards and MAG standards, as appropriate. With the
concurrence of the Town Engineer, the Public Works Director may authorize
variances from the standards and specifications.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.056 MAIN EXTENSIONS; CONNECTION WITH DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM AND COLLECTION
SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Persons desiring to connect water and sewer main extensions to the
existing distribution and collection systems shall apply to the Department in
writing and shall pay all established fees and charges.
   (B)   In new subdivisions, shopping centers, industrial tracts or other
similar developments, the developer shall furnish and install, to town
specifications, all water mains, valves, service lines, sewer lines, manholes
and all required appurtenances for each type of main extension within the
boundary of the designated area of development.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.057 EXTENSIONS; CONSTRUCTION, OWNERSHIP AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   In new subdivisions and developments where public sewers and/or water
mains are authorized by the Public Works Director, the mains, service lines and
appurtenances, including storage tanks and pump stations, shall be designed and
constructed at the developer’s expense in accordance with plans and
specifications approved by the Public Works Director. Review and inspection
fees shall be paid in accordance with provisions of the town code. The costs
for the preparation of the plans and specifications, the staking of the
location of the lines, the cost of inspection and testing, the cost of
acquiring rights-of-way and easements, and preparation of as-built plans shall
be the responsibility of the developer. The town will perform inspection during
construction.
   (B)   Subsequent to final approval and acceptance of construction, the
person responsible for the construction of the extension shall relinquish all
right to, or interest in, free of all liens, the ownership of the extension and
the Department shall exercise complete control over such extension.
   (C)   Upon acceptance of construction, water main extensions and service
connections shall be maintained by the Department, up to and including the
consumer’s meter and shall be operated by the Department, as part of the
distribution system. The Department shall maintain all public sewer lines,
pumping stations, treatment facilities and other appurtenances, except for the
package pumping stations as may be required for individual residences or
businesses to access to the gravity system. The Department shall exercise
complete operational control over all such extensions and appurtenances.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.058 EXTENSIONS; POLICY OF TOWN GENERALLY.
   The water and sewer main extension policy of the town for areas beyond
present town trunk mains and the policy to be followed in connection therewith
shall be, and the same is hereby declared to be, as follows: The town desires
to encourage the development of undeveloped areas through repayment for extra
costs incurred in construction of “off-site” mains that are necessary to serve
new developments, and bring service to existing developments, in order to
distribute the costs of extending the mains between two or more developers.
This policy would apply where a main extension was constructed by one developer
and connected to or utilized at a later date by one or more developers or
property owners. For this purpose, a WATER OR SEWER MAIN is defined as a main
constructed from the town’s existing point of connection to, and along, the
frontage or boundary of the development with the capacity to serve additional
developments. However, the developer must pay all costs for engineering design
and construction of mains of such size as to afford adequate capacity and
service for specific “service areas” to be served by such mains.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.059 APPROACH MAINS; CONSTRUCTION BY DEVELOPERS; REPAYMENT AGREEMENT.
   (A)   An approach main may be constructed by the town, or by a developer, in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   The final detailed plans and specifications for an “approach main”
shall be approved by the Town Engineer and Public Works Director prior to
construction. The engineering cost for the preparation of plans,
specifications, ADEQ and/or Yavapai County review fees, and permit fees, and
construction staking of the “approach main” incurred by a developer may be
included in the calculation of repayable costs as provided for in this section.
The plans and bid line items for the approach mains shall be clearly and
distinctly separated from all other on-site plan sheets and bid items.
   (C)   The cost of distribution mains within the boundaries of a development
shall not be eligible for repayment. Where booster pumps and storage tanks are
necessary to maintain reserve, peak and fire flow capacity and/or to maintain
adequate pressures in the water mains due to the development being near or
above the hydraulic gradient in the town service area, the developer shall
provide adequate land, and construct, at his or her own expense, the necessary
storage facility and booster pumping station to town specifications. The town
will assume ownership, maintenance and operation of the property and facilities
upon completion and acceptance by the town.
   (D)   The town may utilize line charges to facilitate the repayment of
repayable costs associated with an approach main, provided that such line
charges shall expire after 20 years, and that the town shall record notice of
such line charges in the office of the Yavapai County Recorder. For an approach
main that was constructed by a private developer, line charges may only be
utilized if repayable costs have been established pursuant to a repayment
agreement and approved by the Town Council. Repayable costs to be included in a
repayment agreement shall be determined by the Town Engineer, based on an
estimate by the developer’s design engineer and after consideration of
comparable projects.
   (E)   The town reserves the right, in its sole discretion, to require an
increase in the diameter of an approach main, in which case, if the increased
diameter exceeds 12 inches for a water main or 18 inches for a sewer main, the
town shall pay the cost of the materials required to increase the diameter of
the main from 12 inches for a water main, 18 inches for a sewer main, or the
diameter required by the developer, whichever is larger, and the increased
diameter required by the town.
   (F)   If the town will pay any portion of the cost of an approach main with
public funds, that approach main shall be designed and constructed in
compliance with A.R.S. Title 34 and funds to be used for reimbursement shall be
approved by Town Council.
   (G)   Improvement or community facility districts. When justified by the
anticipated scope or cost of construction, a community facilities district or
an improvement district may be formed by the Town Council at its sole
discretion and in accordance with provisions of state and local law.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.060 APPROACH MAINS; LENGTH OF EXTENSIONS.
   Where no water or sewer main exists along the frontage of a lot, and the
developer or owner of the lot requests water and/or sewer service, sufficient
length of main shall be constructed by the developer or owner to extend the
main from the point of connection at the existing main to the full frontage,
rearage, or sideage of the property.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.061 [RESERVED].
§ 51.062 EXTENSIONS; INAPPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS TO EXISTING AGREEMENTS, NO
INTEREST TO BE PAID.
   The provisions of §§ 51.058 through 51.060 shall not apply to existing
agreements signed under previous policies or code provisions. No interest will
accrue or be applied to, the agreed approach main construction cost unless
specifically set forth in the existing agreement.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS
§ 51.075 REQUIRED WATER MAIN CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   As used in this chapter, MULTI-FAMILY means designed or used for
residential purposes and comprising multiple dwelling units, whether free-
standing or attached, in a single building or on a single parcel or lot, such
as apartments, townhouses, and condominiums. A “guesthouse” (or “guest house”),
as defined in Section 2.2 of Chapter 154, is not MULTI-FAMILY.
   (B)   Non-residential and multi-family.
      (1)   Unless serviced by another public water provider, any non-
residential or multi-family property with new construction and a town water
main available at the property line shall be connected to the town’s water
system.
      (2)   Unless serviced by another public water provider, developed non-
residential or multi-family property with a town water main available at the
property line shall be connected to the town’s water system within 1 year of
written notice by the town that the service is available.
      (3)   On-site exempt wells on any non-residential or multi-family
properties required to connect to the town’s water system under this section
must be properly sealed and abandoned in accordance with ADWR and ADEQ
standards, and such abandonment shall be inspected, confirmed, and documented
by the Utility Department.
      (4)   Service connections required under this section must extend at
right angles from the main to the curbside or property line and be installed in
accordance with town standard details.
   (C)   Single-family.
      (1)   A new single-family dwelling unit with a town water main available
at the property line shall be connected to the town water system at the time of
construction. The connection shall not prohibit the construction and operation
of a non-exempt well in accordance with state ADWR regulations.
      (2)   If a new town water main becomes available at the property line of
a developed single-family dwelling unit with a private well, the property owner
may elect to continue using the on-site well in lieu of connecting to the town
system. In the event such property is connected to the town system, either at
the time of original line construction or at some later date, the on-site well
shall be properly sealed and abandoned in accordance with ADWR and ADEQ
standards, and the abandonment shall be inspected, confirmed, and documented by
the Utility Department.
   (D)   The number, location, manner of construction, and sizes of all service
connections shall be subject to the approval of the Public Works Director.
   (E)   Regardless of lot size, where there is new construction within platted
subdivisions, each lot shall be connected to the town’s water system.
   (F)   Private systems and wells shall not be constructed on any property
connected to a municipal water system, except as allowed in division (C) above.
   (G)   Service connection to the town water system shall only be provided
pursuant to an application or agreement between the property owner or applicant
and the town. An application or agreement for service connection to a new
project or development shall be approved and accepted by the town only if the
town finds that the project or development is consistent with, conforms to, and
furthers the implementation of:
      (1)   The town’s water use policy.
      (2)   The town’s general plan.
      (3)   Any applicable adopted plan, including, but not limited to,
specific area plan, circulation plan, capital improvement plan, growth
planning, or growth management plan.
      (4)   The town’s water budget.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022; Am. Ord.
2024-940, passed 7-9-2024)
§ 51.076 BUILDINGS TO HAVE SEPARATE SERVICE CONNECTIONS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Every separate building supplied with town water and/or sewer service
must have its own separate connection with the town mains, except 2 or more
buildings located on the same lot or on contiguous lots under single ownership,
or property known as an apartment house, trailer court or other similar
developments covering more than 1 lot may be, upon written permission granted
by the Public Works Director, supplied through a single metered connection with
the town main as long as single ownership continues. Upon change from such
single ownership, a new separate connection shall be immediately made for the
building or premises having the indirect connection.
   (B)   The Utility Department shall have the right, at its sole discretion,
to install a single service pipe of sufficient size from the main to the back
of curb to supply not more than 2 separate properties connecting to separate
meters. The size of the service pipe shall be determined by the Director and
the Building Official.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.077 UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS WITH WATER MAINS.
   No person shall connect any pipe, tube or other instrument with any main,
service pipe, conduit or flume for the purpose of taking and conducting water
belonging to the town, without a permit or authorized service connection from
the Utility Department. Violators shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.078 SERVICE CONNECTIONS ON EXISTING MAINS.
   Only authorized personnel of the Department shall make taps for service
connections on town water mains, unless specifically authorized in writing by
the Public Works Director.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.079 DEVELOPER TO INSTALL SERVICE CONNECTIONS ON NEW MAINS IN NEW
SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   In all new subdivisions or other developments where there are no
existing town water mains, the developer shall install all 3/4- and/or 1-inch
service connections simultaneously with the installation of water mains to the
subdivision or development. Services of 1-1/2 inches and/or 2 inches may also
be installed by the developer if approved by the Public Works Director.
   (B)   Services larger than 2 inches shall have a resilient seat shutoff
valve with a valve box.
   (C)   In all new subdivisions or other developments where the developer
installs the service connections and meter sets, application must be made to
the Department, as otherwise provided in this code, for installation of water
meters.
   (D)   All service connections shall be installed in full compliance with
town standards and specifications. Only meter boxes and meter sets specified by
the town may be installed. Any required pressure regulating valve shall be
installed and tested by the contractor. The pressure regulating valve shall be
maintained by the town utility customer.
   (E)   In the event a service connection must cross an Arizona Department of
Transportation (“ADOT”) highway right-of-way, the customer shall obtain the
necessary permits directly from ADOT and make the service connection through a
licensed contractor. The service connection shall include the meter set and box
and the service line from the meter box to the water main. The contractor shall
install the water main tap and expose the water main. The town shall install
the meter in the box.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.080 CONNECTION OF EXISTING SERVICE TO NEW MAIN.
   Where a new main has been laid in any street, the owners of premises on the
street who are being supplied through existing services, and have paid the
regular buy-in and service installation charges, shall be connected to the new
main by the Department without further charge.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.081 CHANGES TO EXISTING SERVICE CONNECTION.
   When new buildings are to be erected on the site of old ones and it is
desired to increase the size of, to change the location of the old service
connection, or where a service connection to any premise is abandoned or no
longer used, the Department may immediately reclaim and disconnect the
connection at the main, after which, should a service connection be required to
the premises, a new service shall be placed. Any additional buy in fees may
apply. Any fees paid for the existing service shall be credited against the
determination of the new buy in fees.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
METERS
§ 51.095 SERVICES TO BE METERED.
   (A)   Whenever a service shall be installed, connecting any property or
water-using equipment with the water supply of the town, the water will be
supplied to the property or equipment through meter only, except as provided in
§ 51.260 for sprinkler type fire prevention systems.
   (B)   A separate water meter is required for new services established after
August 23, 2004 for the following:
      (1)   Landscape watering (irrigation) of all landscaped areas greater
than 10,000 square feet; or
      (2)   All water features having a maximum daily water consumptive use of
500 gallons per day.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.096 LOCATION OF METERS.
   All meters shall be located on the back of the sidewalk side of the curb
line, if such exists, or at the property line if the curbs do not exist in
accordance with standard construction details as approved by the Public Works
Director.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.097 COST OF CHANGING SIZE OF METER OF SERVICE.
   In case a larger or smaller meter or service is applied for, other than the
one already in service, the applicant shall pay for the installation of the new
service in accordance with the schedule of charges as established by the Public
Works Director, subject to the approval of the Town Manager. The original tap
shall be removed and the applicant given a refund for the old meter removed by
the Department, in accordance with a refund schedule approved by the Public
Works Director.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.098 REMOVAL OF METERS.
   Meters, when installed to service any property, shall be removed only by an
authorized employee of the Department or upon order of the Public Works
Director. Violation of this provision shall result in the water to the property
being turned off. Before water service is restored, the property owner or
person in control shall reimburse the town’s costs incurred to restore the
meter to its authorized and designated location. If the meter was removed by a
plumber or other contractor, his or her business license may be revoked and not
again issued until the charge has been paid.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.099 REPLACEMENT OF METERS.
   The Department may replace any meter at such time as it may see fit and
shall be the judge of the size and type of any water meter installed. In the
event there is an excessive rate of flow through an installed meter the town
may require the owner, at his or her expense, to install a meter of adequate
size.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.100 MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR; CONSUMER TO PAY FOR DAMAGES.
   The Department shall maintain and repair all meters when rendered
unserviceable through normal use and shall renew them if necessary. Where
replacements, repairs or adjustments of any meter are determined necessary by
the act, neglect or carelessness of the owner or occupant of any premises, and
this shall include any damage to meters due to hot water, breaking meter seals,
tampering with working parts of the meter and the like, any expense caused to
the Department thereby shall be charged against and collected from the owner of
the premises or person supplied. The Department may refuse to furnish water
through the service until all charges are paid in full.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.101 TESTING METER ACCURACY.
   Any town water customer may have the accuracy of his or her meter examined
and tested by the Department upon written request and receipt by the town of
the established fee for such work. The Department will examine and test the
meter, and, if found to be inaccurate in excess of 2% of water passing through
it, the town will remove and replace the meter at the town’s expense. If the
meter is found to be inaccurate in excess of 2% of water passing through it,
the billing for the current period will be adjusted in the manner deemed
appropriate by the Finance Director, and the testing fee shall be refunded to
the customer. If the meter is found to be accurate, the town shall retain the
testing fee.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
BACKFLOW PREVENTION
§ 51.115 DECLARATION OF POLICY; AUTHORIZATION.
   It is determined that danger to the public health, safety and welfare
resulting from contamination or pollution of the public potable water supply
system requires that measures be adopted to protect that system by authorizing
town officials to:
   (A)   Protect the public potable water supply from the possibility of
contamination or pollution by preventing the backflow of contaminants or
pollutants into the public water supply system;
   (B)   Promote the awareness and elimination of cross connections, actual or
potential, of a customer’s internal potable water system with the public
potable water supply system;
   (C)   Provide for a continuing program of backflow prevention control which
will prevent the contamination or pollution of the public potable water supply
system;
   (D)   Provide for the monitoring and enforcement of a continuing program of
backflow prevention which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the
public potable water supply; and
   (E)   Comply with the federal, state and local requirements.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.116 CROSS CONNECTIONS FROM OR TO SOURCE OF WATER SUPPLY OTHER THAN THAT OF
TOWN.
   It shall be unlawful for any customer to cause a connection to be made or to
allow 1 to exist for any purpose whatsoever between the town water supply and
any other source of supply without the approval of the Public Works Director.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 51.117 RESPONSIBILITY FOR BACKFLOW PREVENTION CONTROL.
   (A)   Public Works Director. It shall be the responsibility of the Public
Works Director to protect the public water supply by applying the remedies and
enforcement provisions set forth in § 51.120 and as otherwise provided in
state, local and federal law.
   (B)   Building Department. The town Building Official, as head of the
Building Department, shall have the following responsibilities for backflow
prevention enforcement.
      (1)   The Building Official shall administer and enforce all applicable
cross connection control provisions of the town of Chino Valley Plumbing Code,
and amendments, including issuance of permits for all required backflow
prevention assemblies.
      (2)   The Building Official shall determine, in conjunction with the
Department, whether a facility is a listed facility or activity in § 51.118 and
therefore requires backflow protection. This responsibility includes inspection
as necessary of all existing facilities to be connected to the town water
services.
      (3)   The Building Official shall, as a condition of issuance of any
building permit, require installation of appropriate backflow prevention as
required by § 51.118 and the town’s Plumbing Code.
      (4)   The Building Official and Public Works Director shall determine the
type and location of all backflow prevention assemblies in accordance with this
chapter and all other codes and ordinances of the town.
      (5)   The Department shall keep accurate and adequate records of each
location of an approved backflow prevention assembly, required tests and any
subsequent maintenance or repair thereof.
   (C)   Customer responsibilities. It shall be the responsibility of the
customer to prevent contaminants or pollutants from entering the customer’s
building potable water system and the public potable water system. The
customer’s responsibility starts at the point of service delivery from the
public potable water system and includes all water piping systems. The customer
shall properly locate, install, test and maintain each backflow assembly in
good working condition and provide the necessary inspections and tests to
assure that the assembly is operating properly. These responsibilities include,
but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The customer shall obtain a permit from the Building Department for
installation of any backflow prevention assembly and for modification or
relocation of the assembly or any plumbing system.
      (2)   The customer shall test all backflow prevention assemblies at least
once a year, except that the Building Official or the Public Works Director may
require more frequent testing if warranted. As to fire lines or fire sprinkler
systems with backflow prevention assemblies, the initial and annual tests shall
be performed by a certified tester who is also permitted by the Fire Marshal to
test fire lines or fire sprinkler systems. The initial and annual test shall
include a full flow test. It is the responsibility of the customer to test and
submit all testing results to the Department. If the test reveals the assembly
to be defective or in an unsatisfactory operating condition, the customer shall
perform all repairs or replacement, to the satisfaction of the Public Works
Director, so that the assembly is in satisfactory operating condition.
      (3)   If the Public Works Director, the Building Official or the customer
becomes aware during the interim period between annual tests that an assembly
is defective or in unsatisfactory operating condition, the customer shall
perform all repairs, replacement and testing, to the satisfaction of the Public
Works Director, so that the customer has an assembly in satisfactory operating
condition.
      (4)   Assembly testing shall be performed only by a certified tester.
      (5)   The customer shall be responsible for submitting copies of testing
records pertaining to assemblies, on forms approved by the Department, by the
date specified by the Department. The customer shall retain all records for a
minimum of 3 years from the date that a copy of the record was provided to the
Department.
      (6)   The customer shall install the backflow prevention assemblies at
the customer’s expense, in compliance with the standards and specifications
adopted by the town.
      (7)   In the event the customer’s or the public water system is
contaminated or polluted due to a cross connection or other cause, and the same
comes to the knowledge of the customer, the Public Works Director and the
Yavapai County Health Department shall be promptly notified by the customer so
that appropriate measures may be taken to overcome the contamination.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.118 BACKFLOW PREVENTION METHODS.
   Unless otherwise specifically designated by the Public Works Director:
   (A)   An approved backflow prevention shall be 1 of the following types:
      (1)   Air gap. An unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the opening of any pipe or faucet supplying potable water to
a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of the tank,
plumbing fixture or other device. An approved air gap shall be at least double
the diameter of the supply pipe or faucet and in no case less than 1 inch.
      (2)   Reduced pressure principle assembly (“RP”). An assembly containing
2 independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically
operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located
between the check valves and below the first check valve. The assembly shall
include properly located test cocks equipped with brass plugs and tightly
closing resilient seat shut-off valves at each end of the assembly.
      (3)   Pressure vacuum breaker assembly (“PVB”). An assembly containing an
independently operating, loaded check valve and an independently operating,
loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The
assembly shall be equipped with properly located test cocks equipped with brass
plugs and tightly closing resilient seat shut-off valves at each end of the
assembly.
      (4)   Double check valve assembly (“DC”). An assembly containing 2
independently acting approved check valves including properly located test
cocks equipped with brass plugs and tightly closing resilient seat shut-off
valves at each end of the assembly.
   (B)   An approved backflow prevention method is required in accordance with
the edition of the International Plumbing Code as adopted and amended by the
town.
   (C)   Where there is a question or a facility or activity is not
specifically listed in the International Plumbing Code as adopted and amended
by the town, The Building Official, in conjunction with the Public Works
Director, shall determine on a case-by-case basis backflow prevention
requirements for any facility or activity.
   (D)   All assemblies shall be accessible for testing, inspection and
maintenance. A reduced pressure principle assembly or double check valve
assembly shall not be installed in a basement, meter box, pit or vault unless
adequate clearance and drainage is provided. A pressure vacuum breaker assembly
shall be installed above ground.
   (E)   Unless a cross connection problem is specifically identified, or as
otherwise provided in this chapter, the requirements of this section do not
apply to single-family residences used solely for residential purposes. Home
occupation or home businesses shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis.
   (F)   An air gap separation shall be located as close as practical to the
customer’s point of service delivery. All piping between the customer’s
connection and receiving tank shall be entirely visible unless otherwise
approved by the Building Official and the Public Works Director. CLOSE AS
PRACTICAL means the point nearest the service delivery where the assembly can
be installed. Where the assembly location may interfere with obstacles such as
driveways and sidewalks, then CLOSE AS PRACTICAL is the nearest point after the
obstacle but in no event beyond the first tap.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.119 APPEALS.
   An action or decision concerning the determination of the Building Official
or the Public Works Director may be appealed in accordance with the procedures
set forth in the town Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.120 REMEDIES.
   (A)   If a customer has committed 1 or more of the following acts in
division (C) below and, notice from the town, has not taken the corrective
action within the time specified by the Building Official, the Public Works
Director may:
      (1)   Terminate water service to the facility; and
      (2)   After 3 days’ written notice impose a civil penalty not to exceed
1,000%/billing period on the charges for all water used beginning from the date
the corrective action was required and until the corrective action has been
completed by the customer to the satisfaction of the town.
   (B)   If a situation exists, which would otherwise result in discontinuance
of water service, and is not remedied within the time provided in the notice of
termination sent to the customer, the Public Works Director, at his or her
discretion, may install a backflow prevention assembly at the customer’s point
of service delivery, in which case the customer shall be responsible for all
costs, including testing, together with applicable penalties.
   (C)   (1)   In addition to any other enforcement remedy available to the
Public Works Director, the Building Official may request the Public Works
Director to terminate the water service if the customer:
         (a)   Fails to locate, install, test or maintain a required backflow
prevention assembly;
         (b)   Removes or bypasses a required backflow prevention assembly
without the prior approval of the Building Official;
         (c)   Allows a cross connection to occur;
         (d)   Fails to timely submit records of tests and repairs of a
backflow prevention assembly;
         (e)   Fails to comply with the written policy on backflow prevention
and cross connection on file with the Town Clerk, the Building Department and
the Utility Department; or
         (f)   Fails to comply with any requirements imposed upon the customer
by A.A.C. R-18-4-215.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the above, termination of water service shall be
immediate and without prior notice if the Public Works Director determines that
the customer’s water system may cause a health hazard to the public potable
water supply. Otherwise, the Public Works Director shall give 10 days’ written
notice to the customer prior to termination of water service, which notice
shall include the time and place where customer may present grounds why his
water service should not be terminated. Water service may be restored when the
condition forming the basis for the termination has been remedied, to the
satisfaction of the Public Works Director. All costs, fees and expenses
incurred, and all surcharges and penalties relating to the termination and
restoration of water service, shall be paid prior to the water service being
restored.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
  WASTEWATER COLLECTION, TREATMENT, AND RECHARGE POLICY
§ 51.135 [RESERVED].
§ 51.136 WASTEWATER COLLECTION; TREATMENT AND RECHARGE; SCHEDULE OF
CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   The town shall develop a centralized Wastewater Treatment Plant to
serve the greater Chino Valley area.
   (B)   The town shall design, build and operate the sanitary sewer system on
its own schedule. If a development requires additional effluent collection,
treatment and recharge capacity prior to the time such services or capacity is
available from the town, the development shall provide financial resources
sufficient to construct the additional capacity as requested, at their own
expense, at the town’s facilities only. The developments shall receive
reimbursement of financial resources provided according to the schedule as per
a development agreement approved by Council, and in accordance with provisions
of this chapter. Any proposed exceptions or deviations from this policy shall
be reviewed by the Public Works Director and specifically approved by the Town
Council. The approval, if granted, shall not negate mandatory connection to the
town system and payment of appropriate fees at a future date, as required in
other portions of this chapter.
   (C)   The town shall develop a Wastewater Collection System Master Plan to
identify the general location and sizing of all central sewer system mains and
infrastructure required throughout certain designated areas of the community
and also a treatment and recharge system phasing plan.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.137 [RESERVED].
 § 51.138 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM BUY-IN FEE.
   At the time of building permit application for a new residence or a new
commercial building, the permittee shall pay a sanitary sewer system buy-in fee
as adopted by Council Resolution in the fee schedule(s), which may be amended
from time to time. At the time it is required to connect to the sanitary sewer
system, the property owner of an existing residence or commercial building
shall pay the sanitary sewer system buy-in fee in accordance with these
regulations. The fee shall include the cost of administration, operation,
maintenance and regulatory compliance of the town’s wastewater collection,
treatment and recharge facilities, including sludge disposal costs and an
amount for replacement costs of equipment and real property.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.139 CONSTRUCTION FINANCIAL CAPABILITIES.
   All new developments, subdivided and unsubdivided, shall be required to
demonstrate adequate financial capability and assurance, as approved by the
town, to design and construct the sanitary sewer system components sufficient
to serve the new development and other areas as approved by the town.
(Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.140 [RESERVED].
§ 51.141 [RESERVED].
§ 51.142 EFFLUENT; CONTROL AND OWNERSHIP.
   The town reaffirms its ownership and control of all effluent produced within
the town’s Regional 208 Planning Area.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
CONNECTIONS TO PUBLIC SEWERS, PUMPING
§ 51.155 REQUIRED SEWER CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   A developed property served by an existing septic tank system is not
required to connect to the sanitary sewer system, except that:
      (1)   When a town sewer main becomes available at the property line of a
developed multi-family or non-residential property, the property owner shall
connect the property to the sanitary sewer system within 1 year of written
notice by the town that the service is available.
      (2)   In the event that the town or the Yavapai County Health Department
determine that there exists a condition that is a menace to health arising from
improper sewage disposal on any property having access to a town sewer main,
the property owner shall connect the property to the sanitary sewer system
within 60 days of receiving written notification from the town or County Health
Department to do so.
      (3)   If, after receiving notice pursuant to divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2)
above, a property owner refuses to connect or does not have the financial
ability necessary to connect to the sanitary sewer system as herein required,
the town may install the sewer connection and related facilities necessary to
provide service to the property and charge the property owner the actual price
for the labor and materials for the installation. The town shall work with the
property owner to establish a reasonable repayment schedule based upon the
property owner’s financial conditions. If the property owner becomes
delinquent, having not complied with the repayment schedule, the town, upon
providing written notice and an opportunity for a hearing before the Town
Manager, shall file a lien against the affected property for the amount unpaid.
In addition to or as an alternative to filing such lien, the town may refer any
unpaid connection fees or costs to a collection agency.
      (4)   Upon connecting a property to the sanitary sewer system, existing
septic tanks on that property shall be abandoned in accordance with procedures
established by ADEQ, and as directed by the town.
   (B)   The following shall connect to the sanitary sewer system:
      (1)   New construction within platted residential subdivisions,
regardless of size.
      (2)   New construction within multi-family properties or platted
subdivisions.
      (3)   New construction within non-residential properties or developments
with a sewer main available at the property line.
      (4)   New single-family dwelling units on lots smaller than one acre.
   (C)   A single lot greater than or equal to 1 acre may be permitted to
install a septic tank system if the sanitary sewer system is not available at
the property line.
   (D)   When a town sewer main becomes available at the property line of a
developed multi-family property, the property owner shall connect the property
to the sanitary sewer system within 1 year of written notice by the town that
the service is available.
   (E)   In accordance with A.A.C. R18-5-404, where both the water supply and
sewage disposal system must be developed on the same lot, the minimum size for
septic shall be at least 1 acre.
(Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022; Am. Ord. 2024-940, passed 7-9-2024)
§ 51.156 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the Utility Department.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.157 APPLICATION FOR SEWER TAP, SEWER DYE TEST.
   (A)   Applications for sewer taps shall be made in accordance with the
provisions hereof.
   (B)   A sewer customer who questions whether the sewer tap to his or her
property is in service may apply to the Utility Department for a sewer dye test
to be performed. The sewer dye test shall be performed by the Utility
Department when the customer has paid a fee to cover the costs of the test. If
the test shows that the sewer tap is not in service, the fee shall be refunded
to the customer. The fee shall be set by Council resolution and may be amended
from time to time.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.158 PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR TO APPROVE DESIGN, QUANTITY, LOCATION, SIZE AND
CONSTRUCTION OF SEWER SERVICES.
   (A)   The design, quantity, location, method of connection and size of all
sewer taps is subject to approval by the Public Works Director. The Utility
Department shall install all sewer taps for single-family dwelling units that
are less than 6 inches in diameter, except as provided elsewhere in this
chapter. All sewer taps for subdivisions or nonresidential property, and all
sewer taps that are 6 inches in diameter or larger, shall be installed by a
private contractor in accordance with plans and standard details approved by
the Public Works Director. Review, buy-in and inspection fees shall be paid as
set forth in this chapter and other pertinent chapters of the town code. Sewer
taps shall be connected to public sewer mains only, unless specifically
authorized and approved by the Public Works Director.
   (B)   Sewer taps shall extend at right angles from the main to the property,
unless otherwise specifically authorized for unusual conditions, and shall be
installed in accordance with the most current edition of the MAG Standard
Specifications and Details for Public Works Construction, unless otherwise
modified and approved by the Town Engineer.
   (C)   Permits for sewer taps shall not be granted, and may be revoked, when
the lateral sewer passes through property which at the time is, or may become,
the property of persons other than the owner of the property to be served from
the connection, unless a private sewer service connection easement is obtained
and recorded in the office of the Yavapai County Recorder. This easement shall
include legal descriptions of the property that it burdens and the property
that it benefits.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.159 SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR INSTALLING SEWER TAPS IN NEW SUBDIVISIONS AND
DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   For new construction within platted subdivisions or developments where
sanitary systems are authorized by the town and constructed at the developer’s
expense, the developer, or his or her agent, shall install sewer taps with wyes
or tees and extend the lateral sewer to the right-of-way line, or connect the
lateral sewer to the building sewer.
   (B)   The design and construction of the sanitary sewer system lines, sewer
taps, and connections of the lateral sewer to the sewer tap shall be under the
supervision of a registered civil engineer holding registration in the State of
Arizona, who shall submit “as-built” plans to the Public Works Department
bearing the engineer’s signed and dated registration seal. It shall be the duty
of the developer to require that all sewer taps serving lots in the
development, upon which no buildings are initially constructed, to be
effectively sealed until such time as buildings will be constructed on the
lots. The service connections shall be inspected and approved by the Public
Works Department before being backfilled and shall be designated and accurately
located on the as-built plans with stations from manholes. The effective seal
shall consist of a watertight cap placed on the cleanout located at the right-
of-way line.
   (C)   Before any building sewer construction is commenced, plumbing permits
must be obtained by the developer or his or her agent from the Building
Department.
   (D)   When the “as-built” plans are submitted, the Public Works Director
will make a record of the sewer taps.
   (E)   The town will collect the appropriate fee for initial plan review,
inspection, and “as-built” plan review as required by the Town Code.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022; Am. Ord.
2024-940, passed 7-9-2024)
§ 51.160 INSTALLATION OF SEWER TAPS.
   Unless otherwise required by §
51.159 or determined by the Public Works Director, the responsibility for
installation of sewer taps shall be assumed and paid for by the contractor/
developer, whose work will be inspected by the Utility Department. The
contractor/developer is responsible for the excavation to and the uncovering of
the town’s sewer main. All excavation and trenching shall be in accordance with
the latest regulation of OSHA. The contractor shall notify the Utility and
Roads Departments at least 48 hours in advance of the time required for the
sewer tap installation. Department employees are prohibited from entering any
excavation or trench not meeting the safety requirement of any applicable town,
state, or federal regulations. Upon completion of the installation of the sewer
tap and approval by the Utility Department, the contractor/developer shall
backfill the trench and restore the road or ground surface to its original
condition, or as shown on the approved engineering plans. All service
connections shall be inspected and approved by the Utility Department prior to
being backfilled. The contractor/developer shall ensure that the service
lateral is not damaged, broken or crushed during the backfilling operation.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.161 PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR CLEANING, REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT OF
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   The property owner shall clean, unstop, maintain, and repair the
building connection piping serving the owner’s property from the home or
building to the public sewer line including repairs or replacement of damaged
or broken piping in the public right-of-way serving a single-family or duplex
property.
   (B)   Where the correction of a stoppage requires the repair or replacement
of a damaged or broken section of the building connection piping serving other
than a single-family or a duplex property and the damaged or broken section is
located off property in a street, alley or easement, the owner or his or her
contractor shall obtain a permit from the town to work in the street, alley or
easement prior to commencing the work.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.162 [RESERVED].
§ 51.163 PUMPING CHARGES; BASIN BOUNDARIES.
   Generally, the town has adequate topography to render the necessity of sewer
lift station unnecessary. Where it is deemed necessary for sewage to be pumped
from a specific geographic area to the treatment plant main lift station or
main collector lines due to topography, as opposed to gravity flow, additional
service charges may be assessed by the town to cover the cost of pumping and
maintaining pump stations.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS AND LIMITATIONS
§ 51.175 [RESERVED].
§ 51.176 TREATMENT OF POLLUTED WASTES REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet or drainage channel
within the town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town, any sewage,
industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 51.177 SEWER DISCHARGE, GENERAL USE REQUIREMENTS AND PRETREATMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any user to discharge or cause to be discharged to
any point of entry into the sanitary sewer system:
   (A)   Any storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, surface
drainage, cooling water or unpolluted process waters that may constitute
inflow, as defined in § 50.01. No rain spout, roof drain or other form of
surface drainage and no foundation drainage or sump pump shall be connected to,
or discharge into, any sanitary sewer;
   (B)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard to the system or
treatment plant. In no case shall pollutants be discharged with a closed cup
flash point less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius), or
pollutants which cause an exceedance of 10% of the lower explosion limit (LEL)
at any point within the wastewater treatment plant for any single reading or
more than 5% for any 2 consecutive readings;
   (C)   Solid or viscous pollutants, petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting
oil or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference
with, pass through or that will cause obstruction in the flow in sewers or
other interference or damage with the sanitary sewer system or treatment plant
efficiency;
   (D)   Any waters or wastes containing a toxic, radioactive, poisonous or
other substance in sufficient quantity to cause, or have the potential to
cause, injury or interference with any sewage treatment process, cause effluent
of the treatment plant to come out of ADEQ compliance, cause corrosive
structural damage or equipment degradation, constitute a hazard to humans or
create any hazard to the sanitary sewer system or in the receiving waters of
the sewage treatment plant or pollutants which result in the presence of toxic
gasses, vapors or fumes within the sanitary sewer system in a quantity that may
cause acute worker health and/or safety problems;
   (E)   Pretreatment of any raw sewage shall be required for excessive PH, low
PH, excessive water temperatures, synthetic / organic chemicals, inorganic
chemicals, volatile organic chemicals, metals, radio nucleus and any other
compounds or chemicals in accordance with the town’s aquifer protection permit;
   (F)   Any water or waste that has in any way been diluted, as a substitute
for pretreatment, for the purpose of obtaining compliance with any categorical
standard or pretreatment requirement imposed by this chapter, except where
dilution is expressly authorized by any acceptable categorical standard;
   (G)   Any water or waste that has the potential to cause a violation of any
accepted categorical standard, pretreatment or recharge requirement;
   (H)   Any water or waste that is transported from the point of generation to
the treatment plant by any septic tank pumper, (or) chemical waste hauler, or
similarly transported unless the transporter has first:
      (1)   Disclosed to the Public Works Director the origin, nature,
concentration and volume of all pollutants to be discharged; and
      (2)   Obtained written consent of the Public Works Director to discharge;
   (I)   Any water or waste which could cause interference or pass-through with
the sanitary sewer system or component operations;
   (J)   Any discharge that exhibits a characteristic of a hazardous waste, or
contains a substance that is listed as a hazardous waste pursuant to either
A.A.C. R 18-8-261 or Title 40 C.F.R. part 261, whichever is applicable, whether
or not the discharge is otherwise subject to hazardous waste regulations. This
provision does not apply to domestic wastewater unless part of a home
occupation, or to discharges of hazardous wastes that are authorized by the
Public Works Director.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.178 AUTHORITY OF PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR TO ESTABLISH PROHIBITIONS AND
EFFLUENT LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   The Public Works Director shall have the authority to establish
limitations for individual users or class of users for various specific
substances, materials, waters or wastes that can be accepted into the sewer
system, as well as specify those substances, materials, waters or wastes that
are prohibited from entering the sewer system. All prohibitions and effluent
limitations so established shall be placed on file with the Town Clerk and
become effective and enforceable on the thirty-first day after the date of
filing.
   (B)   All affected individuals or classes of users shall comply with the
prohibitions and effluent limitations established pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.179 PRELIMINARY TREATMENT; REQUIRED APPROVAL; MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   Where necessary, any user of the sanitary sewer system shall provide,
at his or her expense, the preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce
objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits in
accordance with federal, state and local standards. Plans, specifications and
any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment
facilities shall be submitted for review and approval by the Public Works
Director. Construction of the facilities shall not be commenced until the
Public Works Director’s approval is obtained in writing. The completed
facilities shall not be placed in service until they have been inspected for
conformance to the approved plans and the final construction approved by the
Public Works Director. Approval of the plans and inspection of construction
shall not relieve the owner from complying with, and achieving, discharge
limitations set forth in this chapter. Federal pretreatment requirements as set
forth in Title 40 C.F.R. part 403 apply and shall be enforced by the town.
   (B)   Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his or her expense. The owner shall keep written
records and documentation of all cleaning, repair, calibration and maintenance
required to demonstrate compliance with this section. Records shall be kept at
the facility for a minimum of 3 years in accordance with federal, state and
local regulations, and be made available for inspection and review upon
request.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.180 INTERCEPTORS; REQUIREMENTS; TYPE, CAPACITY, LOCATION; CONSTRUCTION OF
GREASE AND OIL INTERCEPTORS; MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Fats, oil, grease, lint or sand interceptors shall be provided for
laundries, restaurants, service stations, auto repair shops, carwashes and
other facilities when, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing fats, oils or
grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful
ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private
living quarters or dwelling units.
   (B)   All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Public Works Director and shall be located so as to be readily and easily
accessible for inspection, cleaning and maintenance.
   (C)   All interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials. They
shall be of substantial construction, designed to withstand anticipated
internal and external pressures, watertight and equipped with easily removable
covers. When bolted covers are required, they shall be gastight and watertight.
Grease and oil interceptors shall be capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme
changes in temperature.
   (D)   All grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the
owner at his or her expense. The owner shall keep written records and
documentation of all cleaning, repair, calibration and maintenance required to
demonstrate compliance with this section. Records shall be kept at the facility
for a minimum of 3 years and be made available for inspection and review upon
request.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.181 CONTROL MANHOLES.
   When required by the Public Works Director, the owner of any property served
by a building sewer carrying potentially harmful or industrial wastes shall
install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, measurement and sampling of the wastes. The manhole, when
required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the Public Works Director. The manhole shall
be installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained by him
or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.182 DISCHARGES TO BE REPORTED.
   Every user of the town sewer system shall report to the Public Works
Director immediately any accident, negligent act or other occurrence that
occasions a discharge to the sanitary sewer system of any wastes or process
waters that exceed the permissible limits for the wastes established by this
chapter or by the Public Works Director.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.183 TESTS AND ANALYSES.
   All tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and waste shall be
determined in accordance with approved laboratory procedures.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
INDUSTRIAL AND PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS
§ 51.195 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL USER REQUIREMENTS.
   All industrial users, as defined in this chapter, shall:
   (A)   Comply with the categorical standards, pretreatment requirements, and
all other requirements imposed by this chapter upon sanitary sewer system
users. Upon the effective date of any federal categorical pretreatment
standards for a particular industrial subcategory, if more stringent than the
effluent limitations imposed under this chapter, the federal standard shall
immediately supersede the limitations set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   Comply with orders of the Public Works Director designed to implement
the categorical standards, pretreatment requirements and all other requirements
imposed by this chapter.
   (C)   Prior to the discharge of wastewater to the sanitary sewer system by
any user required to have a permit under this chapter, the user shall file a
written notice with the Public Works Director which identifies the:
      (1)   Name and address of the existing or prospective users;
      (2)   Business location(s) served, or to be served, by the sanitary sewer
system;
      (3)   Nature, concentration and amounts of any substance present at, or
intended to be present at, such business location(s) which, if discharged to
the sanitary sewer system, could constitute an industrial discharge; and
      (4)   Nature and concentration of all pollutants currently discharged to
the sanitary sewer system from the business location(s).
   (D)   Carry out, and maintain an adequate record of, all self-inspection and
self-monitoring activities necessary for the user to know at all times whether
or not such user is introducing any industrial discharge to the sanitary sewer
system.
   (E)   Assist the Public Works Director to determine the exact nature,
concentration and volume of any pollutant intended for discharge to the
sanitary sewer system. Upon request by the Public Works Director, any user or
industrial user shall promptly:
      (1)   Allow the examination and copying of all relevant records or
documents stored, filed or available from other locations to the user;
      (2)   Allow the inspection of all business locations served by the
sanitary sewer system, including all pretreatment equipment, methods and
activities utilized by the user at the locations;
      (3)   Install and maintain, at the user’s expense, convenient and
adequate monitoring and/or sampling point(s) with appropriate, calibrated
equipment approved by the Public Works Director for monitoring and/or sampling
purposes;
      (4)   Allow the taking and removal of samples from any wastewater
discharged, or intended for discharge, to the sanitary sewer system; and
      (5)   Provide the Public Works Director with any other information
including, but not limited to, chemical analyses of wastewater, architectural
or engineering design data, drawings and the like, which are reasonably needed
by the Public Works Director for the purpose of determining the user’s
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (F)   Not cause an industrial discharge without having first obtained a
permit required by this chapter. The industrial user shall comply with all
requirements and conditions of said permit. Once a permit is issued, no
industrial user shall:
      (1)   Make any new or increased industrial discharge, or otherwise make
any change in the nature of its industrial discharge(s), if the change will
cause any new or increased industrial discharge, without first obtaining an
amended permit.
      (2)   Fail to give written notice to the Department of not less than 90
days prior to any facility expansion, production increase or process
modifications which results, or may result, in new or increased discharges or a
change in the nature of the discharge.
      (3)   Fail to give advance written notice to the Department of any
planned changes in the permitted facility or activity which may result in
noncompliance with permit requirements.
   (G)   Comply with the demand of the Public Works Director to immediately
halt any actual or threatened discharge to the sanitary sewer system when the
Public Works Director has given notice that the actual or threatened discharge:
      (1)   Presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to
the health or welfare of any person or to the environment; or
      (2)   Will cause interference or pass-through with the sanitary sewer
system operations, efficiency or effluent discharge quality.
   (H)   Immediately give notice to the Public Works Director of any discharge,
including an accidental discharge, which is in violation of any categorical
standard, pretreatment requirement or permit condition imposed by this chapter.
The notice shall also describe the:
      (1)   Location of the discharge;
      (2)   Known or estimated nature, concentration and volume of the
discharged pollutant(s);
      (3)   Type of assistance desired from the town;
      (4)   Corrective action(s) undertaken, being undertaken and/or to be
undertaken by the user. Any user causing the discharge shall also initiate all
appropriate corrective action(s) required by the Public Works Director which
are needed to:
         (a)   Prevent any further injury to human health or safety, or to the
environment, the sanitary sewer system and/or any other property;
         (b)   Promptly repair all or part of any injury or damage caused by
the discharge; and
         (c)   Ensure that such a discharge does not occur again.
   (I)   Pay all fees charged by the town for the wastewater collection,
treatment and recharge services provided by the sanitary sewer system pursuant
to the requirements of this chapter. The service fees will apply equally to all
sanitary sewer system users and will be determined by each user’s proportionate
share of the sanitary sewer system operating and maintenance costs. In turn,
the proportionate share will be based on such factors as the strength, volume
and rate of flow of wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer system by each
user.
   (J)   Reimburse the town for all extraordinary expenses reasonably incurred
by the town in insuring such sanitary sewer system user’s compliance with the
applicable requirements of this chapter. An extraordinary expense is any cost
not otherwise reimbursed from the normal collection of sewer fees.
Extraordinary expenses include, but are not limited to, the costs associated
with:
      (1)   Issuing permits;
      (2)   Conducting inspection, surveillance and monitoring activities;
      (3)   Obtaining laboratory analyses of waste samples;
      (4)   Taking enforcement actions against users not in compliance with the
requirements of any permit issued and/or of this chapter;
      (5)   Carrying out any measure needed for the protection of human health
or safety, the environment, the sanitary sewer system or any other property in
order to correct or mitigate any harm or degradation of existing quality caused
by the violation of any categorical standard or pretreatment requirement.
   (K)   Be financially responsible for all injury, damage and/or loss suffered
by any person as a result of any industrial discharge by the user which
violates any categorical standard, pretreatment requirement or permit condition
enforced pursuant to this chapter. In particular, the user shall be liable for
the:
      (1)   Personal injury suffered by any person as a result of the
discharge;
      (2)   Costs reasonably incurred by any person in correcting, or otherwise
mitigating, any adverse environmental impact which resulted from the discharge;
and
      (3)   Economic loss and property damage suffered by any person as a
result of the discharge.
   (L)   Fully comply with this subchapter. If the results of the user’s self-
monitoring wastewater analysis indicates a violation has occurred, the user
shall:
      (1)   Inform the Public Works Director of the violation within 24 hours
of becoming aware of the violation; and
      (2)   Repeat the wastewater sampling and pollutant analysis and submit in
writing the results of the repeat analysis within 30 days after becoming aware
of the violation, unless the Public Works Director requires it sooner.
   (M)   In addition to the above requirements, the user shall:
      (1)   Notify the Public Works Director, the EPA Regional Wastewater
Management Division Director and state hazardous waste authorities in writing
of any discharge into the sanitary sewer system of a substance which, if
otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under Title 40 C.F.R. part
261. Such notification shall include the name of the hazardous waste as set
forth in Title 40 C.F.R. part 261, EPA hazardous waste number and type of
discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the industrial user discharges more
than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the sanitary sewer
system, the notification shall also contain the following information to the
extent the information is known and readily available to the industrial user:
an estimation of the mass and concentration of the constituents in the waste
stream discharged during that calendar month and an estimation of the mass of
constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following
12 months. Industrial users shall provide the notification no later than 180
days after the discharge of the listed or characteristic hazardous waste. Any
notification under this section need be submitted only once for each hazardous
waste discharged. Notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under
Title 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(j). The notification requirement in this section does
not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements
of Title 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b), (d) and (e).
      (2)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of division (M)(1)
above during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms
of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified
in Title 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15
kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity
of acute hazardous wastes as specified in Title 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and
261.33(c) requires a 1-time notification. Subsequent months during which the
industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste
require additional notification.
      (3)   In the case of new regulations under § 3001 of RCRA identifying
additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional
substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user shall notify the Public
Works Director of the discharge of the substance within 90 days of the
effective date of the regulations.
      (4)   In the case of any notification made under this division (M), the
industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the
volume and toxicity of wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practicable and that it has selected the method of treatment,
storage and/or disposal currently available which minimizes the present and
future threat to human health and the environment.
   (N)   Sign all permit applications using the appropriate signatory:
      (1)   For a corporation: By a corporate officer of (or) other persons
performing a similar policy or decision-making function for the corporation;
      (2)   For a partnership or sole proprietorship: By a general partner or
the proprietor, respectively; or
      (3)   For a government entity: By the administrator, chairperson,
director or principal executive responsible for operations at the facility.
   (O)   Ensure that all applications, correspondence, reports and self-
monitoring reports are signed by a duly authorized representative of the person
described in division (N) above. Any change in signatures or positions shall be
submitted to the Public Works Director in writing within 30 days after the
change. A person is a duly authorized representative only if:
      (1)   The authorization is made by a person described in division (N)
above; and
      (2)   The authorization specified either an individual or a position
having the responsibility for the overall operation of the regulated facility
or activity, such as the position of plant manager, superintendent, or position
of equivalent responsibility. (A duly authorized representative may thus be
either a named individual or an individual occupying a named position.)
   (P)   Any person signing a document under this subchapter shall make the
following certification:
      “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly
responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the
best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that
there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of a fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.196 SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER REQUIREMENTS.
   In addition to all other requirements, each industrial user who discharges
an industrial discharge into the sanitary sewer system and is designated as a
significant industrial user (SIU) by the Director shall also:
   (A)   Obtain a Class A wastewater discharge permit from the Director. Any
application for a Class A permit or an amended Class A permit shall contain the
information specified in the application form or such other information as may
be requested by the Director. Any person intending to commence any new
industrial discharge(s), or any additional discharge(s) not already allowed
pursuant to an existing permit, shall apply for a new or amended permit at
least 90 days prior to initiating the discharge(s).
   (B)   Provide all of the pretreatment necessary to comply with the
categorical standards and pretreatment requirements imposed by this chapter. In
addition, there shall be no discharge of any water or waste exceeding limits
for the following substances that are expressed in the total form except if
otherwise indicated:
   Daily Average Effluent Limitations
Arsenic            100 ug/l
Boron              5,600 ug/l
Cadminum           47 ug/l
Chromium VI        No limit
Chromium           1,400 ug/l
Copper             1700 ug/l
Cyanide            2,000 ug/l
Lead               500 ug/
Mercury            4.6 ug/l
Nickle             5,000 ug/l
Oil & grease (TPH) 100 mg/l
Selenium           100 ug/l
Silver             500 ug/l
Sulfides           10.0 mg/l
Zinc               5,400 ug/l
NOTES TO TABLE:
   mg/l = Milligrams per liter
   ug/l = Micrograms per liter
   1 mg/l = 1,000 ug/l
 
   (C)   Maintain a continuous discharge record which clearly indicates the:
      (1)   Dates and times of all industrial discharges; and
      (2)   Nature, concentration(s) and volumes of all such discharges.
   (D)   Provide the Director with all reports and notices which the SIU is
required to submit in accordance with the provisions of Title 40 C.F.R. part
403.12. In particular, each SIU shall meet the requirements of:
      (1)   Notices which must be filed within 180 days of the adoption of any
categorical standard, including a compliance schedule;
      (2)   Notices which must be filed within 90 days of any final compliance
date, or in the case of a new source, following the commencement of the
introduction of wastewater into the sanitary sewer system;
      (3)   Reports which must be filed by the SIU in June and December of each
year unless required more frequently by the Director;
      (4)   Notices which must be immediately given after a slug load release
of any industrial discharge;
      (5)   Sampling and analyses of pollutants discharged to the sanitary
sewer system, including any more frequent sampling and analyses performed
beyond what is required by the Director;
      (6)   The maintenance of records by the SIU.
   (E)   Comply with all reporting requirements and maintain records of all
information resulting from any monitoring activities as required hereby.
   (F)   Records required by divisions (D) and (E) above shall be required to
be retained for a minimum of 3 years from the date of monitoring activity and
shall be made available for inspection and copying. This period of retention
shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation between the
SIU and the town. The records shall include for all samples:
      (1)   The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the name(s)
of the person(s) taking the samples;
      (2)   The dates analyses were performed;
      (3)   Who performed the analyses;
      (4)   The analytical techniques/methods used; and
      (5)   The results of the analyses.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.197 SPECIAL DISCHARGES.
   (A)   In addition to all other requirements imposed by this chapter upon
industrial users, the following types of industrial users who are not
significant industrial users may be required to obtain a Class B wastewater
discharge permit if the Director determines the industrial discharge causes, or
has the reasonable potential to cause, harm or damage to the sanitary sewer
system, worker safety, public safety or the environment.
      (1)   Zero process discharge user;
      (2)   Users which discharge the equivalent strength of 25,000 gallons per
day of domestic waste as measured by BOD and SS;
      (3)   Discharges of polluted groundwater; and
      (4)   Users discharging any of the substances identified in §§ 51.177 and
51.196(B).
   (B)   The industrial user shall comply with all requirements and conditions
of a Class B wastewater discharge permit issued by the Director under § 51.198.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.198 [RESERVED].
§ 51.199 [RESERVED].
§ 51.200 [RESERVED].
ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE
§ 51.215 PERMITTEE PROVIDES PROTECTION.
   Each permittee shall provide protection from the accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this chapter.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.216 PERMITTEE SHALL NOTIFY TOWN OF ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE.
   For counter-measures to be taken by the town to minimize damage to the
sanitary sewer system and/or receiving waters, the permittee shall notify the
town immediately upon accidentally discharging wastes in violation of this
chapter. This notification shall be followed by a written statement, within 3
days of the date of the discharge or the discovery thereof, describing the
nature and quantity of regulated wastes discharged, causes of the accidental
discharge, any action taken to mitigate the discharge and the measures being
taken to prevent a future occurrence. The notification will not relieve
permittee of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the sanitary sewer
system, any clean up, mitigation measures, or for any fines imposed on the town
on account thereof and/or for any enforcement action pursuant to this
occurrence.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.217 PERMITTEE WILL NOTIFY EMPLOYEES.
   In order that officers, agents and employees of permittees will be informed
of the town’s requirements, permittees shall make available to their employees
copies of this chapter together with such other wastewater information and
notices which may be furnished by the town from time to time for the purpose of
improving and making more effective water pollution control. A notice shall be
furnished and permanently posted on the permittee’s bulletin board, or other
prominent location, advising officers, agents and employees who call in case of
an accidental discharge in excess of the limits authorized by the permit.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.218 PERMITTEE SHALL LABEL ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE POINTS.
   Any possible connection or entry point for a hazardous and/or prohibited
substance to the permittee’s plumbing or drainage system shall be appropriately
labeled to warn operating personnel against discharge of the substances in
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
HAULAGE OF NON-HAZARDOUS LIQUID WASTES
§ 51.230 PROHIBITION ON WASTES FROM INDUSTRIAL SITES DISCHARGED TO SANITARY
SEWER SYSTEM.
   (A)   Haulers of non-hazardous liquid wastes (NHLW) removed from residential
and non-industrial discharge commercial customers are subject to the terms and
conditions for discharge contained in this subchapter.
   (B)   The following NHLW wastes may be discharged into the sanitary sewer
system by waste haulers at the discharge point specified by the Public Works
Director:
      (1)   Domestic septage from residences;
      (2)   Domestic septage from commercial facilities;
      (3)   Septage from self-service non-drycleaning laundries;
      (4)   Domestic septage from chemical toilets; and
      (5)   Wastewater from swimming pools.
   (C)   The Public Works Director, at his or her discretion, shall have the
authority to establish additional categories of NHLW that are permitted to be
discharged to the sanitary sewer system. Any additional category of NHLW shall
be placed on file with the Town Clerk and at each authorized discharge point.
   (D)   Aside from the above, any wastes removed by a hauler from
nonresidential, industrial or commercial customers are specifically prohibited
from being discharged to the sanitary sewer system. Such unauthorized discharge
is a violation and shall subject the hauler to the penalties provided for in
this chapter.
   (E)   Discharge by the hauler of any permitted NHLW into any manhole or
cleanout, other than at the designated discharge point, is a violation and will
subject the hauler to the penalties provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.231 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Except as provided in § 51.232, any person transporting NHLW to the sanitary
sewer system shall first obtain from the Public Works Director a NHLW hauler
discharge permit prior to any discharge to the facility. The annual permit fee
shall be per vehicle, as adopted by the Town Council by resolution. Discharge
of NHLW without a permit is prohibited. In addition to any other remedies
available to the town, any person violating this section shall be liable for a
permit fee for the first occurrence.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.232 EXEMPTION.
   The Public Works Director has the authority to exempt NHLW haulers from the
permitting requirements of this subchapter if the Public Works Director
determines that other safeguards are in place to protect the sanitary sewer
system, worker safety, the public and the environment. Any exemptions made
pursuant to this section shall be filed with the Town Clerk.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.233 AUTHORITY OF THE PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR; PERMITTEE LIMITATIONS AND
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Public Works Director shall develop and administer a non-hazardous
liquid waste monitoring program to determine the characteristics of the non-
hazardous liquid waste, discover illegal loads, and prevent the unauthorized
discharge of non-hazardous liquid wastes in to the sanitary sewer system.
   (B)   The Public Works Director shall establish a NHLW policy, a copy of
which shall be on file with the Town Clerk and at all designated discharge
points.
   (C)   The Public Works Director shall issue or amend (as applicable) a
permit within 60 days of receiving a complete permit application. In addition
to other conditions and requirements deemed appropriate by the Public Works
Director, each permit shall contain the following:
      (1)   Specify a time period not to exceed 5 years.
      (2)   Require the permittee to complete a waste tracking form (manifest)
for each load of NHLW prior to discharge to the sanitary sewer system. The
manifest shall be on forms provided by, or approved by, the Public Works
Director. The manifest shall contain information on the permittee and the
source(s), quality and quantity of the NHLW, as well as a certification
statement, signed by the permittee, to that effect.
      (3)   Specify the allowable categories of NHLW to be discharged at the
designated discharge point.
      (4)   State that prior to discharge of hauled waste, the permittee shall
allow a town designated representative to sample the waste, if so required or
deemed necessary, to ensure compliance with discharge limits and requirements.
The permittee shall not discharge the NHLW until the initial analysis is
complete. The Public Works Director reserves the right to refuse permission to
discharge any load that may not be treatable at the facility, or will inhibit,
interfere or otherwise be incompatible with the operation and function of the
CTR system.
      (5)   Require the permittee to carry liability insurance in such amount
and in such form as shall be determined by the Public Works Director. The
insurance shall, at a minimum, provide general liability coverage, including
contractual liability, in the amount of $1 million combined single limit. Motor
vehicle liability insurance shall be in the minimum amounts as outlined in
A.R.S. § 28-4033. Workers compensation insurance, if applicable, shall comply
with state requirements. Evidence of the insurance shall be provided to the
Public Works Director. The requirement shall not in any manner preclude the
permittee from obtaining such additional insurance coverage as may be necessary
for his or her protection.
      (6)   Require the permittee (as “indemnitor”) to indemnify, defend and
hold harmless the Town (as “indemnitee”) from and against any and all claims,
losses, liability, costs or expenses (including reasonable attorney’s fees)
(herein collectively referred to as “claims”) arising out of bodily injury of
any person (including death) or property damage to the extent that such claims
are caused by the negligence, misconduct or other fault of the indemnitor, its
agents, employees or contractors.
      (7)   Specify the discharge limitations and requirements as deemed
appropriate by the Public Works Director.
   (D)   The permittee is responsible for protecting the CTR system from any
contributing discharges which would inhibit, interfere or otherwise be
incompatible with the operation or maintenance of the collection system or
treatment plant including the use or disposal of municipal sludge or effluent.
The permittee shall comply with all requirements and conditions of its permit.
   (E)   The permit is nontransferable. In the event of any change in control
or ownership, the permittee shall notify the Public Works Director. The new
owner shall apply for a new permit and shall not be allowed to discharge to the
CTR system until a permit is issued and all other requirements of this
subchapter have been satisfied, or unless written permission is otherwise
provided by the Public Works Director.
   (F)   The Public Works Director is authorized to take appropriate
enforcement action against any person in noncompliance with this subchapter.
All penalties assessed to the town by federal and/or state agencies as a result
of a violation shall be recoverable from the violator. In addition to the
enforcement available to the Public Works Director that is contained herein,
the Public Works Director may:
      (1)   Suspend for a period of up to 30 days the permit of any hauler for
the first violation of any provision of the permit or any provision of this
subchapter. Following the first period of suspension, the waste hauler permit
may be reinstated only after payment of the fee for reinstatement, which shall
be as adopted by resolution of the Council.
      (2)   Suspend for a period of up to 180 days the permit of any hauler
committing a subsequent violation of a provision of the permit or a provision
of this subchapter. Following the second period of suspension for a subsequent
violation, the permit may be reinstated only after payment of the reinstatement
fee, which shall be as adopted by resolution of the Council. In addition to any
reinstatement fee required to be paid under this section, the hauler shall
either pay or make arrangements acceptable to the Public Works Director to pay
any expenses the town incurs by reason of the violation.
      (3)   A suspension may be appealed by the permit holder to the Town
Council by submitting within 15 days of receipt of the notice of suspension, an
appeal in writing, setting forth the specific grounds for the appeal. The
appeal shall be filed with the Town Clerk. Filing of an appeal will not stay
the suspension or the fees for reinstatement. A lesser fee for reinstatement
may be charged by the Town Council if it is found that the permit holder has
taken substantial action to prevent further violations.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.234 MIXING OF NON-HAZARDOUS LIQUID WASTE.
   Septage of different categories shall not be mixed unless the load contains
only septic wastes from septic tanks and chemical toilets.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.235 HAZARDOUS LIQUID WASTE.
   Regardless of origin, hazardous liquid waste (as defined in § 1004 of the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.) shall not be
disposed of in any sanitary sewer system component, manhole, or headworks.
Discharge of hazardous wastes to the headworks or NHLW discharge point by truck
or other conveyance is prohibited.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.236 NON-HAZARDOUS LIQUID WASTE FEES.
   (A)   Fees charged for the discharge of non-hazardous liquid wastes into the
sanitary sewer system for treatment shall be as established by the Town Council
by resolution and may have varying rates for classification and point of
origin.
   (B)   The Public Works Director shall review the fees yearly and shall make
recommendations to Council for adjustment as he or she deems necessary.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.237 CESSATION OF ACCEPTANCE OF NON-HAZARDOUS LIQUID WASTES.
   (A)   The Public Works Director may suspend or reduce the dumping of NHLW
into the sanitary sewer system for reasons that include, but are not limited
to, temporary repairs or maintenance to the facility, inability of the sanitary
sewer system to process either the volume or strength of the NHLW stream, and
hazardous conditions to worker safety, the public and/or the environment due to
discharge of a hazardous liquid or malfunctioning of any component of the
sanitary sewer system.
   (B)   In addition to any other remedies in this chapter, the Public Works
Director may suspend or terminate the discharge permit for any hauler violating
provisions of this subchapter or the terms of the permit, including non-payment
of required fees.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.238 VIOLATION.
   The violation or failure to follow any condition or provisions of the waste
hauler permit or NHLW dumping policy or Public Works Director’s order
authorized herein shall be a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
UTILITY FEES
§ 51.250 UTILITY SERVICE DEPOSITS.
   (A)   Utility service deposits will be required of all persons applying for
utility service, unless they have a minimum 12-month good payment record as a
utility customer of the town. Application shall be made in accordance with the
provisions hereof.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, a town utility customer with a good
payment record will be defined as a customer who has not received more than 1
delinquency letter in the last 12 months and has not had water service
discontinued for nonpayment during the previous 24 month period.
   (C)   The town will refund utility service deposits or portions thereof if 1
of the following occurs:
      (1)   The town utility customer who paid a utility deposit has been a
town utility customer for at least 1 year following payment of the deposit and
has a good payment record. If after 1 year the town utility customer has not
maintained a good payment record, the deposit will not be refunded until the
town utility customer has achieved a good payment record for at least 1 year.
      (2)   The town utility customer has provided written notice to the town
to discontinue service and the town has received payment in full for utilities
rendered, any water meter damage, or other damage to the town system for which
the utility customer may be liable under this chapter. The town, at its option
may apply the applicable deposit(s) to the utility customer’s final bill or
send the customer a check for the difference.
   (D)   The town utility customer shall notify the town prior to or at the
time the property to which service is provided becomes vacant. The town utility
customer shall be responsible for all utility usage or damage to the town’s
property until the town receives a vacancy notice. Thereafter, the town utility
customer shall no longer be responsible for payment of metered water services
disconnected sewer service lines may be plugged by the town at its option.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 10-735, passed 9-9-2010; Am. Ord. 15-
792, passed 1-13-2015; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.251 WATER SYSTEM NEW SERVICE BUY-IN FEE.
   (A)   There shall be a mandatory water system service buy-in fee for
connections being served by any of the town’s water production and distribution
systems that are owned, operated, and maintained by the town.
   (B)   This fee shall be the customer’s equivalent share of the town’s costs
for necessary water system improvements, to be computed as follows:
      (1)   Residential. The water system service buy-in fee shall be set by
Council resolution per dwelling unit for a residential connection to the water
system. Single-family residences, including manufactured or mobile homes and
privately owned condominiums, shall be classified as residential connections.
      (2)   Commercial/industrial. Water system service buy-in fees for
commercial/industrial connections shall be set by Council resolution.
Commercial/industrial connections without a specified fee set by Council
resolution shall be based on water meter size. A COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL
CONNECTION is defined as any connection other than residential, including
apartments, hotel/motels, RV parks, mobile home parks, schools, churches, and
the like.
      (3)   No transferability of fees. All fees paid pursuant to this section
shall apply to the real property upon which the fee is initially calculated.
Connection fees are not transferable between properties. Structures moved from
1 location to another location shall pay new connection fees for the new
location, with a credit to be given for any connection fees previously paid for
that location.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022; Am. Ord.
2025-951, passed 5-13-2025)
§ 51.252 WATER SERVICE CONNECTION AND METER INSTALLATION CHARGES.
   (A)   The customer or property owner at the time of applying shall pay to
the town water meter installation charges as set by Council resolution.
   (B)   In the event a service connection must cross an Arizona Department of
Transportation highway right-of-way, the consumer or property owner shall
obtain the necessary permits directly from the Arizona Department of
Transportation to make the service connection, and the consumer or the property
owner shall obtain their own contractor to make the service connection. The
service connection shall include the meter set and box and the service line
from the meter box to the water main. The contractor will install the water
main tap and expose the water main. The meter shall be installed in the box by
the town.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.253 SEWER SYSTEM NEW SERVICE BUY-IN FEES.
   (A)   There shall be a mandatory sewer system service buy-in fee charged for
residential units or commercial/industrial connections to be served by any of
the town’s wastewater collection, treatment and recharge systems that are
owned, operated and maintained by the town.
   (B)   This fee shall be the equivalent of the customer’s share of the costs
to the town for the construction of the wastewater treatment facilities, the
recharge facility, lift stations, and sewer mains and interceptor lines. This
fee shall be payable by the residential or commercial/industrial customer or
property owner prior to the issuance of a new building permit or connection to
the system for existing structures.
      (1)   Residential. The sewer system service buy-in fee shall be set by
Council resolution per residential dwelling unit for a residential connection
to the sewer system, subject to annual review and revision by the Council.
Single-family residences, including manufactured and mobile homes, private
condominiums, shall be classified as residential. A single-family home shall be
considered to have 20 fixture units and be privately owned.
      (2)   Commercial/industrial. Unless otherwise set by Council resolution,
the sewer system service buy-in fee for commercial/industrial connections shall
be based on an equivalent dwelling unit (EDU). The EDU for commercial/
industrial users shall be determined by calculating the fixture units (as
defined in the IPC) divided by the 20 fixture units of a single-family home.
      (3)   No transferability of fees. All fees paid pursuant to this section
shall apply to the real property upon which the initial fee was calculated.
Connection fees are not transferable between properties. Structures moved from
one location to another location must pay new connection fees for the new
location, with a credit to be given for any connection fees previously paid for
that location.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 07-697, passed 12-13-2007; Am. Ord.
2022-913, passed 2-22-2022; Am. Ord. 2025-951, passed 5-13-2025)
§ 51.254 DETERMINATION OF WASTEWATER QUALITY.
   (A)   The Public Works Director or his or her designee shall have the
authority to make whatever tests are necessary to carry out a planned sampling
program and to make whatever analyses are needed for all commercial and
industrial users. The BOD test shall be considered the standard test; however,
COD or TOC tests may be substituted in cases where it has been determined by
the Public Works Director that the BOD test is not representative of actual
wastewater loading. Wastewater characteristics shall be determined by the
Department on the basis of monitored wastewater discharged, a certified
statement from the user, or on the best available data as to the
characteristics of the discharges.
   (B)   Any change in the ongoing process(es) employed by a user contributing
commercial or industrial waste which results in a variation of more than 25% in
one or more of the effluent loading concentrations shall be reported to the
Department within 30 days of the change.
   (C)   If it is determined through testing that a significant variation
exists between the user’s certified data and the discharge characteristics
monitored by the Department, the town may adjust the sewer use charge based on
the monitored data from the original date of certification, unless written
communication has occurred notifying the Department of changes in loading and
giving specific dates of changes.
   (D)   Where sampling and gauging of specific users is not practical for
physical, economic, safety, or other reasons, the Public Works Director may
designate values for concentrations of the wastes discharged into the sewerage
system for all users in the same Standard Industrial Classification or
subclassification.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.255 OTHER USER CHARGE PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Biennial review. The Finance Director will review the wastewater
contribution of users and user classes, the total costs of operation and
maintenance of the treatment works, and its approved user charge system. The
Finance Director shall at such time recommend a revision in the sewer service
charge and user classes to accomplish the following:
      (1)   Maintain a reasonable proportionate distribution of operation and
maintenance costs among users and user classes;
      (2)   Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation and
maintenance costs necessary to the proper operation and maintenance (including
replacement) of the treatment works; and
      (3)   Generate sufficient funds to support a capital improvement plan
(C.P.) as approved by Council.
      (4)   Apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the costs
of operation and maintenance attributable to that class for the next year and
adjust the rate accordingly.
   (B)   Inconsistent agreements. The user charge system set forth in this
chapter is applicable to all agreements or contracts between the town and users
including industrial users, other municipalities or federal agencies or
installations, and the terms of this chapter shall take precedence over any
such agreements or contracts which are inconsistent with the requirements of
this chapter.
   (C)   Wastewater treatment byproducts. All revenue from the sale of
treatment-related byproducts, except recharged effluent, shall be used by the
town to offset the cost of operation and maintenance and C.P. User charges
shall be proportionally reduced for all users. Total annual revenues received
from the sale of a byproduct shall be credited to the treatment works O&M cost
no later than the fiscal year immediately following their receipt.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.256 OTHER SEWER SERVICE CHARGES.
   In addition to the user charges described herein, the rate schedules shall
be sufficient to cover the following costs:
   (A)   The annual debt service costs for retirement of sanitary sewer bonds
and/or loans will be charged to all customers served directly by the town’s
wastewater collection system. The Finance Director shall make recommendations
to the Town Council as to how these costs shall be proportioned among the
users. Charges to recover these costs will be called “other charges.”
   (B)   Adequate reserve funds to allow for reasonably expected increases in
the cost of providing services will be charged to all customers served directly
by the town’s wastewater collection system. The Finance Director shall make
recommendations to the Town Council as to the amount of reserve funds necessary
and as to how these funds shall be proportioned among the users.
   (C)   The costs of billing and collection and performing industrial waste
services shall be charged to customers on an equitable basis. The Finance
Director shall make recommendations to the Town Council as to how these costs
shall be proportioned among the users. Charges to recover these costs will be
called “billing and collection charges” and “industrial waste charges”
respectively.
   (D)   C.P. (Capital Improvement Plan).
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.257 [RESERVED].
§ 51.258 RESIDENTIAL WATER RATES.
   (A)   Effective July 15, 2003, a monthly water charge shall be assessed
against all residential consumers having a service connection with the town
water mains adopted by the Town Council by resolution. Water consumption shall
be measured by meter.
   (B)   (1)   In addition to a monthly minimum fixed charge, residential
customers receiving town water service at a location not located within the
town boundaries (whether or not the location is within a different municipality
or unincorporated Yavapai County), shall be charged at the same rate for water
consumption as residential customers located within the town boundaries.
      (2)   Water furnished to residential consumers in all areas other than
incorporated municipalities shall be charged at the same rate as water
furnished residential consumers within the Town of Chino Valley (inside Town of
Chino Valley limits rates) plus a surcharge equal to 30% of the inside Town of
Chino Valley limits rates. The surcharge shall also apply to the monthly
minimum fixed charge.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.259 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL WATER RATES.
   (A)   Effective July 15, 2003, a monthly water charge shall be assessed
against all commercial and industrial consumers having a service connection
with the town water mains as adopted by the Town Council by resolution. Water
consumption shall be measured by meter.
   (B)   In addition to a monthly minimum fixed charge, commercial and
industrial customers receiving town water service at a location not located
within the town boundaries (whether or not the location is within a different
municipality or unincorporated Yavapai County), shall be charged at the same
rate for water consumption as commercial and industrial customers located
within the town boundaries.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.260 RATES FOR PRIVATE FIRE CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   When fire service connections are installed they shall include a
detector check of a type approved by the town in conformance with its adopted
building and fire codes. The indicating meter to be used with the check shall
be furnished by the town.
   (B)   If unmetered water is used for other than fire protection purposes,
the quantity used shall be estimated and charged according to applicable rates.
If such use continues for more than 20 days, a recording meter shall be
installed at the customer’s expense and water furnished thereafter will be
charged for in accordance with applicable rates.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.261 FEES AND ASSESSMENTS DUE.
   All fees and assessments are due and payable on the date billed. Water
service may be discontinued for the nonpayment of any of the fees, penalties or
assessments set forth in this chapter. Late charges shall be imposed, as set by
the Finance Director with the approval of the Town Manager.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 15-792, passed 1-13-2015; Am. Ord.
2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 51.275 INTERFERENCE WITH OR OBSTRUCTING FACILITIES.
   Any person who in any manner willfully defaces, illegally uses, obstructs or
interferes with the operation of any well, pump, storage tank, hydrant, valve,
pipe, construction trench, or any other water works facility, or any cleanout,
manhole, pipe, pump station, treatment plant, recharge facility, construction
trench or any other wastewater works facility, or anyone who pollutes the
potable water supply or recharge water supply of the town, or violates any
provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, or a felony if the
total value of the damage and expense is sufficient to reach such threshold.
Any expense caused to the town for the repair, replacement or cleanup of
damaged, stolen or misused water and wastewater works facilities shall be
charged against and collected from the person or persons who caused the
expense. The violation of any provision of this chapter, or failure to pay for
damages to town facilities, shall be sufficient cause for the Public Works
Director to discontinue town water and/or wastewater service to any property
owned or used by the person or persons.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 51.276 AUTHORITY OF UTILITY DEPARTMENT TO TURN OFF WATER AND/OR SEWER
SERVICE.
   For any violation of this chapter, or for any nonpayment of water and/or
sewer charges for either domestic, commercial, sprinkling or other purposes,
the Department has the right to turn off such service after providing notice to
the customer that the service will be turned off on a specific date and the
name of the person at the town with whom the customer may discuss the violation
and present grounds for why the service should not be terminated. After it has
been turned off, the service shall not be turned on until all back charges are
paid, together with the payment of all fees, expenses and the applicable
deposit paid, if required. Disconnected sewer service lines may be plugged by
the town at its option.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.277 RULES AND REGULATIONS TO BE ENFORCED, EXCEPTION.
   The rules and regulations of this chapter are made for the benefit of town
water and wastewater customers and for the protection of the water supply
system, wastewater system, recharge system, the town, and the environment.
Enforcement shall in no case be willfully ignored by any town official,
employee or agent. When a strict enforcement of any rule could result in a
gross injustice on a consumer of water or discharger of wastewater, the Public
Works Director may, in his or her discretion and with the agreement of the Town
Manager, order a suspension of the rule as to that particular case.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.278 CRIMINAL PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, other than the
sections designated as civil violations in § 51.279, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, except for such violations as may exceed felony damage thresholds.
Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.279 CIVIL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of §§ 51.176 et seq., 51.215 et
seq. and/or 51.230 et seq. shall be civilly liable to the town for a sum as
adopted by resolution per day for each violation. Each
day a violation continues may constitute a separate offense. In seeking the
assessment of a civil penalty, the following criteria contained in A.R.S. § 49-
391(C) shall be considered:
      (1)   The seriousness of the violation;
      (2)   The economic benefit, if any, resulting from the violation;
      (3)   Any history of such, or other, violations;
      (4)   Any good faith efforts to comply with the applicable requirements;
      (5)   The economic impact of the penalty on the violator; and/or
      (6)   Such other factors as justice may require.
   (B)   In addition to the civil penalty imposed herein, the person shall be
liable for any civil penalty imposed on the town by other regulatory agencies
as a result of the violation.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 51.280 REMEDIES.
   (A)   In addition to any civil and/or criminal penalty which may be imposed
for violations of this chapter, a user shall be liable for all actual costs
which may be assessed by the Finance Director on a user of the town’s sanitary
sewer system who discharges wastes containing non-permissible quantities of
prohibited substances into the sanitary sewer system or contaminates the town’s
potable water supply, storage and discharge system. The Finance Director is
authorized to assess charges based on the extra costs incurred by the town in
surveillance, sampling and testing, for additional operating and maintenance
expenses, including overhead charges, and for any other action required to
identify, handle, process or supplement normal activities due to the
unauthorized discharge of wastes or system contamination.
   (B)   The Finance Director shall have the authority to discontinue water
and/or sewer service to a user for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Failure to pay a charge assessed by the Finance Director for
unauthorized discharges or water system contamination;
      (2)   Failure to correct an unauthorized discharge as required by the
Public Works Director;
      (3)   Discharging any unauthorized substances, materials, water or waste
as prohibited by this chapter or the Finance Director;
      (4)   Failure to correct any cross connection, source of contamination or
potential source of contamination with the potable water supply; and
      (5)   For violation of any provision of this chapter.
   (C)   Before discontinuing water or sewer service as provided herein, the
Finance Director shall give written notice to the user of the discontinuance
and an opportunity to appear before the Finance Director on any disputed matter
relative to the discontinuance of water and/or sewer service, except that if a
discharge or source of contamination is a threat to the public health, safety,
and welfare, the discontinuance of water and/or sewer service shall be
accomplished by physically cutting and blocking the sewer connection and/or
removing or locking the water meter in the off position. The actual cost for
disconnecting and/or reconnecting the affected utility service shall be paid by
the affected user to Utility Department.
   (D)   Upon notice of the final determination by the Finance Director of an
assessment owed, the user shall tender the fee and/or charges within 10 days
ordered by the Finance Director.
   (E)   Any unauthorized discharge or other threat to the public water supply
not corrected, or assessment not tendered, is hereby declared to be, and is, a
public nuisance which may be abated by order of a court of competent
jurisdiction and its continued operation is unlawful. The remedy provided
herein shall be in addition to any other remedy authorized by this chapter.
   (F)   The Finance Director may refer to a collection agency any utility
account that is more than 60 days past due which shall be calculated from the
original billing date.
   (G)   The Finance Director may cause any delinquent sewer account past 90
days from the original billing date to be subject to a lien on the property for
the full delinquent amount plus any other incurred costs.
(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
LIEN ENFORCEMENT
§ 51.290 LIEN ENFORCEMENT FOR UNPAID UTILITY USER FEES.
   (A)   The Town Clerk or Finance Director may assess and file a lien on real
property for the nonpayment of utility user fees for services provided to the
property if the payment of the fees is delinquent for more than 90 days.
   (B)   Before filing the lien, the Town Clerk or Finance Director shall
provide written notice to the owner of the property. The notice shall be given
at least 30 days before filing the lien and shall include an opportunity for a
hearing before an official, to be designated by the town council for such
purposes. Subject to division (C), below, the notice shall be either served
personally on or mailed to the property owner, at the last known address by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or to the address to which the tax
bill for the property was last mailed as shown in the county records.
   (C)   If the owner does not reside on the property, the notice shall be sent
to the last known address.
   (D)   If served by mail, notice shall be deemed to be complete on the date
on which the notice is deposited in the United States mail.
   (E)   The notice shall inform the property owner that:
      (1)   He or she has the opportunity for a hearing regarding the
delinquency before a designated town official;
      (2)   If a timely objection is not filed, the unpaid delinquency shall be
deemed due and owing and failure to pay shall result in the town pursuing all
available means of collection as authorized by the town code;
      (3)   If a hearing is requested and it is determined as a result of the
hearing that the unpaid delinquency is due and owing, failure to pay shall
result in the town pursuing all available means of collection as authorized by
the town code.
   (F)   In the event the property owner requests a hearing, such request must
be received not later than 15 days from the date of the notice. The request for
hearing must include copies of all documents that support the owner’s position,
including any documents that there is no delinquency or that the amount claimed
delinquent by the town is in error. A hearing shall be scheduled and held not
later than 30 days following a request for a hearing by a property owner. The
property owner shall be notified in writing of the time and date of the
hearing.
   (G)   The hearing shall be held by a hearing officer who shall be a non-town
employee retained by the town, or a town employee who has no involvement with
the Utilities Division or the Finance Department. The hearing officer shall
have the authority prescribed to public officers pursuant to A.R.S. § 12-2212,
as may be amended from time to time.
   (H)   The hearing may be continued one time by the hearing officer upon the
written request of either party for good cause.
   (I)   The hearing shall be held during regular town business hours.
   (J)   The hearing shall be recorded by an electronic recording device.
   (K)   The property owner and the town shall each be given an opportunity to
present their respective cases. The town shall present its case first.
Presentation by either party may include:
      (1)   Sworn testimony;
      (2)   Submission of evidence;
      (3)   Presentation of witnesses; and
      (4)   Cross examination.
   The Arizona Rules of Evidence shall not apply, and the hearing officer may
permit the admission of any evidence deemed relevant to the issues at hand.
   (L)   The hearing officer shall render a decision within 15 days of the
close of the hearing. The record of the hearing and the decision by the hearing
officer shall be filed with the Town Clerk. The hearing officer’s order shall
be mailed to the property owner by certified mail, return receipt requested,
and notice of the order shall be deemed to be complete upon the date on which
the notice is deposited in the United States mail.
   (M)   The hearing officer may find the following:
      (1)   The property owner does not owe the delinquent amount and the
notice of delinquency shall be canceled;
      (2)   The property owner does owe the delinquent amount as noticed by the
town and order that the amount be paid within 20 days of the date the decision
is rendered; or
      (3)   A different (lesser) amount than that which was noticed by the town
is owed and delinquent and order that amount be paid within 20 days of the date
the decision is rendered.
   (N)   The hearing officer’s decision may be appealed by either party by
filing an action in the Yavapai County Superior Court.
   (O)   In the event no hearing is requested by the property owner, or in the
event payment is not made on a delinquent amount as determined by a hearing
officer after a hearing, the town shall place a lien on the property in
accordance with this section.
   (P)   The unpaid utility user fees are a lien on the property from the date
of the recording of the lien in the Office of the County Recorder until all
fees are paid in full. The lien is subject and inferior to the lien for general
taxes and to all prior recorded mortgages and encumbrances of record. A sale of
the property to satisfy a lien obtained under this section shall be made
following a judgment of foreclosure and order of sale. The town may bring an
action to enforce the lien in the Yavapai County Superior Court at any time
after the recording of the lien, but failure to enforce the lien by a
foreclosure lawsuit shall not affect the validity of the lien. The recorded
unpaid utility user fees lien shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of all
matters recited in the recording and of the regularity of all proceedings
before the recording.
   (Q)   Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this section, any lien placed
on a property pursuant to this section shall be enforceable pursuant to and in
accordance with A.R.S. § 9-511.02.
(Ord. 10-741, passed 10-28-2010; Am. Ord. 2022-913, passed 2-22-2022)
CHAPTER 52: GARBAGE AND TRASH REMOVAL AND COLLECTION;
CULVERT MAINTENANCE
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Unattended containers
   
52.02   Culverts or other drainage infrastructure; installation and maintenance
Garbage and Trash Removal; Methods
   
52.40   Hauling refuse
   
52.41   Vehicles and receptacles to be spill proof
   
52.42   Spilled refuse
   
52.43   Dumping refuse
Cross-reference:
   For additional provisions, see also Title VIII
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 UNATTENDED CONTAINERS.
   No person shall place, display or maintain any unattended container for
soliciting deposit of recyclable materials or donated items in any exterior
location within the town limits, except in conformance with all of the
following provisions:
   (A)   Unattended containers may be located only within the parking lot of
private property lawfully zoned, developed and used for commercial or
industrial purposes or at schools, churches or charitable organizations which
have similar parking facilities.
   (B)   Unattended containers may be located only with the permission of the
property owner, his or her agent or the person in possession of the property,
and the container owner’s name and current telephone number shall be displayed
thereon in a conspicuous location.
   (C)   The owner of such unattended container and the property owner shall
jointly or severally maintain all exterior areas within 25 feet of the
container free from litter.
(2001 Code, Art. 9-5)
§ 52.02 CULVERTS OR OTHER DRAINAGE INFRASTRUCTURE; INSTALLATION AND
MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Any person with valid access to a public street, pursuant to the
Unified Development Ordinance of the town, that contains a bar ditch, roadside
ditch, or similar drainage improvement (“drainage ditch") may be required by
the Public Works Department, upon 60 days notice, to install a culvert or other
drainage structure in or beneath a driveway or similar access path (“culvert”).
   (B)   Any person that uses an access way or driveway from property owned or
controlled by them, which contains a culvert, is responsible for maintaining
such culvert and shall maintain the same in a reasonable condition. The town,
through its Public Works Department, may provide written notice to such person,
who shall have 30 days from the date of the notice to correct the deficiencies
and maintenance of the culvert.
   (C)   The town shall not be responsible for the installation, maintenance or
replacement of a culvert.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for a person to install or to maintain a culvert
in such a manner that traps water or earthen material in any drainage ditch, or
that otherwise impedes positive drainage along or away from the public street.
   (E)   Notice provided by this section shall be in writing and mailed by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the property owner and party
controlling the property.
(Ord. 12-758, passed 6-12-2012; Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019) Penalty, see §
10.99
GARBAGE AND TRASH REMOVAL; METHODS
§ 52.40 HAULING REFUSE.
   It is unlawful for any person to haul or cause to be hauled any refuse on or
along any public street, avenue or alley in the town in violation of any of the
provisions in this subchapter.
(2001 Code, § 9-1-1) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 52.41 VEHICLES AND RECEPTACLES TO BE SPILL PROOF.
   It is unlawful for any person to haul or cause to be hauled on or along any
public street in the town any garbage, unless the garbage is contained in
strong, watertight vehicles or vehicles with watertight receptacles,
constructed to prevent any such garbage from falling, leaking or spilling.
(2001 Code, § 9-1-2) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 52.42 SPILLED REFUSE.
   Any person hauling any refuse along the streets of the town shall
immediately replace in the conveyance used for the hauling any refuse which may
fall upon any street.
(2001 Code, § 9-1-3) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
Cross-reference:
   Littering from trucks, see §
91.06
   Littering provisions, see §§
91.01 through
91.15
§ 52.43 DUMPING REFUSE.
   It is unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any refuse upon
any public or private property within the town except as specifically permitted
in this chapter.
(2001 Code, § 9-1-4) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
      Chapter
         
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
71.   TRAFFIC RULES
         
72.   PARKING RULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   Duty of Police Department
   
70.02   Records of traffic violations
   
70.03   Police Department to investigate accidents
   
70.04   Traffic accident studies
   
70.05   Traffic accident reports
§ 70.01 DUTY OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Police Department, under the direction of
the Police Chief, to investigate all reported crimes, to provide for the
enforcement of the street traffic regulations of the town and all of the state
vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the town, to make arrests for
traffic violations, to investigate criminal activity and accidents and to
assist in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry
out all duties specially imposed by this title.
   (B)   Any peace officer of the town may stop and detain a person as is
reasonably necessary to investigate an actual or suspected violation of this
title and to serve a copy of a complaint for any alleged civil or criminal
violation of this title.
(2001 Code, § 12-1-1)
§ 70.02 RECORDS OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The Police Department, under the direction of the Police Chief, shall
keep a record of all violations of laws of the town or of state laws of which
any person has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of
all such alleged offenses. The record shall be maintained according to the
Arizona Records Management Program, A.R.S. § 41-1345.
   (B)   All forms for records of violations and notices shall be serially
numbered. For each month and year, a written record shall be kept available to
the public.
   (C)   All records and reports shall be public records in accordance with
federal and state laws.
(2001 Code, § 12-1-2)
§ 70.03 POLICE DEPARTMENT TO INVESTIGATE ACCIDENTS.
   It shall be the duty of the Police Department, under the direction of the
Police Chief, to investigate traffic accidents and to arrest and assist in the
prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or
contributing to the accidents.
(2001 Code, § 12-1-3)
§ 70.04 TRAFFIC ACCIDENT STUDIES.
   Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the
Public Works Department shall conduct studies of the accidents and determine
remedial measures.
(2001 Code, § 12-1-4)
§ 70.05 TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (A)   The Police Department, under the direction of the Police Chief, shall
maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports
shall be maintained within the Department’s computerized records management
system.
   (B)   The Police Department, under the direction of the Police Chief, shall
receive and properly file all accident reports made to it under state law or
under any law of the town.
(2001 Code, § 12-1-5)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
   
71.01   Directing traffic
   
71.02   Obedience to traffic regulations
   
71.03   Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted
   
71.04   Traffic control devices
   
71.05   Authority to designate crosswalks, establish safety zones and mark
traffic lanes
   
71.06   Authority; obedience; turning markers and restricted turn signs
   
71.07   Limitations on turning around
   
71.08   One-way streets and alleys
   
71.09   Traffic at intersections
   
71.10   Drivers to obey signs
   
71.11   Processions
   
71.12   Speed limits
   
71.13   Motorized vehicles prohibited on The Peavine Trails
   
71.14   Use of mobile communication devices and texting while operating a motor
vehicle
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 DIRECTING TRAFFIC.
   (A)   The Police Chief is hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice,
hand or signal.
   (B)   Firefighters, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the
Police Chief in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
(2001 Code, § 12-2-1)
§ 71.02 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   It is unlawful, except as otherwise provided in this code, for any person to
do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this chapter or
willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of the
Police Chief.
(2001 Code, § 12-2-2) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 71.03 USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED.
   No person upon roller skates, skateboards, or riding any coaster, toy
vehicle, or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a
street on a crosswalk, and, when crossing, the person shall be granted all of
the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians.
(2001 Code, § 12-2-3) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 71.04 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   The Public Works Department, with input from the Police Chief and
approval of the Council, shall place and maintain traffic control devices,
signs and signals when and as required under the traffic regulations of the
town to make effective the provisions of the regulations, and may place and
maintain such additional traffic control devices as he or she may deem
necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic laws of the town or under state
law or to guide or warn traffic.
   (B)   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the traffic
regulations of the town unless otherwise directed by the Police Chief, subject
to the exceptions granted in this chapter or by state law.
(2001 Code, § 12-2-4)
§ 71.05 AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE CROSSWALKS, ESTABLISH SAFETY ZONES AND MARK
TRAFFIC LANES.
   The Public Works Department, with input from the Police Chief, is hereby
authorized on approval by the Council:
   (A)   To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon
the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his or her
opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at
such other places as he or she may deem necessary;
   (B)   To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such
places as he or she may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians; and
   (C)   To mark lanes for traffic on street pavement at such places as he or
she may deem advisable, consistent with the traffic laws of the town.
(2001 Code, § 12-2-5)
§ 71.06 AUTHORITY; OBEDIENCE; TURNING MARKERS AND RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS.
   (A)   (1)   The Public Works Department with input from the Police Chief and
approval by the Council is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within
or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles
turning at such intersections, and the course to be traveled as so indicated
may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.
      (2)   When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning
thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of the
indications.
(2001 Code, § 12-2-6)
   (B)   (1)   The Public Works Department with input from the Police Chief is
hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles
shall not make a right, left or U-turn and shall place proper signs at such
intersections. The making of the turns may be prohibited between certain hours
of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be
plainly indicated on the signs, or such signs may be removed when such turns
are permitted.
      (2)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or
left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
directions of any such sign.
(2001 Code, § 12-2-7) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 71.07 LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND.
   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction upon any street in a business district nor shall a driver
upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless the movement can be made in
safety and without interfering with other traffic.
(2001 Code, § 12-2-8)
§ 71.08 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   (A)   The Council shall by resolution designate any streets or alleys which
are to be limited to 1-way traffic.
   (B)   When any resolution of the Council designates any one-way street or
alley, the Public Works Department with input from the Police Chief shall place
and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be
effective unless the signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of
lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of
traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
(2001 Code, § 12-2-9) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 71.09 TRAFFIC AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The Council shall, by resolution, designate through streets and
intersections where stops are required and intersections where vehicles shall
yield the right-of-way.
   (B)   When any resolution of the Council shall designate any through street
or intersection where vehicles are to stop or yield the right-of-way, the
Public Works Department with input from the Police Chief shall erect and
maintain the appropriate signs at every location where a vehicle must stop or
yield the right-of-way.
(2001 Code, § 12-2-10)
§ 71.10 DRIVERS TO OBEY SIGNS.
   Whenever traffic signs are erected as provided in this chapter, every driver
of a vehicle shall obey the signs unless directed to proceed by a police
officer or a traffic control signal. No driver shall drive upon or through any
private property, vacant lot or similar property to avoid obedience to any
regulation included in this chapter.
(2001 Code, § 12-2-11)
§ 71.11 PROCESSIONS.
   (A)   No procession or parade, except funeral processions, shall be held
without first securing a permit from the Police Chief, and all such requests
for permits shall state the time, place of formation, proposed line of march,
destination and such other regulations as a police officer may set forth
therein.
   (B)   A funeral procession composed of a procession of vehicles shall be
identified by such methods as may be determined and designated by the Police
Chief.
   (C)   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a
funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when the
vehicles are conspicuously designated. This provision shall not apply at
intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or a
police officer.
   (D)   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to
the right hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle
ahead as close as is practical and safe.
(2001 Code, § 12-2-12)
§ 71.12 SPEED LIMITS.
   The Town Council may, by written resolution, alter the prima facie speed
limits within the town, as authorized by A.R.S. § 28-701 or other applicable
state statute, when, based upon an engineering and traffic investigation
pursuant to A.R.S. § 28-703 (“speed study”), it is determined that the maximum
speed permitted under state law is greater or less than is reasonable or safe
under the conditions found to exist upon any part of a street or highway
located within the town. A copy of the speed study and speed limits so affected
must be maintained in the files of the Public Works Department. Maximum speed
limits of all other streets within the town that are not affected by Council
resolution as a result of the speed study will be as established by state
statute.
(2001 Code, § 12-2-13) (Am. Ord. 11-744, passed 3-22-2011)
§ 71.13 MOTORIZED VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON THE PEAVINE TRAILS.
   (A)   The portion of the railroad right-of-way called “The Peavine Trails”,
the north segment of the trail to be known as the “North Peavine Trail” running
from Perkinsville Road north to Road 4 North (excepting the access roadway to
the Old Home Manor) and the south segment of the trail to be known as the
“South Peavine Trail” running from the south side of Perkinsville Road to Road
4 South, shall be utilized exclusively for pedestrian, equestrian or non-
motorized bicycle use.
   (B)   No person shall operate any bus, combination of vehicles, farm
tractor, golf cart, motor-driven cycle, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorized
skateboard, road tractor, semi-trailer, trailer, truck, truck tractor or
vehicle as defined in A.R.S. §§ 28-101 et seq. as the statute now exists or as
it is amended in the future, on any portion of the railroad right-of-way
designated as the “Peavine Trails” other than emergency or maintenance
vehicles.
   (C)   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor.
(2001 Code, § 12-2-14)
§ 71.14 USE OF MOBILE COMMUNICATION DEVICES AND TEXTING WHILE OPERATING A MOTOR
VEHICLE.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      HANDS-FREE USE. The use of a mobile communication device without the use
of either hand.
      MOBILE COMMUNICATION DEVICE. A wireless communication device that is
designed to engage in calls, and/or receive and transmit text, images, and/or
data.
      OPERATING A MOTOR VEHICLE. Being in actual physical control of a motor
vehicle on a highway or street and includes being temporarily stopped because
of traffic, a traffic control device or otherwise, but excludes operating a
motor vehicle when the vehicle has pulled over to the side of the road or off a
roadway and has stopped at a location in which the vehicle can safely remain
stationary.
   (B)   Prohibited use. No person shall, except as otherwise provided in this
section, use a mobile communication device while operating a motor vehicle upon
a street or highway, unless that device is specifically designed or configured
to allow hands-free use and is used in that manner while operating a motor
vehicle. A law enforcement officer may stop a motor vehicle or motor driven
cycle if the officer has reasonable suspicion to believe a violation of this
section is occurring.
   (C)   Exemptions. This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   The use of a mobile communication device for the sole purpose of
communicating with any of the following regarding an immediate emergency
situation, safety hazard or criminal activity:
         (a)   An emergency response operator;
         (b)   An ambulance company;
         (c)   Fire Department and rescue service personnel;
         (d)   Law enforcement personnel;
         (e)   A hospital; or
         (f)   A physician;’s office or health clinic.
      (2)   The activation, initiation or deactivation of hands-free use while
operating a motor vehicle.
      (3)   The use of a mobile communication device by law enforcement, public
safety personnel and persons operating authorized emergency vehicles while
performing official public safety duties.
      (4)   The use of a mobile communication device while driving on private
property.
      (5)   A person driving a school bus or transit vehicle that is the
subject to Arizona Revised Statutes or United States Department of
Transportation regulations.
   (D)   Affirmative defense. It is an affirmative defense to a violation of
this section if the driver was not operating the vehicle in a careless manner
and was:
      (1)   A driver (a) using a two-way radio or a private Land Mobile Radio
System, within the meaning of Title 47 Code of Federal Regulations Part 90,
while in the performance and scope of work-related duties and (b) who is
operating fleet vehicles or who possess a commercial vehicle license; or
      (2)   A driver holding a valid amateur radio operator license issued by
the Federal Communications Commission and using a half-duplex two-way radio.
(Ord. 18-859, passed 11-13-2018) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   In addition to all other penalties authorized under the Chino Valley Town
Code, a person found to be in violation of §
71.14 is subject to a base civil penalty of $125. A person found to be in
violation of §
71.14 and involved in a motor vehicle accident is subject to a base civil
penalty of $250, in addition to any other penalties or assessments authorized
by law.
(Ord. 18-859, passed 11-13-2018)
CHAPTER 72: PARKING RULES
Section
   
72.01   Method of parking
   
72.02   Presumption in reference to illegal parking
   
72.03   Parking, standing, stopping prohibitions
   
72.04   Authority to erect signs and provide other markings to indicate parking
restrictions
   
72.05   Removal of vehicles in violation of parking restrictions
   
72.06   Abandoned vehicles
§ 72.01 METHOD OF PARKING.
   (A)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a public street where there are
adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked such that the right hand wheels of
the vehicle are parallel to and within 18 inches of the right hand curb.
   (B)   Upon recommendation of the Police Chief and approval by Town Council,
the following alternative methods of parking may be permitted:
      (1)   On the left hand side of a one-way street. If permitted, any
vehicle parked along the left hand side of the street shall be parked so that
the left hand wheels are parallel to and within 18 inches of the left hand
curb.
      (2)   Parking at an angle to the curb.
(2001 Code, § 12-3-1) (Am. Ord. 17-833, passed 9-12-2017)
§ 72.02 PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.
   In any prosecution charging a violation of this chapter, proof that the
particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of this
chapter, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was the
registered owner of the vehicle at the time of such parking, shall constitute
in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle
was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where, and for the
time during which, such violation occurred.
(Ord. 17-833, passed 9-12-2017)
§ 72.03 PARKING, STANDING, STOPPING PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop, stand, or unload a
vehicle in violation of any sign, curb marking, or other notice erected on
government owned property that indicates no parking, stopping, standing, or
unloading, or any combination thereof, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic.
   (B)   In addition to the restrictions on parking set forth in A.R.S. § 28-
873, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park any vehicle in
any of the following manners or places:
      (1)   So as to leave available less than 20 feet of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
      (2)   So as to block or obstruct any alleyway.
      (3)   Upon or in front of another person's private road or driveway.
      (4)   On the side of the street adjacent to any school property where
marked for no parking, standing or stopping.
      (5)   On a sidewalk.
      (6)   Upon any area, parking lot, roadway, or portion thereof, whether
public or private property, designated by signs or curb painting as a fire
zone.
      (7)   Within an intersection.
      (8)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
      (9)   On a crosswalk.
      (10)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection.
      (11)   Within 30 feet on the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign,
yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a street.
      (12)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone.
      (13)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail or railroad crossing or within
8 feet 6 inches of the center of any railroad track, except while a motor
vehicle with a motive power attached is loading or unloading railroad cars.
      (14)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to a fire station and on
the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet
of the entrance when properly posted.
      (15)   Alongside or opposite a street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
      (16)   On the roadway side of a vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street.
      (17)   On a bridge or other elevated structure on a highway or within a
highway tunnel.
      (18)   In a parking space designated and marked for use by persons with
physical disabilities, unless the vehicle is transporting a person who has been
issued a valid placard or international symbol of access special plates and
either (1) the vehicle displays the valid permanent disability or temporary
disability removable windshield placard; or (2) the vehicle displays
international symbol of access special plates currently registered to the
vehicle, as provided in A.R.S. § 28-884.
   (C)   The stopping, standing, and parking restrictions provided in this
chapter do not apply to a police or peace officer or emergency vehicles when
such action is for the purpose of the performance of a law enforcement duty or
public safety emergency activity.
(Ord. 17-833, passed 9-12-2017)
§ 72.04 AUTHORITY TO ERECT SIGNS AND PROVIDE OTHER MARKINGS TO INDICATE PARKING
RESTRICTIONS.
   The Public Works Department after consultation with the Police Chief, may
erect signs, paint curbs, and provide such other notice as may be appropriate
and expedient to indicate restrictions, limitations, and prohibitions on the
parking, standing, stopping, loading and unloading of vehicles on streets
within the town.
(2001 Code, § 12-3-4) (Am. Ord. 17-833, passed 9-12-2017)
§ 72.05 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES IN VIOLATION OF PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
   Any vehicle parked in violation of the provisions of this chapter may be
moved by and under the direction of an officer and at the expense of the owner
into a place where parking is permitted.
(Ord. 17-833, passed 9-12-2017)
§ 72.06 ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   Any vehicle left unattended for more than 48 hours within the right-of-way
of a public street is declared to be an abandoned vehicle and the police may
remove the vehicle or cause it to be removed at the expense of the owner of the
vehicle.
(2001 Code, § 12-3-6) (Am. Ord. 17-833, passed 9-12-2017)
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned vehicles, see
Chapter 93
   Abandonment prohibited, see §
93.02
TITLE VIII: HEALTH AND SAFETY
      Chapter
         
80.   [RESERVED]
         
81.   HEALTH AND SAFETY IN GENERAL
         
82.   DECLARATION AND PROHIBITION OF PUBLIC NUISANCES
         
83.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
         
84.   ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES
CHAPTER 80: [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 81: HEALTH AND SAFETY IN GENERAL
Section
   
81.01   Purpose and applicability
   
81.02   Definitions
Cross-reference:
   Garbage and trash removal and collection, see
Ch. 52
§ 81.01 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The purpose of this title is to promote the health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the town by providing for the removal of rubbish, trash,
weeds, filth, debris, and dilapidated buildings; by defining, prohibiting and
setting forth the procedures to abate public nuisances pursuant to the police
powers of the town and to ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as
they are affected by public nuisances; and protect neighborhoods from blight by
setting minimum requirements applicable to building exteriors and real
property.
   (B)   This title shall apply to all buildings, structures and lands within
the town without regard to the use, occupancy, or the date of acquisition,
construction, improvement or alteration of such building, structure or land.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 81.02 DEFINITIONS.
      For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABATEMENT. The removal, remediation, halt, or destruction of that which
causes or constitutes a public nuisance, whether by breaking or pulling it
down, or otherwise destroying, repairing, replacing, or effacing it.
   AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE. A storage and collection receptacle for
rubbish, trash, weeds, filth, debris and other discarded materials as required
or authorized by the town.
   BLIGHT or BLIGHTED. An unsightly or unsafe condition including, but not
limited to, accumulation of filth, weeds, debris, dilapidation, and other
similar conditions of neglect, disrepair and deterioration, regardless of the
condition of other properties in the neighborhood.
   BUILDING. A structure having a roof that is used, intended to be used, or
capable of supporting, housing, sheltering, or enclosing a person, animal, or
tangible goods.
   DEBRIS. The remains of something broken down, destroyed, or discarded that
is of little or no apparent economic value.
   DEFENSIBLE SPACE. The area around a building or property line in which
vegetation, debris, and other types of combustible fuels have been treated,
cleared or reduced to slow the spread of fire.
   DILAPIDATED STRUCTURE. Any real property structure that is decayed,
deteriorated, or has otherwise fallen into partial ruin and whose condition
poses a danger to life, health, safety or property of the public.
   FILTH. Any accumulation of garbage, junk, or litter, or any other
accumulation or condition which may constitute a breeding place for flies,
rodents, mosquitoes and other insects.
   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal, vegetable, and organic waste materials,
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food that
is subject to rapid decomposition or rot.
   HANDBILL. A printed sheet or sheets of paper or similar material distributed
by hand.
   HARDSHIP. A condition that would cause substantial suffering or privation
due to a lack of financial resources, knowledge, or support.
   HAZARD. A condition that may cause serious personal harm.
   HEALTH HAZARD. The presence of any item(s) which adversely impact or
jeopardize the well-being or health of an individual. Such items may provide
evidence of occupancy without adequate facilities or may be inclusive of human/
animal waste, medical or biological waste, gaseous or combustible materials,
radioactive waste, dangerous or corrosive chemicals/liquids, flammable and/or
explosive materials, friable asbestos, offal and decay/matter. Such items
constitute an imminent hazard.
   IMMINENT HAZARD. A condition that presents an immediate likelihood for
causing serious personal harm.
   INFESTATION. The presence of unpleasant, damaging or unhealthful insects,
rodents or reptiles.
   INOPERABLE VEHICLE. Any vehicle for which required license plates and/or
tags have expired or any motor vehicle which is inoperable due to mechanical
failure or mechanical disassembly.
   JUNK. An item that, in its present state, is of little or no apparent
economic value and is not confined within a junk or salvage yard, including but
not limited to litter and solid waste. JUNK does not include:
      (1)   A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a
building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other
public or private property;
      (2)   A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful
manner on private property for the business purposes of a dismantler, vehicle
dealer, automotive recycler or junkyard that holds a valid Chino Valley
business license;
      (3)   A vehicle which is eligible for licensing with personalized street
rod vehicle plates or with license plates for vehicles of historic value;
      (4)   A motor vehicle which is being repaired in sections or rebuilt by
an individual or business entity engaged in the business of repairing or
rebuilding automobiles; and
      (5)   A motor vehicle which is being repaired, restored or rebuilt by the
owner of the vehicle at his or her private residence.
   LITTER. Trash, weeds, filth, debris, and all other waste material, which is
not disposed of or contained in a manner required by this chapter or in
accordance with
Chapter 52.
   OCCUPANT. The person or legal entity having actual use, possession, control,
or custody of a structure and/or premises as a lessee or otherwise.
   OWNER. The legal entity listed as owner of the real property in the official
records of the Yavapai County Recorder.
   PARK. A public area devoted to public recreational use, including
reservation, playground, or recreation center.
   PERSON IN CONTROL. A person who has responsibility for the care and
maintenance of the private property, whether or not that person has possession
or the use and enjoyment of said property. The PERSON IN CONTROL may be the
owner, occupant, property manager, or designated agent of the owner.
   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any real property and buildings and structures located
thereon that are not owned or operated by a public entity or opened to use by
the public.
   PROPERTY. Any real property, land, premises, structure, or anything erected,
growing on or affixed thereto.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Public rights-of-way, streets, sidewalks, boulevards,
alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces,
grounds and buildings.
   REFUSE. Putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes, except body wastes,
including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned,
wrecked or junked vehicles or parts thereof and solid market and industrial
wastes.
   RUBBISH. Non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
non-combustible wastes, including but not limited to, paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, metal cans, yard clippings, leaves, metal, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery and similar materials.
   SIDEWALK. That paved portion of a right-of-way between the curb lines or
lateral lines of the street bed and the boundary line of such right-of-way
designed and intended for the movement and use of pedestrian traffic.
   STREET or ROAD. The entire width between the boundary lines of every
publicly maintained right-of-way, way or roadway easement when any part thereof
is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel, including
the entire dedicated public right-of-way, whether the right-of-way is paved or
not.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected and located on the ground or
attached to something located on the ground.
   TRASH. Rubbish, waste, debris, and all other non-putrescible wastes.
   VACANT STRUCTURE. A structure that is unoccupied or that is illegally
occupied.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks, except for a device propelled solely by human
power.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
CHAPTER 82: DECLARATION AND PROHIBITION OF PUBLIC NUISANCES
Section
   
82.01   Offensive premises
   
82.02   Unsecured excavations
   
82.03   Removal of rubbish, trash, garbage, weeds, filth, and debris
   
82.04   Disposal of animal waste
   
82.05   Overgrowth of weeds or noxious plants
   
82.06   Unsafe structures
   
82.07   Keeping of inoperable vehicles
   
82.08   Light
   
82.09   Abandoned refrigerators
   
82.10   Litter; construction debris
   
82.11   Handbills on vehicles and posted premises prohibited
   
82.12   Violations; penalties; abatement
Cross-reference:
   Garbage and trash removal and collection, see
Ch. 52
   Other public nuisances, see §§
130.01 and
130.02
§ 82.01 OFFENSIVE PREMISES.
   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to suffer or permit
premises owned, occupied, or controlled by him or her or any cellar, privy,
vault, cesspool, pool, sewer or private drain to become nauseous, foul or
offensive to the senses or prejudicial to the public health or comfort.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 82.02 UNSECURED EXCAVATIONS.
   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person in control to leave
unguarded or to abandon any excavation, pit, privy, vault, sump, or hole on his
or her property that is more than 6 inches in diameter and more than 18 inches
deep. If the person in control protects any such excavation from access by the
public by effective barrier or warning device, it shall not be deemed unguarded
or abandoned.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 82.03 REMOVAL OF RUBBISH, TRASH, GARBAGE, WEEDS, FILTH, AND DEBRIS.
   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person in control to fail to
remove any rubbish, trash, garbage, weeds, or other accumulation of filth or
debris that consititutes a health hazard or safety hazard, unless said rubbish,
trash, garbage, weeds, or other accumulation of filth or debris is kept in
covered authorized private receptacles.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 82.04 DISPOSAL OF ANIMAL WASTE.
   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to dispose of animal
manure or waste in any quantity in any manner which is not securely protected
from insects and the elements, or to keep or handle animal waste in violation
of any ordinance of the town, Yavapai County, or the State of Arizona;
provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the
use of animal manure on any farm, garden, or ranch in such a manner and for
such purposes are compatible with customary methods of good husbandry.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 82.05 OVERGROWTH OF WEEDS OR NOXIOUS PLANTS.
   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person in control of property:
   (A)   To permit upon the property the growth of poison oak, poison ivy, or
any noxious or toxic weeds or uncultivated plants (whether growing or
otherwise), weeds, tall grass, uncultivated shrubs or growth higher than 12
inches or which otherwise present a fire hazard; or
   (B)   To permit upon the property plants or other material, which are dead,
dormant or so dry as to be readily flammable or combustible on such land that
may constitute a fire hazard or other threat to the public health or safety.
   (C)   For residential property less than 2 acres and property greater than 2
acres that is adjacent to any developed property, to fail to maintain the
entire property, unless the property is used for grazing.
   (D)   For all vacant commercial lots, to fail to maintain the entire
property. These properties are required to mow the entirety of the property.
   (E)   Except for the sides of property that abut a residential property or a
non-residential developed property, agricultural property used for grazing is
exempt from the requirement to maintain the front yard setback and street side
yard setbacks for a defensible space.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 82.06 UNSAFE STRUCTURES.
   (A)   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to maintain or
allow any structure to become unsafe, unsanitary or deficient.
   (B)   A structure shall be deemed unsafe, unsanitary or deficient if any of
the following conditions are present:
      (1)   Inadequate means of egress facilities;
      (2)   Inadequate light or ventilation;
      (3)   It constitutes a fire hazard;
      (4)   It is infested with rodents, insects or other pests that pose a
risk to public health or safety;
      (5)   It contains an accumulation of litter, garbage, refuse, trash or
other unsanitary material;
      (6)   It is otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare;
      (7)   It involves illegal or improper occupancy;
      (8)   It has missing or broken exterior windows, doors, or fences, or
other inadequate maintenance to the degree that it poses a danger of physical
injury to any person or animal;
      (9)   It is a vacant structure and is not secured against entry.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 82.07 KEEPING OF INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person in control to place, park or store an
inoperable vehicles(s) that is not cosmetically complete in or on any public or
private property in any manner without being screened and not visible from
plain view of property upon which it is stored.
   (B)   A person in control may keep up to 4 cosmetically complete inoperable
vehicles on properties 1 acre or greater that are stored behind the residence
but no closer than the front yard setback and street side yard setback of the
residence. The vehicles and surrounding area must be kept in a clean and
orderly manner.
   (C)   A person in control may keep up to 3 cosmetically complete inoperable
vehicles on properties less than 1 acre that are stored behind the residence
but no closer than the front yard setback and street side yard setback of the
residence. The vehicles and surrounding area must be kept in a clean and
orderly manner.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 82.08 LIGHT.
   It is unlawful and a public nuisance to cause, allow, or permit any
artificial illumination of such intensity as to interfere substantially and
unnecessarily with the use and enjoyment of public or private property by any
considerable number of people, or with the lawful use of any school, public
place or public street, or with any governmental or public function of the
town, or as to constitute a hazard or threat to the public health, safety and
welfare of the people of the town. This section shall not apply where the
person responsible for the artificial illumination is authorized by the Town
Manager, any school within the town, this code or valid ordinance of the town.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 82.09 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS.
   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to leave or permit to
remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any
unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling or other structure under the control
of any person and in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended
or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container which has an airtight door
or lid, snap lock or other locking device which may not be released from the
inside, without first removing the door or lid.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 82.10 LITTER; CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS.
   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to:
   (A)   Throw, deposit, sweep litter, refuse, garbage, or other debris onto,
into or upon any gutter, street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any
private premises within the town except to deposit into public receptacles, or
in authorized private receptacles for collection.
   (B)   To not contain construction debris at all times upon the premises
where the construction is occurring.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 82.11 HANDBILLS ON VEHICLES AND POSTED PREMISES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to throw or
deposit any handbill, leaflet, circular, pamphlet, brochure, or other such item
in or upon any parked vehicle.
   (B)   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to throw, deposit
or distribute any handbill, leaflet, circular, pamphlet, brochure, or other
such item upon any private premises, if requested by the person in control of
the premises not to do so, or if notice is conspicuously posted on the premises
saying “no trespassing,” “no peddlers or agents,” “no advertisement,” “no
soliciting,” or any similar notice indicating that the person in control does
not desire to have any such item left upon the premises.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 82.12 VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES; ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Civil penalty. Any person found to be in violation of any provision of
this chapter shall be guilty of a civil violation, punishable by imposition of
a civil sanction not less than $100 and not to exceed $500.
   (B)   Each day a separate violation. Each day a violation continues shall be
considered a separate violation.
   (C)   Procedures. Hearings and appeals shall be conducted in accordance with
the rules of procedure in civil traffic violation cases as set forth in the
Arizona Revised Statues, Rules of Procedure in Civil Traffic Cases.
   (D)   Reinspections costs. In addition to any penalties or civil sanctions
imposed by the court, the town may impose fees in an amount set separately by
resolution approved by the Town Council for reinspection of the premises at the
request of the property owner to determine whether the property has been
brought into compliance after initiation of enforcement or prosecution of the
provisions set forth in this title.
   (E)   Habitual offender. A person who commits a violation of this chapter
after previously having been found responsible for committing two or more civil
violations of this chapter within an 18-month period, whether by admission, by
payment of the sanction, by default, or by judgment after hearing, shall be
guilty of a class one misdemeanor. For purposes of calculating the 18-month
period under this section, the dates of the commission of the offenses are the
determining factor.
   (F)   Abatement. In addition to or separate from actions for civil offenses,
violations of this chapter may be abated pursuant to the provisions set forth
in Chapter 84, by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a
penalty or civil sanction does not prevent abatement or equitable relief.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
CHAPTER 83: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Section
   
83.01   Purpose; applicability
   
83.02   Duty to maintain premises
   
83.03   Exterior building standards
   
83.04   Prevention of pest infestation
   
83.05   Swimming pools
   
83.06   Obstruction of sidewalks prohibited
   
83.07   Landscaping
   
83.08   Graffiti
   
83.09   Parking of commercial vehicles and equipment
   
83.10   Violation; penalties; abatement
§ 83.01 PURPOSE; APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety
and welfare of the citizens of the town by establishing and requiring minimum
standards for the exterior condition of buildings and real property to protect
neighborhoods by eliminating conditions that contribute to blight and
deterioration.
   (B) Scope. This chapter shall apply to all buildings, structures and lands
within the town without regard to the use, date of construction or alteration.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 83.02 DUTY TO MAINTAIN PREMISES.
   (A)   It is the duty and responsibility of each person in control of any
premises to maintain the premises in a safe and sanitary manner, consistent and
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and to maintain the premises
free of litter, dilapidated or unsafe structures, abandoned or junk vehicles,
and all public nuisances. In addition to any other penalties which may be
imposed, failure to maintain a premises as required by this chapter is a public
nuisance, subject to the abatement procedures set forth in
Chapter 84.
   (B)   All persons owning any building, lot or premises within the town shall
maintain and repair all sidewalks, driveway culverts and streets adjacent to
said building, lot or premises in a safe and sound condition, free of decay and
defect.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 83.03 EXTERIOR BUILDING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Every exposed exterior surface, opening, foundation, wall and roof
shall be maintained in structurally sound condition, able to support itself
under reasonable loading or weather conditions, free from decay or defect and
in such a manner as to not become a blighted exterior.
   (B)   Every window and other exterior surface constructed of or containing
glass shall be maintained free from breakage so as to prevent access to the
interior and pest infestation. Every broken window shall be repaired or covered
with glass, plexiglas or other secure and non-combustible material and glazed
to be weather tight. The replacement material shall be designed and of such
color so as to blend with the finish of the building.
   (C)   Outdoor stairs, porches and railings shall be maintained to be safe
and structurally sound. Supports for railings, stairs and porches shall be
structurally sound, maintained in safe condition and capable of supporting a
load that normal use may place thereon.
   (D)   Building service, equipment and utilities such as plumbing, piping,
and fixtures that convey or dispose of liquid or waste, electric wiring,
components or fixtures, mechanical heating and cooling equipment, ductwork and
fixtures shall be maintained in a safe and functioning manner in accordance
with applicable codes.
   (E)   Every fence, screen wall and retaining wall on the premises shall be
safe and structurally sound. A fence, screen wall, or retaining wall that is
leaning, damaged, missing slats, blocks, or other materials or are otherwise
broken or damaged in a manner to appear deteriorated or blighted shall be
deemed to be unsafe and not structurally sound.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 83.04 PREVENTION OF PEST INFESTATION.
   The person in control of a property shall keep the premises free from
infestation by insects, rodents, or other noxious pests. This provision shall
not require action to disturb the natural or cultivated activity of bees,
rabbits or other insects and animals where such activity is not a danger or
nuisance to any resident or residence of the area, or where other applicable
legal requirements are met.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 83.05 SWIMMING POOLS.
   The person in control shall maintain all swimming pools and similar bodies
of water free from stagnation, pollution, or other condition offensive to the
senses, unsafe for its intended use, or that may be a breeding ground for
insects.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 83.06 OBSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.
   The person in control of a residential, commercial, or industrial property
shall keep the sidewalk or other public place fronting or bordering the
premises free of garbage, junk, obstructions, and weeds, and grass in excess of
12 inches in height.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 83.07 LANDSCAPING.
   The person in control shall maintain trees, shrubs, or other plant growth on
the premises in a condition so as not to endanger, impede, obstruct or
interfere with vehicular or pedestrian use of any street, sidewalk, alley, or
other public way, or visibility of any traffic control device. The premises
shall be free from vegetation that is substantially dead, damaged, or
characterized by uncontrolled growth, neglect, lack of maintenance or similar
condition.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 83.08 GRAFFITI.
   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person in control of property
to permit graffiti on the building or structure or fail to eradicate graffiti
from the building or structure within 30 days of notice thereof.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 83.09 PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT.
   Except as provided in divisions (A) and (B) below, no person shall park or
allow to be parked any commercial vehicle of 13,000 pounds or greater, or
related part or piece of heavy equipment on any residential property in the
town, except when necessary to conduct an authorized commercial purpose on the
property as defined below.
   (A)   On developed residential properties less than 1 acre, a commercial
vehicle with no more than 2 axles, when used as a commuter or for business
purposes off-site or for an on-call purpose shall be permitted;
   (B)   On developed residential properties of 1 acre or more, 1 commercial
vehicle, 1 trailer, and 1 piece of heavy equipment shall be permitted when used
for business purposes at off-site locations.
   (C)   On developed residential properties greater than 2 acres property
owners shall be permitted to maintain and house no more than 4 commercial grade
vehicles and/or equipment when used for personal on-site property improvements
and maintenance.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 83.10 VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES; ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Violations of this chapter are declared to be public nuisances.
   (B)   Violations of this chapter are also punishable as set forth in §
82.12 as civil violations.
   (C)   In addition to civil sanctions and criminal penalties that may be
imposed on habitual offenders, violations may be abated pursuant to the
provisions set forth in
Chapter 84 or by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a
penalty does not prevent abatement or equitable relief.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
CHAPTER 84: ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES
Section
   
84.01   Purpose and findings
   
84.02   Applicability
   
84.03   Owner, occupant, or person in control to maintain premises
   
84.04   Authority to inspect
   
84.05   Inspection and investigation: interference, false information; failure
to provide evidence of identity
   
84.06   Emergency abatement
   
84.07   Abatement in lieu of or in addition to civil or criminal complaint
   
84.08   Abatement procedures
   
84.09   Assessments; how paid; accrual of interest
§ 84.01 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide procedures to abate
public nuisances pursuant to the police powers of the town and to ensure the
public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by a public
nuisance.
   (B)   Findings. The Town Council finds that the failure of a person in
control to maintain property in a safe and sanitary manner, as required by this
title creates a public nuisance and is hazardous to the public health, safety
and welfare. Public nuisances promote the spread of disease, endanger the
physical safety of persons, and cause neighborhood blight.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 84.02 APPLICABILITY.
   The procedures set forth in this chapter apply to all public nuisances, as
defined and declared in this code, wherever found in the town.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 84.03 OWNER, OCCUPANT, OR PERSON IN CONTROL TO MAINTAIN PREMISES.
   The person in control of any private property is responsible, at all times,
for maintaining the premises and adjoining sidewalks free of public nuisances.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 84.04 AUTHORITY TO INSPECT.
   (A)   Town compliance agents are hereby authorized to inspect property for
violations of this title in the normal course of job duties, in response to a
citizen complaint that alleges a violation of this title on the property; or
when the compliance agent probable cause to believe that a violation has been
or is being committed.
   (B)   In order to determine compliance with this title, private property may
be entered with the consent of the person in control of the property or as
authorized by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (C)   This section shall not be construed to require regular inspections of
premises by the town, nor shall the town have an obligation to abate any public
nuisance, reported or unreported within a specific time period. Neither the
town nor any of its officers or officials shall be liable in any manner for
injuries or damages which result or are alleged to have resulted from any delay
or failure to enforce the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 84.05 INSPECTION AND INVESTIGATION: INTERFERENCE, FALSE INFORMATION; FAILURE
TO PROVIDE EVIDENCE OF IDENTITY.
   (A)   It is unlawful and a violation of this code for any person to:
      (1)   Interfere, prevent, or attempt to interfere with or prevent, an
individual employed or contracted by the town from investigating an alleged
violation of this title, or from correcting or abating a violation of this
title; or
      (2)   Knowingly make a false or fraudulent statement, or knowingly
misrepresent a fact, or mislead an individual employed or contracted by the
town when that individual is investigating, correcting or abating a violation
of this title; or
      (3)   Fail or refuse to provide evidence of his or her identity to an
individual employed or contracted for by the town when that individual is
investigating an alleged violation of this title and has reasonable cause to
believe that the person committed a violation of this title. Evidence of
identity under this section shall consist of a person’s full name, residence
address and date of birth.
   (B)   A person found to be in violation of this section is guilty of a class
one misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in §
10.99(C).
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 84.06 EMERGENCY ABATEMENT.
   (A)   If a public nuisance presents an imminent hazard to life or public
safety, the town may do 1 or more of the following:
      (1)   Issue a notice to abate the nuisance, directing the person in
control to immediately take such action as is appropriate to correct or abate
the nuisance upon notice by the compliance agent to the person in control.
      (2)   Act to correct or abate the nuisance, whether or not the town is
able to contact the person in control.
   (B)   The person in control may appeal an order to abate to the Town
Council. Upon notice and request by the person in control, a hearing before the
Town Council shall be scheduled as soon as practicable. Such appeal shall in no
case stay the abatement or correction of a nuisance deemed to pose an imminent
hazard.
   (C)   The town may recover its costs incurred in abating a nuisance that it
deems to present an imminent hazard under this section in the same manner as
provided for in this chapter to the extent practicable under the circumstance.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 84.07 ABATEMENT IN LIEU OF OR IN ADDITION TO CIVIL OR CRIMINAL COMPLAINT.
   In addition to or in lieu of filing a civil or criminal complaint, the town
may file a notice to abate any nuisance as defined in this code. Such abatement
shall proceed independently of any civil or criminal violation filed. The town
compliance officer, town prosecutor and Town Attorney are authorized to file
civil or criminal complaints to abate a public nuisance.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
§ 84.08 ABATEMENT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Notice to abate.
      (1)   If, after an inspection, the town finds 1 or more violations of
this title, and the town elects to use the abatement process, the town shall,
in writing, notify the person in control of the property.
      (2)   The notice to abate shall set forth the following information:
         (a)   The person in control has 35 calendar days from the date of the
notice to abate or correct the violation.
         (b)   Location of the property in violation by street address if known
and, by book, map and parcel number.
         (c)   Statement of the violation(s) in sufficient detail to allow a
reasonable person to identify and correct the violation(s).
         (d)   An estimate of the cost of abatement by the town plus 10% for
the costs of inspection and other incidental costs associated with abating the
nuisance.
         (e)   Re-inspection date and time.
         (f)   Name, address and telephone number of the town compliance agent
who sent the notice to abate.
         (g)   A warning stating that if the violation is not corrected within
30 days of the date of the notice, the town may abate the nuisance and assess
the person in control the cost of such abatement and record a lien against the
property for payment of the assessment.
         (h)   A statement that the person in control may appeal the abatement
order in writing to the Town Council within 15 days from the date of the
notice.
      (3)   The Town Manager may extend the time limits set forth in division
(A)(2) of this section if the person in control demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the Town Manager that complying with the notice of violation or
notice to abate is a hardship and if the person in control agrees in writing to
a schedule for correcting the violation bringing the property into compliance
with the requirements of this title and complies with the schedule.
      (4)   The notice requirements set forth in this division (A) do not apply
in an emergency abatement situation.
   (B)   Service of notices.
      (1)   Any notice required to be given under this section shall be
accomplished by a compliance agent of the town delivering the notice to the
person in control of the property, or by mailing the notice to the person in
control by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the property owner is
not the occupant or person in control, a duplicate notice shall be mailed to
him or her by certified return receipt requested mail at his or her last known
address and to the address as shown on the most recent records of the Yavapai
County Assessor’s Office, if different.
      (2)   Notice is deemed effective on the date it is hand delivered or five
calendar days after it is deposited in the United States mail.
      (3)   Nothing herein shall preclude the town from giving additional oral
or written notice at its discretion. If the town elects to give additional
notice in any instance, it shall not thereby become obligated to give such
additional notice thereafter in the same or other situation.
   (C)   Recording a notice to abate. The notice to abate shall run with the
land. The town, at its sole option, may record a notice to abate with the
County Recorder and thereby cause compliance by an entity thereafter acquiring
such property. The non-filing of any notice to abate shall in no way affect the
validity of such notice as to entities so notified. When the property is
brought into compliance by the person in control a satisfaction of notice to
abate shall be filed with the County Recorder.
   (D)   Appeals to the Council.
      (1)   A notice to abate or assessment may be appealed to the Town
Council.
      (2)   An appeal must be filed within 15 calendar days of the service of
the notice to abate or assessment and must be filed with the Town Clerk’s
office.
      (3)   Failure to timely file an appeal shall constitute a waiver of the
right to a hearing of the appeal before the Town Council. Any person who fails
to timely file an appeal shall be estopped from denying the validity of any
notice or assessment that could have been timely appealed.
      (4)   The notice of appeal shall set forth, in writing, the owner’s
reason for believing he or she is not in violation of this title or that the
assessment is excessive of unjust.
      (5)   The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by an appeal fee of $25,
to be deposited in the general fund of the town.
      (6)   In case of financial hardship, as determined by the Town Clerk, the
appeal fee may be suspended until the decision on appeal is rendered. The Town
Council may either waive the fee upon a finding of financial hardship or find
no financial hardship and require the fee to be paid.
   (E)   Grounds for appeal. The following shall constitute reasonable grounds
for appeal of a notice to abate or assessment:
      (1)   A claim that the property or building subject to the notice is not
in violation of the ordinance;
      (2)   A claim that the true intent of the code section allegedly violated
or standards described in that section were incorrectly interpreted; or
      (3)   A claim that the statement of costs for correcting or abating the
violation is excessive.
   (F)   Procedure on appeal.
      (1)   The Town Clerk shall set a date for hearing an appeal within 40
calendar days of receipt by the Town Clerk of the notice of appeal.
      (2)   The Town Council shall hear testimony from all parties to the
appeal. The parties may, if they choose, be represented by an attorney.
      (3)   The Town Council shall prepare a written summary of the hearing and
shall set forth the decision reached. The findings and decision shall be mailed
to all parties to the appeal.
   (G)   Conflicting provisions; special assessment.
      (1)   Conflict of ordinances.
         (a)   In any case where a provision of this title is in conflict with
a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code
of the town existing on the effective date of this title, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for promoting and protecting public health and
safety shall prevail.
         (b)   This title is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any
way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances,
except those specifically repealed by this title, or with private restrictions
placed upon the property by covenant, deed, or other private agreement.
         (c)   In cases where 2 or more provisions of this title are in
conflict, the most stringent or restrictive shall prevail.
      (2)   Special assessment lien.
         (a)   If the town is required to correct or abate a violation pursuant
to this section, the town shall prepare a verified statement and account of the
actual cost of such correction or abatement, including an additional 10% of the
actual costs for inspection and other incidental costs incurred in connection
with such correction or abatement. The verified statement and account shall be
an assessment upon the property on which the town corrected or abated the
violations and shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as
other town assessments are collected. Such assessment shall be recorded in the
office of the Yavapai County Recorder and from the date of its recording shall
be a lien on the property. Such lien shall be prior and superior to all other
liens, obligations, mortgages or other encumbrances, except liens for general
taxes. A sale of the property to satisfy a lien obtained under the provisions
of this section shall be made upon judgment of foreclosure and order of sale.
The town may institute an action to enforce the lien in the Yavapai County
Superior Court at any time after the recording of the assessment. Failure to
enforce the lien by such action shall not affect its validity. The recorded
assessment shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of all matters recited
therein and of the regularity of all proceedings prior to the recording
thereof.
         (b)   A prior assessment pursuant to this title shall not be a bar to
a subsequent assessment, and any numbers of liens on the same lot or tract of
land may be enforced in the same action.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019; Am. Ord. 2019-875, passed 11-12-2019)
§ 84.09 ASSESSMENTS; HOW PAID; ACCRUAL OF INTEREST.
   (A)   Assessments that are imposed pursuant to this title shall run with the
land until paid and are due and payable as follows:
      (1)   Assessments of less than $500 shall be paid within 1 year after the
assessment is recorded.
      (2)   Assessments of $500 or more, but less than $1,000, shall be paid
within 2 years after the assessment is recorded.
      (3)   Assessments of $1,000 or more, but less than $5,000, shall be paid
within 3 years after the assessment is recorded.
      (4)   Assessments of $5,000 or more, but less than $10,000, shall be paid
within 6 years after the assessment is recorded.
      (5)   Assessments of $10,000 or more shall be paid within 10 years after
the assessment is recorded.
   (B)   Each assessment shall contain a payment schedule which requires
payment of the assessment over the above time periods in substantially equal
yearly installments.
   (C)   An assessment that is past due shall accrue interest at the legal rate
as prescribed by A.R.S. § 44-1201, as may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
90.   ANIMALS
         
91.   [RESERVED]
         
92.   PARKS AND RECREATION; LIBRARY
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
   
90.01   Purpose
   
90.02   Definitions
   
90.03   Injury by vehicle
   
90.04   Stray dogs
   
90.05   Dogs at large; designation as aggressive dog
   
90.06   Impoundment of dogs; destruction; emergency assistance
   
90.07   Powers and duties of the animal control officer
   
90.08   License fee for dogs; issuance of tags; records; penalties
   
90.09   Anti-rabies vaccinations: vaccination and license standards
   
90.10   Wearing license tags
   
90.11   Handling of biting dogs; responsibility for reporting dog bites
   
90.12   Excessive dog noise; nuisance behavior
   
90.13   Unlawful interference with officers
   
90.14   Keeping of aggressive dogs
   
90.15   Adequate exercise space for dogs
   
90.16   Animal cruelty
 
   
90.99   Violation; penalty
§ 90.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to aid and assist the town and its
appropriate staff in the enforcement of A.R.S. § 11-1002, Powers and Duties of
the State Veterinarian and the Arizona Department of Agriculture; A.R.S. § 11-
1003, Power and Duties of the Department of Health Services; A.R.S. § 11-1010,
Anti-rabies Vaccination; Vaccination and License Stations; A.R.S. § 11-1016,
Removing Impounded Animals; A.R.S. § 11-1017, Unlawful Keeping of Dogs; and
A.R.S. § 11-1020, Dogs; Liability.
(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017)
§ 90.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context requires otherwise.
   AGGRESSIVE DOG. A dog that causes injury or reasonable fear of attack or
bodily injury by violating §
90.05(A)(2).
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. A person who has the authority and is responsible
for enforcement of the provisions and regulations of this chapter.
   ANIMAL CONTROL SHELTER. Any established location authorized by the Chief of
Police for the confinement, maintenance, safekeeping and control of dogs that
come into the custody of an animal control officer or police officer in the
performance of their duties.
   AT LARGE. When a dog is not confined within the limits of its owner’s or
responsible person’s property and not physically restrained by a leash, rope,
cord, chain, or other device not more than six feet in length.
   COLLAR. A band, harness or suitable device worn around the neck or body of a
dog to which a license tag may be attached
   DOG. A member of the canis familiaris, domesticated wolves and/or offspring
of a dog cross-bred with wild animals or domesticated wolves.
   DOG OWNER. Any person owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, having an
interest in, or having control or custody of a dog.
   DOG VIOLATION CITATION. A document issued by an animal control officer or
police officer to a person who has violated a provision of this chapter.
   ENCLOSURE. A fence or structure suitable to prevent the escape of a dog or
the entry of young children.
   EXCESSIVE DOG NOISE. Frequent, habitual, or continuous barking, howling,
whining, yelping, or other irritating dog noises that are audible to one or
more persons occupying property in the community or neighborhood within
reasonable proximity to the property where the dog is located.
   IMPOUND. The act of taking or receiving any dog into the custody, of an
animal control officer or police officer, for the purpose of confining it in
the Chino Valley Animal Control Shelter in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
   MICROCHIP. To implant an animal with a microchip tag linked to a national
computer network for the purpose of identification.
   NEGLECT. Failure to provide for the health and safety of a dog, including
but not limited to, failure to provide adequate food, water, shelter, exercise
or necessary veterinary care to a dog, or to adequately confine a dog in a
manner appropriate to its breed, age and condition.
   NUISANCE. That which causes offense, annoyance, trouble, or injury.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON. An owner or other person who has the responsibility for
the possession, care, custody or control of a dog, and has the authority and
ability to act on behalf of, or in the interest of the owner.
   SEVERE INJURY. Any physical injury that results in a broken bone, puncture
wound, or laceration, and that may or may not require sutures and/or cosmetic
surgery.
   SHELTER. A structure capable of protecting a dog from present and potential
environmental hazards.
   STRAY DOG. A dog that is at large and is not wearing a valid license tag
and/or microchip device.
   TAG. Proof of a license that is worn by the licensed dog.
   UNDER CONTROL. When a dog is confined within the limits of its owner’s or
responsible person’s property, or physically restrained by a leash, rope, cord,
chain, or other device not more than six feet in length.
   VACCINATION. The administration of an anti-rabies vaccine to a dog by a
veterinarian.
   VETERINARY HOSPITAL. Any establishment operated by a veterinarian licensed
to practice in the State of Arizona, which provides clinical facilities and
houses dogs and/or other domesticated animals for dental, medical or surgical
treatment. A veterinary hospital may have adjacent to it, in conjunction with
it or as an integral part of it, pens, stalls, cages or kennels for quarantine,
observation or boarding.
(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017; Ord. 2023-926, passed 2-14-2023)
Editor’s note:
   The definition for "dog" provided in §
90.02 was revised in editing the S-3 Supplement to reflect the correct Latin
name.
§ 90.03 INJURY BY VEHICLE.
   Any person who accidentally or otherwise hits a dog with a vehicle shall
make a reasonable effort to contact the owner of the dog. In the event the
owner cannot be contacted, the operator of the vehicle shall at once contact
the Police Department or animal control officer to report the incident.
(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017)
§ 90.04 STRAY DOGS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to harbor or keep any lost or stray dog
within the town without notifying the animal control officer.
   (B)   When a dog that appears to be lost or stray is found, the finder shall
make a reasonable effort to locate the owner and shall notify the animal
control officer or the Police Department as soon as possible.
(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017)
§ 90.05 DOGS AT LARGE; DESIGNATION AS AGGRESSIVE DOG.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a dog to:
      (1)   Be at large. A dog is not at large when:
         (a)   Engaged in obedience training and accompanied by its owner,
responsible person, or trainer.
         (b)   Being used for legitimate hunting purposes.
         (c)   Being exhibited in a sanctioned event.
         (d)   Being utilized as a service dog for a disabled person, or as a
seeing-eye dog for a legally blind person, and the handler exercises sufficient
control.
         (e)   Being used to control livestock.
         (f)   Being used to assist a police officer engaged in law enforcement
duties.
         (g)   In a designated off-leash area in a dog park.
      (2)   Attack, bite, molest, tackle, terrorize, menace, chase, or harass
any person, domestic animal, fowl, poultry, pet, or livestock.
   (B)   The dog’s owner or responsible person shall control the dog in a
manner that ensures it does not violate §
90.05(A)(1) and (2) and, in addition to any penalties under this chapter, shall
be responsible for injury to any person or damage to any property caused by a
dog in violation thereof.
   (C)   An animal control officer or police officer may apprehend and impound
any dog at large. An animal control officer may issue a citation to the owner
or responsible person of the dog at large. The procedure for the issuance of a
notice to appear shall be as provided for peace officers in A.R.S. § 13-3903,
except the animal control officer shall not make an arrest before issuing the
notice. The issuance of citations pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to
the provisions of A.R.S. § 13-3899.
   (D)   A person is not in violation of §
90.05(B) when the dog:
      (1)   Is on the owner’s or responsible person’s property and the incident
occurred after provocation from the person, domestic animal, fowl, poultry,
pet, or livestock the dog attacked, bit, molested, tackled, terrorized, chased,
or harassed.
      (2)   Is owned by a governmental agency and is in use for military or
police work.
      (3)   Is a service dog, and the incident occurred while the dog was
providing a service to the owner.
      (4)   Was engaged in the lawful act of hunting, ranching, farming , or
other agricultural purpose.
   (E)   After a conviction of a violation of §
90.05(B), the prosecutor may request a hearing to establish that the involved
dog should be designated as an aggressive dog as follows:
      (1)   After a first conviction, the dog may be designated by the court as
an aggressive dog.
      (2)   After a second or subsequent conviction, the dog may be designated
by the court as an aggressive dog, and if so designated, shall be maintained in
conformance with §
90.14.
   (F)   An owner of an aggressive dog may petition the court to have the
aggressive dog designation removed. The petition shall request a hearing at
which the owner may present facts and circumstances to the court supporting the
request. While the request is pending and until the court determines that the
dog is not an aggressive dog, the dog shall be maintained in conformance with §
90.14.
(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017; Ord. 2023-926, passed 2-14-2023) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS; DESTRUCTION; EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE.
   (A)   Any dog at large shall be impounded. All impounded dogs shall be given
proper care and maintenance.
   (B)   Each impounded licensed or microchipped dog shall be kept and
maintained at the Animal Control Shelter for a minimum of five days unless
claimed by its owner or responsible person. An unlicensed dog shall be kept and
maintained at the Animal Control Shelter for a minimum of three days. Any dog
found without a tag or microchip device identifying its owner shall be deemed
not owned.
   (C)   An impounded licensed or unlicensed dog may be adopted upon expiration
of the impoundment period, provided the adopting person pays the appropriate
adoption fees and complies with licensing and vaccinating provisions of this
chapter. Adoption fees may be waived for recognized nonprofit dog rescue
groups. No dog shall be released for use in medical research. Animal control
officers may destroy impounded sick or injured dogs whenever the destruction is
deemed by a licensed veterinarian to be necessary to prevent the dog from
suffering, or to prevent the spread of disease.
   (D)   Any licensed impounded dog may be reclaimed by its owner or
responsible person within five days of its impoundment, provided the person
reclaiming the dog furnishes proof of the right to do so, proof of rabies
vaccination, pays all dog shelter fees, medical fees, and service and license
fees as applicable. If the dog is not reclaimed within the impoundment period,
the animal control officer shall take possession of the dog and may place the
dog for adoption, or dispose of the dog in a humane manner as prescribed by a
licensed veterinarian.
   (E)   A dog showing signs or symptoms of rabies, may be destroyed by a
state-licensed veterinarian or any other means deemed necessary to protect
public health and safety.
   (F)   Upon surrender of a dog by its owner or responsible person to the town
for destruction, the town shall become the person responsible for the dog.
Prior to the surrender, the owner or responsible person shall pay all
associated fees to the town.
   (G)   If a peace officer or animal control officer observes an animal in
imminent danger of death or inhumane suffering, the peace officer or animal
control officer may assist the animal as needed.
(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017; Ord. 2023-926, passed 2-14-2023)
§ 90.07 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.
   (A)   The animal control officer shall:
      (1)   Enforce the provisions of this chapter and the regulations
promulgated hereunder.
      (2)   Issue citations for violations of this chapter and the regulations
promulgated hereunder. The procedure for the issuance of notices to appear
shall be as provided for peace officers in A.R.S. § 13-3903, except that the
animal control officer shall not make an arrest before issuing the notice.
   (B)   Citations issued for violations of this chapter shall comply with the
non-verification and certification requirements set forth in A.R.S. § 13-3899.
   (C)   The animal control officer is a member of the Police Department and,
where applicable, shall function in accordance with Police Department policies
and procedures.
(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017)
§ 90.08 LICENSE FEE FOR DOGS; ISSUANCE OF TAGS; RECORDS; PENALTIES.
   (A)   The Town Council shall set an annual license fee, which shall be paid
for each dog three months of age or over that is kept, harbored or maintained
within the boundaries of the town for at least 30 days of the calendar year.
License fees shall be set at the discretion of the Council by resolution. The
licensing period shall not exceed the period of time for revaccination as
designated by the State Veterinarian.
   (B)   License fees shall be paid within 30 days of acquisition of the dog
and/or the dog becomes eligible for licensing. A penalty shall be added to the
license fee in the event that application is made subsequent to the date on
which the dog is required to be licensed under the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Durable license tags shall be provided. Each dog licensed under the
terms of this chapter shall receive, at the time of licensing, such a tag on
which shall be inscribed the name of the town, the number of the license and
the year for which it is valid. The license tag shall be attached to a collar
or harness, which shall be worn by the dog at all times, except when the dog is
confined on the owner's property or due to medical condition certified by a
licensed veterinarian, in which case the owner shall provide proof of the
condition signed by a licensed veterinarian. Whenever a tag is lost, a
duplicate tag shall be issued upon application and payment of a fee by the
owner.
   (D)   License fees for dogs permanently incapable of procreation shall be at
a lower rate. An application for a license for a dog incapable of procreation
shall furnish adequate proof satisfactory to the animal control officer that
the dog has been surgically altered to be permanently incapable of procreation.
   (E)   After written notification from the animal control officer, the owner
will have fifteen days to obtain a license for a dog required to be licensed.
It is a violation of this chapter to counterfeit or attempt to counterfeit an
official dog tag, or to remove a tag from any dog for the purpose of willful
and malicious mischief, or to place a dog tag upon a dog unless the tag was
issued for that particular dog.
   (F)   Impounding fees shall be established by resolution of the Council in
conformance with current state fees for the impounding and maintenance of dogs
of like species and circumstances.
(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017)
§ 90.09 ANTI-RABIES VACCINATIONS: VACCINATION AND LICENSE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Before a license is issued for any dog, the owner must present a
rabies vaccination certificate signed by a veterinarian, stating the owner's
name and address and giving the dog's description, date of vaccination, and
type, manufacturer and serial number of the vaccine used, and date
revaccination is due. A duplicate of each rabies vaccination certificate issued
to a resident of Chino Valley shall be transmitted to the animal control
officer on or before the 10th day of the month following the month during which
the dog was vaccinated. No dog shall be licensed unless it is vaccinated in
accordance with the provisions and regulations of this chapter.
   (B)   The owner of a dog three months of age or over, which, for medical
purposes, is unable to receive a rabies vaccination, may request a waiver of
the unaltered license fees. The owner may be granted this waiver only after
supplying a certified veterinarian recommendation from a licensed veterinarian
to the animal control officer.
   (C)   A dog vaccinated in any other state prior to entry into Arizona may be
licensed in Arizona provided that, at the time of licensing, its owner presents
a vaccination certificate, signed by a veterinarian licensed to practice in the
state or a veterinarian employed by a governmental agency in that state. The
vaccination certificate must state the owner's name and address, and provide a
description of the dog, its date of vaccination, and the type, manufacturer and
serial number of the vaccine used.
   (D)   The vaccination must be in conformity with the provisions and
regulations of this chapter.
(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.10 WEARING LICENSE TAGS.
   (A)   Any dog over the age of three months, that is off the owner’s
property, shall wear a collar or harness to which is attached a valid license
tag pursuant to §
90.08 above.
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   If a dog is microchipped and the owner information on file with the
microchip company is current and includes a valid telephone number, and the
owner of the dog has in his possession proof of current rabies vaccination the
dog need not wear a license tag.
      (2)   Dogs used for the control of livestock, while being trained for
hunting or dog obedience training, or while being exhibited or trained at a
kennel club event, and dogs being transported to and from such events, need not
wear a collar or harness with a valid license attached, provided they are
properly vaccinated, licensed and controlled.
(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017)
§ 90.11 HANDLING OF BITING DOGS; RESPONSIBILITY FOR REPORTING DOG BITES.
   (A)   A dog, whether licensed, unlicensed or unvaccinated, that bites any
person shall be confined and quarantined in an authorized animal control
shelter, with the owner or responsible person liable for all fees and expenses.
Upon the request of and at the expense of the owner or responsible person, the
dog may be quarantined at a veterinary hospital, or at a location deemed
appropriate by the animal control officer, for a period of not less than ten
days.
   (B)   Whenever a dog bites any person, the incident shall be reported to the
animal control officer or Police Department immediately by any person having
direct knowledge. The officer shall be responsible for making reports of dog
bites and other dog-related incidents and procedures, including the disposal of
dog remains and the transportation of dogs to be scientifically examined.
   (C)   Any dog confined and quarantined pursuant to this chapter may be
destroyed prior to the termination of the minimum confinement period for
laboratory examination for rabies if:
      (1)   The dog shows clear clinical signs of rabies in accordance with
state law; and
      (2)   The owner or responsible person of the dog consents to its
destruction.
   (D)   Any dog found without a tag or microchip device identifying its owner
shall be deemed not owned.
   (E)   Dogs that expire or become ill during quarantine shall be examined by
medical authorities to scientifically determine causes for the condition or
death of the dog, and if a communicable disease is present. All associated fees
will be paid by the owner or responsible person.
   (F)   In any case, where the dog is determined to be diseased, the owner or
responsible person of the dog and the victim of the attack or bite shall be
immediately notified so medical treatment may be administered as necessary. In
cases where the victim is in or on a public place or lawfully in or on a
private place at the time of the attack or bite, all associated reasonably
necessary fees shall be paid by the owner or responsible person.
   (G)   The owner of any dog that has bitten a person shall deliver the dog to
the Chino Valley animal shelter at the request of the animal control officer
and/or police officer. If the owner refuses or does not bring the dog to the
Chino Valley animal shelter, and the dog is retrieved by the Police Department
or animal control officer, the owner shall pay the town a biting dog retrieval
fee, as established by the Town Council by separate resolution. As an
alternative to delivering the dog to the Chino Valley animal shelter, the owner
may timely take the dog to a licensed veterinarian clinic where it shall remain
for the quarantine period and, in which case, the biting dog retrieval fee
shall not apply.
(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017)
§ 90.12 EXCESSIVE DOG NOISE; NUISANCE BEHAVIOR.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a dog to:
      (1)   Cause a disturbance to the peace and enjoyment of any reasonable
person residing within town limits by making excessive dog noise. It shall be a
violation of this section if excessive dog noise occurs:
         (a)   For more than 15 minutes in any 20-minute period between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. - 8:00 a.m.; or
         (b)   For more than 30 minutes in any 40-minute period between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m.; or
         (c)   For any duration on at least half of the days of a ten-day
period, and such occurrences are attested to by complaints from persons
residing at two or more separate properties.
      (2)   Engage in nuisance behavior, including but not limited to damaging,
soiling, defiling, or defecating on private property other than the owner’s or
on public sidewalks, trails, or recreation areas, unless such waste is
immediately removed and properly disposed of by the owner or person
responsible.
   (B)   The dog’s owner or responsible person shall control the dog in a
manner that ensures it does not violate §
90.12(A).
   (C)   Any person desiring to pursue civil or criminal charges against any
person for a violation of §
90.12(B) shall complete a witness statement (provided by the animal control
officer or other Police Department representative) and assist in the
prosecution.
   (D)   It shall be a defense to a violation of §
90.12(A)(1) if the owner of the dog proves by a preponderance of the evidence
that the excessive dog noise resulted from being provoked by a person or
otherwise being incited to make noise.
(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017; Ord. 2023-926, passed 2-14-2023)
§ 90.13 UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS.
   It is unlawful for any person to interfere with an animal control officer or
peace officer in the performance of his or her duties.
(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017)
§ 90.14 KEEPING OF AGGRESSIVE DOGS.
   It is unlawful for an owner to have an aggressive dog within the town limits
without a certificate of registration issued under this section. This section
shall not apply to dogs used by law enforcement officials for police work.
   (A)   An animal control officer shall issue a certificate of registration to
the owner of such dog if the owner presents to the animal control officer
sufficient evidence of:
      (1)   A proper enclosure for the aggressive dog to confine the aggressive
dog, and the posting of the premises with a clearly visible warning sign that
there is an aggressive dog on the property.The sign shall include a warning
symbol that informs children of the presence of an aggressive dog.
      (2)   A surety bond issued by a surety insurer, in a form acceptable to
the Town Prosecutor, in a sum of no less than $100,000.
      (3)   A policy of liability insurance, such as homeowner's insurance,
issued by a qualified insurer, in the amount of at least $300,000, insuring the
owner for any personal injuries inflicted by the aggressive dog.
   (B)   It is unlawful for the owner of an aggressive dog to permit the dog to
be outside of the proper enclosure unless the dog is under control of the owner
or a responsible person and is restrained by a leash and muzzle.
   (C)   A dog shall not be declared to be aggressive if the bite or attack was
deemed accidental or with reasonable cause, or if the threat or damage was
sustained by a person who, at that time, was committing a willful trespass or
other criminal act upon the premises occupied by the owner of or person
responsible for the dog, or was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, or
has in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused or
assaulted the dog, or committing or attempting to commit a crime.
   (D)   Any aggressive dog shall be immediately confiscated by an animal
control officer if:
      (1)   The dog is not validly registered as required by subsection (A)
above.
      (2)   The owner does not secure the required liability insurance
coverage.
      (3)   The dog is not maintained in the proper enclosure.
      (4)   The dog is outside the dwelling of the owner, or outside of the
proper enclosure and not under control of the owner or responsible person, in
which case, the owner or responsible person shall be guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor.
      (5)   The dog was previously found to be an aggressive dog under this
chapter and attacks or bites a person or another domestic dog. In this event,
the owner or responsible person shall reasonably act to protect the public or
other dogs. In addition, the aggressive dog shall be placed in quarantine for
the proper length of time, and thereafter, upon order of the court, shall be
destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner.
      (6)   The dog aggressively attacks and causes severe injury or death of
any human, regardless of whether the dog has previously been declared
potentially dangerous, dangerous, or aggressive. In addition, the dog shall
immediately be placed in quarantine for the proper length of time, and
thereafter, upon order of the court, shall be destroyed in an expeditious and
humane manner. The owner or responsible person shall be guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor.
   (E)   Notwithstanding the requirements set forth in divisions (A)(1) through
(A)(3) above, the town shall not be liable for the owner's failure to secure
and maintain a proper enclosure, a surety bond, or a policy of liability
insurance.
   (F)   For purposes of this section, “proper enclosure” shall mean the secure
confinement, either indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or
structure with secure sides, top, and floor, designed to prevent the dog from
escaping and the entry of young children. The dog’s head shall not be able to
protrude out of the enclosure. The enclosure shall protect the dog from the
elements and allow for the provision of fresh food and water and an exercise
area in order to maintain the dog in good health.
(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.15 ADEQUATE EXERCISE SPACE FOR DOGS.
   (A)   Every enclosure for a dog shall be constructed in a manner to minimize
the risk of injury to the dog and shall encompass sufficient useable space to
keep the dog in good condition.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or responsible person of a dog,
whether present or not, to intentionally, knowingly or recklessly secure a dog
by means of a tie-out, including but not limited to, chains, leashes, ropes,
wire or cable attached to a swivel, pulley system or fixed point that does
either of the following:
      (1)   Prevents or results in denying the dog access to water or shelter;
      (2)   Inflicts injury or death upon the dog; or
      (3)   Results in or facilitates injury or death to the dog.
(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017)
§ 90.16 ANIMAL CRUELTY.
   (A)   A person commits cruelty to animals if the person does any of the
following:
      (1)   Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly subjects any animal under
the person’s custody or control to cruel neglect or abandonment.
      (2)   Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly fails to provide medical
attention necessary to prevent protracted suffering to any animal under the
person’s custody or control.
      (3)   Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly inflicts unnecessary
physical injury to any animal.
      (4)   Recklessly subjects any animal to cruel mistreatment.
      (5)   Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly kills any animal under the
custody or control of another person without either legal privilege or consent
of the owner.
      (6)   Recklessly interferes with, kills or harms a working or service
animal without either legal privilege or consent of the owner.
      (7)   Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly leaves an animal unattended
and confined in a motor vehicle and physical injury to or death of the animal
is likely to result.
      (8)   Intentionally or knowingly subjects any dog under the person’s
custody or control to cruel neglect or abandonment which results in serious
physical injury to the animal.
      (9)   Intentionally or knowingly subjects any animal to cruel
mistreatment.
      (10)   Intentionally or knowingly interferes with, kills or harms a
working or service animal without either legal privilege or consent of the
owner.
      (11)   Intentionally or knowingly allows any dog that is under the
person’s custody or control to interfere with, kill or cause physical injury to
a service animal.
      (12)   Recklessly allows any dog that is under the person’s custody or
control to interfere with, kill or cause physical injury to a service animal.
      (13)   Intentionally or knowingly obtains or exerts unauthorized control
over a service animal with the intent to deprive the service animal handler of
the service animal.
   (B)   It is a defense to subsection (A) of this section if:
      (1)   Any person exposes poison to be taken by a dog that has killed or
wounded livestock or poison to be taken by predatory animals on premises owned,
leased or controlled by the person for the purpose of protecting the person or
the person’s livestock or poultry, the treated property is kept posted by the
person who authorized or performed the treatment until the poison has been
removed and the poison is removed by the person exposing the poison after the
threat to the person or the person’s livestock or poultry has ceased to exist.
The posting required shall provide adequate warning to persons who enter the
property by the point or points of normal entry. The warning notice that is
posted shall be readable at a distance of fifty feet, shall contain a poison
statement and symbol, and shall state the word “danger” or “warning”.
      (2)   Any person uses poison in and immediately around buildings owned,
leased or controlled by the person for the purpose of controlling wild and
domestic rodents as otherwise allowed by the laws of the state, excluding any
fur-bearing animals as defined in A.R.S. § 17-101.
   (C)   The section does not prohibit or restrict:
      (1)   The taking of wildlife or other activities permitted by or pursuant
to A.R.S. Title 17.
      (2)   Activities permitted by or pursuant to A.R.S. Title 3.
      (3)   Activities regulated by the Arizona Game and Fish Department or the
Arizona Department of Agriculture.
   (D)   A peace officer, animal control officer or animal control deputy may
use reasonable force to open a vehicle to rescue an animal if the animal is
left in the vehicle as prescribed in subsection (A)(7) of this section.
(Ord. 17-834, passed 10-24-2017)
§ 90.99 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in §
10.99 of this Code.
   (B)   Any person convicted of violating any provisions of §§
90.03,
90.04,
90.08,
90.10,
90.13 or
90.15 shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to
exceed $500, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days, or by any
combination of such fine and imprisonment.
   (C)   Any person convicted of violating any provision of §§
90.05 or
90.12(B) that does not involve biting or attacking shall be guilty of a civil
offense punishable as set forth in §
10.99 of this Code and subject to the habitual offender provisions set forth in
§
10.99(D).
   (D)   Any person convicted of violating any provision of §
90.05 that involves biting or attacking shall be guilty of a Class 3
misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in subsection (B) of this section.
   (E)   Any fine, fee or monetary restitution amount assessed for loss of
property due to the unlawful actions of a dog may be ordered by the court at
the time of sentencing if payment was not received prior to sentencing.
(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017; Ord. 2023-926, passed 2-14-2023)
CHAPTER 91: [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 92: PARKS AND RECREATION; LIBRARY
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Compliance with rules and regulations
   
92.03   Vandalism
   
92.04   Fires
   
92.05   Vehicles, speed limits and parking
   
92.06   Rubbish and litter
   
92.07   Pets
   
92.08   Weapons
   
92.09   Fireworks and explosives
   
92.10   Advertising and commercial use
   
92.11   Soliciting
   
92.12   Noise and nuisance
   
92.13   Alcoholic beverages
Park Operating Policy
   
92.30   Hours
   
92.31   Restricted areas
   
92.32   Special events
   
92.33   Use of facilities; payment
   
92.34   Fees
Library Regulations
   
92.45   Purpose
   
92.46   Library Advisory Board
   
92.47   Fines and charges
   
92.48   General library rules
   
92.49   Story hour rules
 
   
92.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONCESSION. A grant by the department for the use of land or property for
the specific purpose of providing services, facilities or improvements for the
public.
   DEPARTMENT. The Town of Chino Valley.
   DIRECTOR. The authorized official of the town.
   PARK OFFICER. Any town law enforcement officer or deputy sheriff with the
authority and power of a peace officer.
   PERSON. Any individual or individuals, corporations, firms, co-partnerships,
clubs and all associations or combinations thereof.
(2001 Code, § 11-1-1)
§ 92.02 COMPLIANCE WITH RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   Permission to enter, occupy, use or otherwise utilize any facility or
roadway within the boundaries of any park or recreation area under control of
the town shall be conditioned upon compliance with all laws, rules, regulations
and orders of the town governing such areas, and any person violating such
laws, rules, regulations and orders will be required to leave the park or
recreation facility or any portion thereof.
(2001 Code, § 11-1-2)
§ 92.03 VANDALISM.
   No person shall disturb, deface, injure, destroy or remove any building,
sign, marker, facility or any other structure, tree, shrub or any object of
significance, nor shall any person leave any park structure or facility in an
unclean or unsanitary condition.
(2001 Code, § 11-1-3) Penalty, see
§ 92.99
§ 92.04 FIRES.
   No person shall build, ignite or maintain any fire of any kind or character,
for any purpose whatsoever, in or upon property within the boundaries of the
parks and recreation areas except by the authority of the Director or his or
her agent.
(2001 Code, § 11-1-4) Penalty, see
§ 92.99
§ 92.05 VEHICLES, SPEED LIMITS AND PARKING.
   (A)   Motorized vehicles, including motorcycles and off-road vehicles, shall
be operated only on roadways, except as otherwise provided and posted in
certain areas; and in all cases, the operator shall comply with the Arizona
Motor Vehicle Code, as provided under A.R.S. Title 28, while within the
boundaries of any town parks and recreation areas. The Director may further
restrict and post certain areas within the parks and recreation areas to
protect life and property.
   (B)   Parking in any non-designated area or on the roadway is prohibited
unless posted for parking. Vehicles parked in any unauthorized parking zone or
vehicles parking in such a manner as to pose a danger to others may be removed
at owner’s expense.
(2001 Code, § 11-1-5)
§ 92.06 RUBBISH AND LITTER.
   (A)   All garbage, rubbish, cans, bottles, broken glass and other litter
shall be disposed of in receptacles designated for such purposes, or carried
away when leaving an area.
   (B)   Using public park refuse containers to dispose of household or
commercial garbage brought as such from private property is prohibited.
(2001 Code, § 11-1-6) Penalty, see
§ 92.99
Cross-reference:
   Littering provisions, see §§
91.01 through
91.15
§ 92.07 PETS.
   (A)   Dogs, cats and other domestic pets shall be kept under physical
restraint or on a leash not longer than 6 feet in length while within the
boundaries of the parks and recreation areas. In the interest of public health
and safety, the Director may designate certain areas as closed to all pets.
   (B)   At no time will dogs or other pets, other than seeing eye dogs, be
allowed within the confines of public park buildings.
(2001 Code, § 11-1-7) Penalty, see
§ 92.99
§ 92.08 WEAPONS.
   With the exception of legally constituted peace officers and security
officers employed by concessionaires and directly responsible to the
concessionaire while in the performance of their duties, no person shall
possess any firearm, air or gas operated weapon, or bow and arrow within the
boundaries of the parks and recreation areas with the mechanism loaded or in
such a condition that it is capable of immediately injuring or killing any
person or animal, or damaging or destroying any public or private property.
(2001 Code, § 11-1-8)
§ 92.09 FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES.
   (A)   No person shall possess fireworks, explosives or devices for the use
of any kind within the boundaries of the parks and recreation areas except
under special permit for fireworks display issued by the Director or his or her
agent.
   (B)   All municipal, county, state and federal ordinances, rules,
regulations and acts shall be complied with.
(2001 Code, § 11-1-9) Penalty, see
§ 92.99
§ 92.10 ADVERTISING AND COMMERCIAL USE.
   (A)   No person shall post, place or erect any signs or distribute any
advertising material within the boundaries of the parks and recreation areas
for any purpose without a permit issued by the Director or his or her agent.
   (B)   However, this regulation does not bar from entry into the parks and
recreation areas a commercially marked vehicle operated by a visitor or person
in service to the parks and recreation department, concessionaire or other
person responding to an emergency situation.
(2001 Code, § 11-1-10) Penalty, see
§ 92.99
§ 92.11 SOLICITING.
   No person shall solicit funds or donations, sell or offer for sale any food,
goods, wares, merchandise or liquids or distribute circulars within the
boundaries of the parks and recreation areas except by written concession
granted by the Director or his or her agent.
(2001 Code, § 11-1-11) Penalty, see
§ 92.99
§ 92.12 NOISE AND NUISANCE.
   No person shall cause or permit any loud noise or sound which creates a
nuisance or use or cause to be used an amplifier or loudspeaker system without
a special permit from the Director or his or her agent.
(2001 Code, § 11-1-12) Penalty, see
§ 92.99
§ 92.13 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   No person shall sell, distribute or otherwise dispose of an alcoholic
beverage within the parks and recreation areas without the prior written
consent of the Director or his or her agent.
(2001 Code, § 11-1-13) Penalty, see
§ 92.99
PARK OPERATING POLICY
§ 92.30 HOURS.
   The opening and closing time for park or recreational facilities or any
portion thereof, as established by the Director and posted at the established
entrances thereto, shall be complied with.
(2001 Code, § 11-2-1)
§ 92.31 RESTRICTED AREAS.
   The entry, use or occupancy in any restricted zone, which has been posted or
otherwise designated as being closed to entry, use or occupancy by the Director
or his or her staff, is prohibited.
(2001 Code, § 11-2-2)
§ 92.32 SPECIAL EVENTS.
   Sports events, pageants, reenactments, regattas, entertainments, public
assemblies, demonstrations and the like, characterized as public spectator
attractions, are prohibited unless given written permission or scheduled by the
Director or his or her agent. The permits may be issued only after finding that
the issuance of such permit will not be inconsistent with the purposes for
which the area is established and maintained and will cause the minimum
possible interference with use of the area by the general public. The permit
may contain such reasonable conditions and restrictions as to duration and area
occupied as are necessary for protection of the area and public use thereof.
(2001 Code, § 11-2-3)
§ 92.33 USE OF FACILITIES; PAYMENT.
   No person shall use or occupy facilities within the park and recreational
boundaries for the use of which a fee has been lawfully established and posted
by the Department unless the fee has been paid.
(2001 Code, § 11-2-4)
§ 92.34 FEES.
   The Council may establish, by resolution, fees for the utilization of all
park and recreation facilities.
(2001 Code, § 11-2-5)
LIBRARY REGULATIONS
§ 92.45 PURPOSE.
   The town currently operates a library for the use and enjoyment of the
community and use of the Chino Valley Public Library is a privilege available
to all residents. The town encourages library patrons to comply with library
rules and regulations to assure that all citizens of Chino Valley have equal
access to the resources of the library.
(2001 Code, § 11-3-1) (Am. Ord. 491, passed - -2002)
§ 92.46 LIBRARY ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   Membership. The Library Advisory Board of the Chino Valley Public
Library shall consist of 6 members appointed by the Council for staggered terms
of 5 years as permitted by A.R.S. § 9-414 and as established by Res. 363.
   (B)   Meetings.
      (1)   The regular meeting of the Library Advisory Board shall be held on
the first Tuesday of each month, as required by statute, and at such place and
at such other times as the board from time to time may appoint.
      (2)   Special meetings may be called by the president or at the request
of 3 members at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting.
      (3)   All meetings of the Library Advisory Board shall be held in
accordance with the open meeting law, A.R.S. §§ 38-431 et seq.
      (4)   Robert's Rules of Order, last revised edition, shall govern the
parliamentary procedure of the board, generally following procedures set for
small boards and adhering to the provisions of the open meetings act summary as
issued by the Arizona Attorney General’s Office.
   (C)   Officers, committees and the like.
      (1)   Officers of the Board shall be chosen at the regular July meeting
of the Board and shall be as follows: President, Vice-President and Secretary.
      (2)   The officers shall be elected by ballot at the July meeting for a
term of 1 year. Vacancies occurring during the year shall be filled by ballot
at the next regular meeting of the Board after the vacancy occurs.
      (3)   The President shall preside at all meetings, appoint all
committees, authorize calls for any special meetings and generally perform the
duties of a presiding officer.
      (4)   The Vice-President shall preside in the absence of the president.
      (5)   The Secretary shall keep, or cause to be kept, a true and accurate
record of all proceedings of the Board meetings. The Secretary shall provide
copies of the minutes prior to the Board meeting to all Board members, Library
Director and the permanent public record at the town hall. Preparation of the
minutes and agenda will occur in a timely manner as prescribed in the
applicable state statutes.
   (D)   Committees, liaisons, representatives and delegates. The Library
Advisory Board may by majority vote appoint from time to time individuals to
serve on committees and to act as liaisons, representatives and delegates of
the Board with such powers and duties as authorized by the Board. The appointed
individuals shall make progress reports to the Library Advisory Board, with a
final report to be made at the end of a particular assignment or project, at
which time the appointment will cease.
   (E)   Quorum.
      (1)   A quorum for the transaction of Library Board business shall
consist of a simple majority of the Board, which is 3 out of 5 members.
      (2)   If a quorum is not present within 15 minutes of the posted set
time, the meeting shall be canceled.
   (F)   Order of business.  The secretary, at the direction of the President
and with the consultation of the Library Director, shall prepare an agenda for
each meeting of the Library Board. All posting of agendas shall be in
compliance with applicable state statutes.
   (G)   Minutes of the meeting. The Secretary shall provide copies of the
minutes prior to the Board meeting to all Board members, the Library Director
and for the permanent public record at town hall.
   (H)   Amendment of by-laws. The Library Advisory Board may, at any regular
meeting and by majority vote, recommend to the Town Council that these by-laws
be further amended by resolution of Council.
   (I)   Absenteeism. Council shall remove from office any Board member who
misses 3 consecutive Board meetings or 5 board meetings in a 12-month period,
unless the absences were excused by the president of the Board.
   (J)   Resignations.
      (1)   Resignation of a Board member shall be submitted in writing to the
Mayor with a copy to the President of the Board stating the effective date of
the resignation.
      (2)   A Town Council appointed replacement to a vacated Board position
shall complete the term of the retired member.
(2001 Code, § 11-3-2) (Am. Ord. 491, passed - -2002)
§ 92.47 FINES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Library materials not returned within a period of time as adopted by
Council resolution shall accrue a fine as adopted by Council resolution, per
day per item up to a maximum amount as adopted by Council resolution.
   (B)   Patrons may renew their library materials over the phone or on the
Chino Valley Public Library web site. Renewal of library materials does not
exempt the patron from fines that have occurred prior to renewal. There are no
renewals for items on hold for another library patron. Library items may be
renewed up to a maximum number of times as adopted by Council resolution.
   (D)   Interlibrary loan materials borrowed from Yavapai Library Network
libraries shall accrue fees reflective of the rules and regulations of the
lending library.
   (E)   Interlibrary loan materials borrowed from Yavapai Library Network
libraries shall accrue a service charge as set by resolution per item if not
picked up by the patron within 7 days of notice availability.
   (F)   Interlibrary loan materials borrowed from outside the Yavapai Library
Network shall accrue a service charge as adopted by resolution per item if not
picked up by the patron within a time period as adopted by Council resolution.
   (G)   In addition to the above, the library shall collect any or all fees
that are applicable and these fees shall be in addition to the fines and fees
specified above.
(2001 Code, § 11-3-3) (Am. Ord. 491, passed - -2002)
§ 92.48 GENERAL LIBRARY RULES.
   (A)   Patrons must have a valid Yavapai Library Network card to check out
library materials and to use the internet. A parent or legal guardian signature
is required for all applicants under the age of 18.
   (B)   A current patron or prospective patron of the Chino Valley Public
Library who has a cumulative fine as adopted by resolution owing to the Chino
Valley Public Library or any library affiliates of the Yavapai Library Network
shall have borrowing privileges suspended or denied until the patron has
satisfied the delinquency or makes a satisfactory arrangement to satisfy the
delinquency.
   (C)   The names of Chino Valley Public Library patrons who are reported for
collection, turned over to the police, Town Prosecutor, County Attorney or
courts for criminal action, or who move from the area with library materials
without giving a forwarding address, shall be reported to all member libraries
in the Yavapai Library Network, of which the Chino Valley Public Library is a
member.
   (D)   Access to the internet is provided to library patrons on public access
computers free of charge.
      (1)   The internet is a global information network, which is not
regulated by any local, state, federal or international authority. Some
materials found on the internet may contain information that is controversial,
offensive, erroneous or illegal. The Chino Valley Public Library disclaims any
warranty of the accuracy, timeliness, authoritativeness or usefulness of the
materials, and shall have no liability for any direct, indirect, or
consequential damages related to the use of these materials. Access to, or use
of the internet by minors under the age of 18, is solely the responsibility of
the parent or legal guardian.
      (2)   (a)   Users must present a valid Yavapai Library Network library
card.
         (b)   All computer workstations are available for use on a sign up
basis. Reservation times will be held for only 10 minutes. The reservation will
be forfeited thereafter.
         (c)   Computer workstations are available for walk-ins if there are no
reservations at that time.
         (d)   Maximum use time of the public computer workstations is 1 hour
per day.
         (e)   The Chino Valley Public Library complies with the Children’s
Internet Protection Act (CIPA), A.R.S. § 34-502, regarding computer access by
minors. All public computer workstations with internet access are filtered to
block pornography. Even with filtering, the town encourages parental guidance
in the use of all library resources. Parents or legal guardians may block all
internet availability for their child through an adjustment of the child’s
library card record.
         (f)   Material may be printed at a cost as adopted by Council
resolution.
         (g)   In accordance with U.S. law (U.S.C. Title 17), users shall not
reproduce or distribute copyrighted materials.
         (h)   Users are prohibited from accessing and displaying explicit
sexual material pursuant to A.R.S. § 13-3507.
         (i)   Users are prohibited from exhibiting any material picturing
minors engaged in harmful conduct pursuant to A.R.S. § 13-3508.
         (j)   Users are prohibited from furnishing obscene or harmful items to
minors pursuant to A.R.S. § 13-3506.
         (k)   Users are prohibited from committing telecommunications fraud
pursuant to A.R.S. § 13-3707.
         (l)   Users are prohibited from committing computer fraud pursuant to
A.R.S. § 13-2316.
         (m)   Users are prohibited from deleting or modifying any computer
workstation settings or controls.
         (n)   Patrons having library fines exceeding an amount as set by
Council resolution shall be denied use of library public computer workstations.
      (3)   Failure of any library user to act in an ethical and legal manner,
or to adhere to the conditions of use set forth above, may result in expulsion
from the library, loss of library privileges, and/or prosecution in a court of
law. A library shall not allow disclosure of any record or other information
that identifies a user of library services.
(A.R.S. § 41-1354)
   (E)   The following actions are prohibited at the Chino Valley Public
Library:
      (1)   Disorderly conduct, fighting or challenging to fight or using
obscene or abusive acts and/or language likely to provoke violence or which
reasonably can be expected to disturb library patrons;
      (2)   Indecent exposure and/or not wearing shirt or shoes;
      (3)   Bringing bicycles, motorbikes, scooters, skateboards, rollerblades,
bedrolls, suitcases, blankets, shopping carts and similar articles into the
library;
      (4)   Smoking or other uses of tobacco products;
      (5)   Possessing or consuming alcohol or illegal drugs or being under the
influence of alcohol or illegal drugs;
      (6)   Possessing firearms, guns or ammunition of any nature;
      (7)   Sleeping in the library, or eating or drinking in the library other
than in areas expressly reserved for such purpose;
      (8)   Leaving a child under 12 years of age unattended by a responsible
adult 18 years or older in any section of the library, (such as by being out of
eyesight or earshot or out of physical control of the adult), including time
that the adult is using the internet;
      (9)   Vandalism or defacing library materials or property, whether the
act occurs within or without the Chino Valley Public Library;
      (10)   Using audio or video equipment (such as radios, tape players, cds,
tvs or cell phones) in a manner which can reasonably be expected to disturb
other library patrons;
      (11)   Bringing animals or pets into the library except those necessary
to assist physically challenged individuals;
      (12)   Public use of library telephones and fax machine, except in an
emergency;
      (13)   Putting feet or legs on library furniture and/or defacing library
furniture;
      (14)   Selling and/or soliciting for money or other consideration, any
goods or services;
      (15)   Distributing or posting printed materials or materials that have
not been approved by the library staff. Only non-profit materials may be
posted;
      (16)   All other acts which can reasonably be expected to disrupt or
disturb library patrons and all violations of federal, state or local laws.
(2001 code, § 11-3-4) (Am. Ord. 491, passed - -2002)
§ 92.49 STORY HOUR RULES.
   (A)   The Library is happy to provide various story hours for the enjoyment
of the children in this community.
   (B)   In order to continue to provide story hours, certain rules must be
followed for the safety and enjoyment of the children enrolled in story hour
activities as well as others using the library during story hour presentations.
      (1)   Children must be between the ages specified in the story hour
advertisements or informational sheets and brochures. Story hours are offered
for toddlers 18 months old through 2 years and pre-schoolers 3 to 6 years.
      (2)   Small children not in the story hour presentation must be under the
immediate supervision of a parent or guardian who is at least 18 years of age.
      (3)   Children who cry or are otherwise disruptive shall be taken from
the library environment. Loud or disruptive children infringe upon the rights
of others using the library facility who need a semi- quiet environment for
reading or study.
      (4)   Children cannot be permitted to crawl or run in the library. The
library environment does not present a place where the above-mentioned
activities can be tolerated. Small children shall remain in strollers or within
the guardian's arms for their protection as well as for the protection of other
library users and workers.
(2001 Code, § 11-3-5) (Am. Ord. 491, passed - -2002)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to
§ 10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Violations of these rules are civil in nature and can result in
the loss of library privileges, including borrowing privileges, computer access
and access to library buildings.
      (2)   Library staff members are authorized to suspend or revoke library
privileges for any violation of these rules. Appeals may be made to the Library
Director, whose decision is final. Enforcement discretion shall be guided by
the severity and frequency of the violation. Enforcement decisions shall be
made to advance the library purposes set forth in §§
92.45 et seq.
      (3)   The penalties set forth in these rules are not exclusive. Patrons
violating these rules may also be subject to civil or criminal sanctions under
other ordinances of law.
(2001 Code, § 11-3-6) (Am. Ord. 491, passed - -2002)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
110.   GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
         
111.   PARK AND SWAP MEETS
         
112.   TRANSIENT MERCHANTS; PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
         
113.   FESTIVALS
         
114.   CABLE TELEVISION
         
115.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
         
116.   REGULATION OF THE SALE OF PRODUCTS CONTAINING PSEUDOEPHEDRINE
         
117.   RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
Section
   
110.01   Purpose
   
110.02   Definitions
   
110.03   License required
   
110.04   Exemptions
   
110.05   Issuance of license
   
110.06   Payment of business license fees
   
110.07   Business license fees
   
110.08   Exhibition of license required; display street address
   
110.09   License not transferrable
   
110.10   Enforcement
   
110.11   Refusal to renew; revocation or suspension of license
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Chino Valley business license is to regulate business
activity which occurs or is transacted within the Chino Valley town limits in
order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people of the town and
to generate revenue for the town. In no case shall the location of a permanent
business be determinative of whether this chapter shall apply. All businesses
of any kind, including businesses located outside the town limits of Chino
Valley, shall obtain a business license if such person, firm, corporation or
association engages in any business activity within the Chino Valley town
limits. Business activity which involves rental of tangible personal property
in Chino Valley, for example, requires a business license.
(2001 Code, § 8-1-1)
§ 110.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUCTION. A sale in which items are sold 1 by 1, each going to the last and
highest of a series of competing bidders.
   AUCTION HOUSE. A structure in which a regularly scheduled auction is held.
   BUSINESS ACTIVITY. Any activity or act, personal or corporate, engaged in or
caused to be engaged in with the object of gain, benefit or advantage, either
directly or indirectly, but not casual activities or sales.
   CALLING. One’s occupation, profession or trade.
   CASUAL SALES. One made by a person not engaged in an activity taxable under
the state sales tax statutes, provided that the seller does not make a practice
of making sales of such volume or frequency as to indicate that the seller is a
dealer.
   CONTRACTING. Engaging in business as a contractor.
   DELIVERY. Constitutes making deliveries either on a wholesale or retail
basis.
   FRATERNAL ORDER. A society of members banded together for mutual benefit or
for work toward a common goal for the benefit of others.
   HOME OCCUPATION. A vocation, trade or profession which is conducted entirely
within the home by a member or members of the family. It should not alter the
residential character of the surrounding neighborhood nor should it infringe on
the rights of nearby residents to enjoy their property.
   HOTEL. Any public or private hotel, inn, hostelry, tourist home or house,
motel, rooming house, apartment house, trailer or lodging place, wherein the
owner and operator thereof, for compensation, furnishes lodging to any
transient, except foster homes, rest homes, sheltered care homes, nursing homes
or hospitals.
   LODGING and LODGING SPACE. The use or possession, or the right to the use or
possession, of any room or apartment in a hotel, or the right to the use or
possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations
accompanying the use and possession of the room, including storage or parking
space for the property of a transient.
   MOBILE MERCHANT. A business conducted from a structure that is not
permanently affixed to the ground, but is capable of being moved from 1
location to another. A MERCHANT must be committed to do business in the town
for at least 1 year, evidenced by presenting a copy of a lease(s) from a
landowner(s).
   NOTICE. A written instrument served by the town as follows, with time
commencing from the date of mailing, serving, filing or recording:
      (1)   By registered or certified mail to the last known residential or
business address of the person to whom it is required to be given;
      (2)   By personal service upon the person or the person’s lawful
representative;
      (3)   By filing or recording with a clerk of the Superior Court or a
county recorder;
      (4)   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the
community; or
      (5)   By serving upon a statutory agent of the person.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, broker, the federal
government, this state or any political subdivision or agency of this state. A
subsidiary corporation shall be considered a separate person from its parent
corporation for purposes of licensing.
   PROFESSION. An occupation which requires advanced learning acquired by a
prolonged course of specialized intellectual instruction or which involves
original or creative work depending primarily on invention, imagination or
talent, including, but not limited to, accountants, architects, artists,
attorneys, dentists, doctors, medical technicians, nurses, engineers,
surveyors, teachers and veterinarians.
   REAL PROPERTY RENTAL BUSINESS. A person who has more than 2 apartment units,
houses, trailer spaces or other residential or lodging spaces available for
rent or lease is deemed to be in the real property rental business and must
comply with all business license requirements. A person who has 1 or more units
of commercial rental property or 1 or more units of commercial rental property
plus 1 or more residential or lodging spaces for rent or lease or available for
rent or lease is deemed to be in the real property rental business and must
comply with all business license requirements.
   RETAILER. A person engaged in the business of making sales at retail.
(2001 Code, § 8-1-2)
§ 110.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent or as a
member of any firm or partnership or association or for any corporation, to
commence, practice, transact or carry on for profit or gain any trade, calling,
profession, occupation, game, amusement or other business activity within the
town limits without first having procured a license from the town to do so and
without complying with all regulations of the trade, calling, profession,
occupation, game, amusement or business as required by law. No license shall be
issued without proof by the applicant of the compliance and verification by the
Town Clerk that no violation of the town’s zoning regulations will occur by
such issuance.
   (B)   A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or
separate business location and for each trade, calling, profession, occupation
or business activity; provided, however, that when more than 1 trade, calling,
profession, occupation or business is carried on, transacted or practiced by
the same person, corporation or partnership at 1 fixed place of business, only
1 license shall be required and the charge for the license shall be the highest
charge applicable to any of the activities, and all activities shall be listed
on the license issued. When more than 1 trade, calling, profession, occupation
or business is carried on, transacted or practiced by the same person,
corporation or partnership without any fixed place of business, a separate
license shall be required and a separate charge shall be paid for each activity
for which a license is required by this chapter. Each license shall authorize
only the conduct of the trade, calling, profession, occupation or business
activity described in the license and only at the location or place of business
indicated on the license.
   (C)   Any person that engages in any business activity without any fixed
place of business, whether a resident of the town or not, shall obtain either a
transient merchant license, pursuant to §§
112.01 et seq., or a peddler’s license, pursuant to §§
112.20 et seq., whichever is applicable.
   (D)   Concerning real property rentals, when a person rents more than 2
residential real property rentals or 1 or more units of commercial rental
property or 1 commercial rental property and 1 or more residential rentals, a
business license is required.
   (E)   A license shall be obtained for any business activity by a person
whose business is located outside of the Chino Valley corporate limits when the
business causes business activity within the town limits of Chino Valley.
   (F)   A license obtained under this chapter is not evidence or proof that
the licensee has complied with the provisions of this chapter or other
provisions of the town code, nor shall the granting of a license limit the
prosecution by the town of any violations of the law.
   (G)   A mobile merchant shall be committed to do business from the same
location or locations, as specified on the business license for at least 1 year
and must provide a copy of written lease(s) from a landowner(s). Restroom and
sanitation facilities must be guaranteed for the employees and customers. All
zoning codes, setback regulations, building and electrical codes and fire codes
must be followed. A mobile food merchant must also follow all Health Department
regulations and obtain any and all applicable licenses and certificates.
(2001 Code, § 8-1-3)
§ 110.04 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The terms of this chapter do not apply to the acts of persons selling
personal property at wholesale to dealers nor to the acts of merchants or their
employees in delivering goods for resale or wholesale in the regular course of
business nor to business activity involving casual sales, as defined herein and
by A.A.C. R15-5-1812 as amended hereafter. Nothing contained in this chapter
shall apply to any sale required by statute or by order of any court.
   (B)   The exemptions to the license requirements of this chapter shall also
include:
      (1)   Nonprofit educational institutions, fraternal orders, service clubs
and religious organizations;
      (2)   A permanent resident wishing to sell any form of agricultural
products produced or raised by the resident, including livestock;
      (3)   Fund raising projects of nonprofit and religious organizations, not
conducted on a regular basis;
      (4)   Persons under the age of 18 years engaged in part time or seasonal
employment while still attending school full time;
      (5)   Any business activity, such as utility services, which has been
granted a franchise by the town following vote of approval by the citizens; and
      (6)   All exemptions granted pursuant to the Arizona Revised Statutes.
(2001 Code, § 8-1-4)
§ 110.05 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   The procedure for the issuance of a business license shall be as follows:
   (A)   Every person shall submit an application for a business license to the
Town Clerk at least 15 days prior to commencement of any business activity
within town limits for profit or gain. The applicant shall complete an
application for business license on a form provided by the Town Clerk. It shall
be the responsibility of the applicant to provide all the information required.
Each partner of a partnership shall be separately listed on the form.
   (B)   At such time as an applicant submits the application for business
license, duly sworn to by the applicant and deemed complete by the Town Clerk,
and the applicant has paid the required license fees and processing fees as set
forth in §
110.07 of this code, the Town Clerk shall accept and date the application.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk upon receipt of a properly
completed application for a business license and verification of the data
contained thereon, to prepare and issue a license under this chapter for every
person, corporation or partnership required to pay a license fee hereunder and
to state in each license the amount charged for the same, the period of time
covered thereby, the name of the person, corporation or partnership for whom
issued and the trade, calling, profession, occupation or business licensed and
the location or place of business where the trade, calling, profession,
occupation or business is to be carried on, transacted or practiced.
   (D)   In no case, shall any mistake made by the Town Clerk in issuing any
license or collecting the amount of fee for any license or the amount actually
due from any person required to pay for a license as provided herein, prevent,
prejudice or stop the town from collecting the correct amount of fee or charge
for any license or the amount actually due from any person required to pay for
a license as provided herein, or revoking any license erroneously issued and
refunding the fee collected.
   (E)   No greater or lesser amount of money shall be charged or received by
the Town Clerk for any license than is provided for in this chapter, and no
license shall be issued for any period of time other than as provided herein.
   (F)   All charges for a license required by this chapter shall be paid in
advance and in lawful money of the United States of America at the Office of
the Clerk.
   (G)   The Town Clerk or designee shall be inspector of licenses and may
appoint, with approval of the Manager, the assistant inspectors as may be
required to enforce these regulations.
   (H)   Each assistant inspector of licenses, immediately upon the facts
coming to his or her knowledge, shall report to the Town Clerk the name of any
person, corporation or partnership carrying on, transacting or practicing any
trade, calling, profession or business within the town without first having
obtained a license as required by this chapter.
   (I)   The inspector of licenses and the assistant inspectors, each in the
discharge and performance of his or her duties, shall have and exercise the
following powers:
      (1)   To file a complaint for any violation of the provisions of this
chapter with the Town Magistrate; and
      (2)   To enter, free of charge and at any reasonable time, any place of
business for which a license is required by this chapter and to demand
exhibition of the license for the current period of time from any person,
corporation or partnership engaged in carrying on, transacting or practicing
any trade, calling, profession, occupation or business at the place of business
and, if the person, corporation or partnership shall fail then and there to
exhibit the license, the person, corporation or partnership shall be liable to
the penalties provided for violation of this chapter.
   (J)   When the charge for any license required hereunder shall remain unpaid
for 5 days from and after the due date, the charge shall be delinquent and the
Town Clerk, on the day upon which said charge becomes delinquent, shall add
thereto an amount equal to 100% of the charge as a penalty and no receipt or
license shall be issued thereafter by the Town Clerk until the charge and
penalty shall be paid in full.
   (K)   Each business license issued by the Town Clerk shall state the
following: the term of the license; the name of the person, firm, corporation,
association, partnership or business entity for whom the license is issued; the
trade, calling, profession, occupation or business activity being licensed and
the location or place of business or permanent address where said trade,
calling, profession, occupation or business is carried on.
      (1)   Each business license shall be issued for a 12 month term.
      (2)   The licensee shall submit a new application in the event of any
change to the information supplied on the original application and shall pay
any additional fees as required in §
110.06.
      (3)   A license may be renewed for additional 12 month terms, pursuant to
procedures established by the Town Clerk and in accordance with all
requirements of this chapter.
(2001 Code, § 8-1-5)
§ 110.06 PAYMENT OF BUSINESS LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   Payment of fees shall be made when due to the Town Clerk in legal
currency of the United States and at the rates set forth in
§ 110.07.
   (B)   An applicant for a license for a new business shall pay, in addition
to the general business license fee, a processing fee and, if additional
inspections are required, an inspection fee to be calculated as a per hour
charge.
      (1)   In the event no license is issued, the general business license fee
shall be returned to the applicant; however, the processing fee and any
inspection fees shall not be returned.
      (2)   In the event an incorrect fee is assessed, the Town Clerk shall
collect the proper fee and refund to the applicant any overage collected.
      (3)   In the event that an inspection fee is charged, the Town Clerk
shall provide to the applicant an accounting of the fees incurred.
   (C)   In the event any information regarding a business license changes, an
additional processing fee shall be assessed. If the location of the business
changes, additional processing and, if necessary, inspection fees shall be
assessed.
   (D)   License renewal fees provided for in this chapter shall be due and
payable on or before the last day of the month of the term of the current
license.
   (E)   If a license is issued erroneously, the license shall be revoked and
the general license fee shall be refunded to the applicant but not the
processing or inspection fees.
   (F)   There shall be no refunds once a business license has been issued.
(2001 Code, § 8-1-6)
§ 110.07 BUSINESS LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   For initial business licenses, and for all renewals thereof, all
businesses, occupations, professions, trades or callings shall pay the business
license fees in amounts established by resolution of the Town Council, and such
business licenses fees shall be payable on an annual, daily or other basis as
established by resolution of the Town Council.
   (B)   On July 1 of each year, commencing in 2005, the amount of the business
license fees to be paid to the town pursuant to this section shall be increased
by the percentage change in the annual average of the engineering news record
(ENR) index between the prior 2 calendar years. The Finance Director shall make
the required calculation by April 1 of each year, and the amount of the
business license fees for the next 12 month period beginning July 1 of that
year, as calculated by the Finance Director based upon the calculation, without
the necessity of further action by the Town Council. In no event shall the
amount of the business license fees be reduced based upon a change in the ENR
index. No later than 30 days after the business license fees are adjusted each
year as provided in this section, the Town Council shall cause to be published
a public notice setting forth the amount of the adjusted business license fees.
The notice shall be published 1 time in a newspaper of general circulation in
the town, provided, however, that the failure of the Town Clerk to cause the
notice to be published shall not affect the validity of the adjustment to
business license fees as made by the Finance Director pursuant to this section.
In the event the ENR index information for the prior calendar years is
unavailable by April 1, the business license fees as previously fixed for the
prior fiscal year (July 1 to June 30) shall continue in effect until such time
as the ENR index for the prior years is available and the Finance Director
makes the required calculation.
(2001 Code, § 8-1-6) (Am. Ord. 04-564, passed 2-12-2004)
§ 110.08 EXHIBITION OF LICENSE REQUIRED; DISPLAY STREET ADDRESS.
   (A)   Every licensee carrying on any business activity at a fixed place of
business shall keep the license posted and exhibited in a conspicuous part of
the place of business. Every licensee, whether the fixed place of business is
within town limits or not, shall produce and exhibit the license during normal
business hours when requested to do so by any police officer or by any town
official authorized to issue or inspect licenses.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit any copy or facsimile
of the original license issued under this chapter.
   (C)   Each licensee shall display near or above the front door of the
business location the correct street address in 5 inch or greater numbers or
letters so that the address shall be plainly visible and legible from the
middle of the street or highway in front of each business, including home
occupation businesses.
(2001 Code, § 8-1-8)
§ 110.09 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   No license granted or issued under any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be in any manner assignable or transferable to any other person other
than is named on the license.
(2001 Code, § 8-1-9)
§ 110.10 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Chief of Police and the Code Enforcement Officer shall have and
shall exercise the power to file complaints against any person violating the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall have and shall exercise the power to cite
and release or arrest all persons violating the provisions of this chapter.
(2001 Code, § 8-1-10)
§ 110.11 REFUSAL TO RENEW; REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The Town Clerk shall refuse to issue a license to an applicant or
shall promptly revoke the existing license of any licensee who is in violation
of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The Town Clerk or designee shall deliver or mail by certified mail to
the applicant or licensee written notice of the denial of an application or the
revocation of an existing license. The notice shall state the reason for denial
or revocation. Notice shall be delivered or mailed to the address of the
applicant or licensee or the statutory agent as shown on the current business
license application. Notice shall be deemed served as of the date of mailing or
delivery. Notice of revocation shall be given at least 30 days before the
revocation is to take effect.
   (C)   An applicant has the right to request a hearing before the Town
Manager within 15 days of denial, revocation or non renewal of a business
license. Appeal of the Town Manager’s decision shall be to the Town Council and
shall be made by the aggrieved party within 30 days of the decision of the Town
Manager.
   (D)   If payment of the business license itself has been made by an
insufficient funds check, the license shall be immediately revoked with or
without notice to the person or entity holding the license. The Town Clerk
shall thereafter determine the conditions under which a license can be issued
to the applicant.
   (E)   All buildings, structures and equipment used by an applicant or
licensee for any business activity shall comply with all applicable federal,
state, county, special district and town regulations, requirements and codes.
Where an ongoing maintenance program is necessary to comply with applicable
federal, state, county, town and special district regulations, requirements and
codes, including but not limited to such things as fire extinguishers, hood and
vents over cooking devices, a routine inspection by authorized fire, building,
zoning, health and safety personnel may occur at any time during normal
business hours, to insure the equipment or structure is kept in proper
operating condition. Any remodeling or modification of the structure or
property, expansion of facilities, alteration or modification of devices of
equipment herein, which was not approved by authorized fire, building, zoning,
health and safety personnel and which may cause safety or code violations to
exist is grounds for suspension or revocation of any license issued pursuant to
this chapter. If the building, structure or equipment of a business licensed
under this chapter is found to be faulty, unsafe or inoperable, the town may
suspend this license, and any violation occurring after issuance of the
business license must be corrected. Thereafter the premises must be reinspected
and approved before any reopening of the business shall occur. Any person who
continues to engage in a business activity while the violations exist is
subject to the immediate revocation without prior notice of any license issued
pursuant to this chapter. Business activity may be resumed only after the town
has provided notice in writing that the violation has been cured.
   (F)   Should a federal, state, county, special district official or town
official declare that an immediate or potential hazard to the public exists
which arises from or affects a licensed business activity, the Town Clerk may
immediately suspend the affected license and order the business activity
discontinued immediately. The suspension shall continue as long as the
emergency situation is present or affects the business.
   (G)   A violation of the standards of conduct set forth in this chapter
which occurs after issuance of a business license may be grounds for revocation
or non renewal of a business license.
(2001 Code, § 8-1-11)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found operating a business in violation of this chapter or
who fails to renew a license issued under §
110.06 and who allows the renewal to become delinquent, shall be assessed a
fine equal to 100% of the applicable license fee which the fine shall be added
to the license fee. If the fine is not paid within 30 days of the renewal date
or required application date, division (B) below shall apply.
   (B)   Any person found guilty of violation of any provisions of this
chapter, except as set forth in division (A) above, shall be guilty of a Class
3 Misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, the required application date shall be
the date upon which a person receives notification from the Town Clerk of a
violation of this chapter.
(2001 Code, § 8-1-12)
CHAPTER 111: PARK AND SWAP MEETS
Section
   
111.01   Compliance generally
   
111.02   Definitions
   
111.03   License requirements
   
111.04   Arizona State sales tax
§ 111.01 COMPLIANCE GENERALLY.
   Park and swap operations shall comply with all provisions of this chapter
unless otherwise stated hereafter.
(2001 Code, § 8-2-1)
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARK AND SWAP LOT. A building, structure, enclosure, lot or other area into
which persons are admitted to display, exchange, barter, buy, sell or bargain
for new and used merchandise, excluding those locations permanently engaged in
the business of making sales at retail.
   PARK AND SWAP MEET. The activity carried on at the park and swap lot and
consists of the admitting of persons into a park and swap lot for the purpose
of displaying, exchanging, bartering, buying, selling or bargaining for new and
used merchandise.
   PARK AND SWAP MEET PARTICIPANT. Any person other than an owner or operator
who brings goods, wares or merchandise, either new or secondhand, to a park and
swap meet for the purpose of displaying, exchanging, bartering, buying, selling
or bargaining these goods, wares or merchandise.
   PARK AND SWAP OWNER or PARK AND SWAP OPERATOR. Any person who rents, sells,
donates or otherwise makes available to park and swap meet participants any
space within premises owned or controlled by the proprietor for the purpose of
a swap meet sale or who controls admission, directly or through agents, of
persons and merchandise into the park and swap lot.
(2001 Code, § 8-2-2)
§ 111.03 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   It is unlawful for any owner or operator to operate a park and swap
operation within the limits of the town without first having obtained a license
as provided in this chapter.
   (A)   Park and swap operations shall comply with all zoning and building
code requirements.
   (B)   Park and swap operations shall be licensed only upon approval by
Council.
   (C)   Park and swap operations shall be licensed only upon a showing that
adequate sanitary facilities will be available during the hours of operation of
the swap meet. A park and swap license may be revoked upon a showing that the
operator has failed to provide adequate sanitary facilities to meet health and
safety standards.
(2001 Code, § 8-2-3) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 111.04 ARIZONA STATE SALES TAX.
   Each park and swap licensee shall require that any park and swap
participant, as a condition of admittance, provide proof of a current Arizona
State sales tax license unless exempt by law.
(2001 Code, § 8-2-4)
CHAPTER 112: TRANSIENT MERCHANTS; PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
Transient Merchants
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   License requirements
   
112.03   Prohibited practices
   
112.04   Loud noises and speaking devices
   
112.05   Suspension or revocation of license
   
112.06   Appeal
   
112.07   Reapplication
Peddlers and Solicitors
   
112.20   Scope; definitions
   
112.21   License required
   
112.22   Exemptions
   
112.23   Application
   
112.24   Investigation and insurance
   
112.25   Fees
   
112.26   Bond
   
112.27   Exhibition of license
   
112.28   Signs to be observed
   
112.29   Enforcement
   
112.30   Records
   
112.31   Suspension or revocation of license
   
112.32   Appeal
   
112.33   Reapplication
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SPECIAL EVENTS LICENSE. A license issued to a transient merchant to allow
for the business to set up a booth or display to sell a product or service
during a special event or festival, as regulated under Chapter 113 of this
code.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person, either for personal gain or the gain of
another, who is engaged in any business activity not conducted from a permanent
place of business but is capable of moving the articles for sale from 1
location to another and who does not intend to do business at the same location
for more than a few days. A TRANSIENT MERCHANT is distinguished from a peddler
who solicits door to door.
(2001 Code, § 8-3-1)
§ 112.02 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any transient merchant to engage in any business
activity within the town without first obtaining a transient merchant license
as provided hereafter.
   (B)   All provisions of
Chapter 110 of this code shall apply unless otherwise stated hereafter.
      (1)   Any transient merchant intending to conduct a business activity for
no more than 3 days in any consecutive 30 day period shall be issued a
transient merchant license by the Town Clerk upon compliance with all
applicable provisions of
Chapter 110 of this code, upon a showing of permission from the landowner, if
applicable, and upon proper payment of daily fees for transient merchants as
provided in §
110.07 of this code.
      (2)   Any transient merchant intending to conduct a business activity for
more than 3 days during any consecutive 30 day period shall be issued a
transient merchant license by the Town Clerk upon approval by Council, upon
compliance with all applicable provisions of
Chapter 110 of this code, upon a showing of permission from the landowner, if
applicable, and upon proper payment of the fee for transient merchant as
provided in §
110.07 of this code. Prior to renewal of a transient merchant license for an
additional period, the merchant shall obtain council approval and shall
otherwise comply with all other requirements.
      (3)   No transient merchant license shall be transferable or assignable.
      (4)   A vendor wishing to set up a booth or display to sell a product or
service during a special event or festival shall first obtain a license as per
Chapter 113 of this code.
(2001 Code, § 8-3-2) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 112.03 PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any transient merchant to make exclusive use of any
location on any street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way for the purpose of
selling, delivering or exhibiting goods or merchandise.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any transient merchant to operate in a congested
area where the operation may impede or inconvenience the public use of the
street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way.
(2001 Code, § 8-3-3) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 112.04 LOUD NOISES AND SPEAKING DEVICES.
   No licensee, nor any person in his or her behalf, shall shout, cry out, blow
a horn, ring a bell or use any sound amplifying device upon any of the streets,
alleys, parks or other public places of the town or upon private premises where
sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to be capable of
being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public
places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or
merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell.
(2001 Code, § 8-3-4) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 112.05 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The Town Clerk shall refuse to issue a license to an applicant or
shall promptly revoke an existing license upon notice that the applicant or
licensee is in violation of the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   The Town Clerk or designee shall deliver to the applicant or licensee,
by certified mail, written notice of the denial of an application or the
revocation of an existing license. The notice shall state the reason for denial
or revocation. Notice shall be delivered to the address listed on the
application or license. Notice shall be deemed served as of the date of
mailing.
(2001 Code, § 8-3-5)
§ 112.06 APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by an action of the Town Clerk pursuant to this
subchapter may appeal the decision of the Town Clerk by filing a written
complaint with the Town Manager within 15 days of the decision of the Town
Clerk. The complaint shall contain a written statement setting forth fully the
grounds for the appeal of the Town Clerk’s decision. The Town Manager shall set
a time and place for a hearing on the appeal. Notice of the hearing shall be
given to the appellant within 5 working days of the filing of the complaint by
certified mail sent to the last known address or by personal service. The town
manager shall hold the hearing within 15 working days of receiving the
complaint. The Town Manager shall make a final determination within 10 working
days of the hearing. The determination by the Town Manager shall be final.
(2001 Code, § 8-3-6)
§ 112.07 REAPPLICATION.
   No licensee whose license has been revoked or refused shall make further
application until at least 1 year has elapsed since the last previous
revocation.
(2001 Code, § 8-3-7)
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
§ 112.20 SCOPE; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   This subchapter is intended to apply to any person whether a resident
of the town or not, who goes from house to house, place to place or street to
street, soliciting or taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods,
wares or merchandise, including magazines, books, periodicals for future
delivery or for services to be performed in the future. All provisions of
Chapter 110 of this code shall apply unless otherwise stated.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PEDDLER. Any person, whether a resident of the town or not, who goes from
house to house, from place to place or from street to street, conveying or
transporting goods, wares or merchandise or offering or exposing the same for
sale or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers.
      SOLICITOR. Any person, whether a resident of the town or not, who goes
from house to house, from place to place or from street to street, soliciting
or taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares or merchandise,
including magazines, books, periodicals or personal property of any nature
whatsoever for future delivery or for services to be performed in the future,
whether or not the individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the
subject of such order or whether or not he or she is collecting advance
payments on the orders. The definition includes any person who, for himself or
herself or for another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building,
motor vehicle, trailer, structure, tent, railroad box car, boat, hotel or motel
room, lodging house, apartment, shop or other place within the town for the
primary purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery.
(2001 Code, § 8-4-1)
§ 112.21 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to engage in any business
activity within the town without first obtaining a license therefor in
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   (1)   It is unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to make exclusive
use of any location on any street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way for the
purpose of selling, delivering or exhibiting goods or merchandise.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to operate in a
congested area where such operation may impede or inconvenience the public use
of the street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way.
      (3)   No licensee nor any person in the licensee’s behalf shall shout,
cry out, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound amplifying device upon any
of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the town or upon
private premises where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced
therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues,
alleys, parks or other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention
to any goods, wares or merchandise which the licensee proposes to sell.
      (4)   It is unlawful for any person to exhibit any copy or facsimile of
the original license issued under this subchapter.
      (5)   It is unlawful for any licensee or agent of licensee to conduct any
business activity except during the daylight hours.
(2001 Code, § 8-4-2) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 112.22 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The terms of this subchapter do not include the acts of merchants or
their employees in delivering goods in the regular course of business, nor to
any salesperson who has obtained prior permission to enter upon an individual’s
property for the purpose of making a sale. Nothing contained in this chapter
prohibits any sale required by statute or by order of any court or to prevent
any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to the law.
   (B)   The exemptions to the license requirements of this subchapter also
include:
      (1)   Nonprofit educational institutions, fraternal and service clubs and
religious organizations;
      (2)   Nonprofit private clubs whose basic membership fees cover the cost
of the use of facilities;
      (3)   A permanent resident wishing to sell any form of agricultural
products including livestock produced or raised by himself or herself;
      (4)   Fund raising projects of nonprofit and religious organizations, not
conducted on a regular basis;
      (5)   Persons under the age of 18 years engaged in part time or seasonal
employment while still attending school full time; and
      (6)   All exemptions granted pursuant to the Arizona Revised Statutes and
all future amendments, if any.
(2001 Code, § 8-4-3)
§ 112.23 APPLICATION.
   Applicants for a license under this subchapter shall file with the Town
Clerk a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the Town
Clerk which shall give the following information:
   (A)   Name, physical description and social security number of applicant and
each helper;
   (B)   Complete permanent home and local address of the applicant and the
local address from which proposed sales will be made;
   (C)   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold or services to be preformed;
   (D)   If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials therefrom establishing the exact relationship (no post office box
will be accepted), the amount of time business has been in operation and the
town and phone number the business is located in for verification;
   (E)   The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
   (F)   The source of supply of the goods or products proposed to be sold or
orders taken for the sale thereof, where the goods or products are located at
the time the application is filed and the proposed method of delivery;
   (G)   Two copies of a recent photograph of each applicant and each agent of
the applicant, which picture shall be approximately 1-1/2" x 1-1/2" and shall
clearly show the head of the individual; (One photograph shall be attached to
the applicant’s application form and the other shall be attached to the
person’s identification badge.)
   (H)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant or any of applicant’s
agents has been convicted of any violation of any federal, state, county,
municipal law or regulation, other than traffic violations, the nature of the
offense and the punishment or penalty assessed;
   (I)   The most recent cities or towns, not to exceed 3, where applicant
carried on business immediately preceding the date of application and the
address from which the business was conducted in those municipalities;
   (J)   At the time of filing the application, a fee as adopted by resolution
per day shall be paid to the Town Clerk by the applicant and an additional fee
as adopted by resolution per day for each agent to cover the cost of processing
the application; (The applicant shall also pay a deposit fee as adopted by
resolution which deposit shall be refunded to the applicant once all
identification badges are returned to the Town Clerk.)
   (K)   Description of vehicles, including license plate numbers to be used in
business; and
   (L)   The Town Clerk shall take a thumb print of each applicant and agent of
the applicant.
(2001 Code, § 8-4-4)
§ 112.24 INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of each application, the Town Clerk shall immediately
forward the application to the Police Department for investigation of the
applicant as is deemed necessary for the protection of the public and as set
forth in §
110.05 of this code.
   (B)   If, as a result of the investigation, the applicant’s character or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory to go from house to
house, the Town Clerk shall reject the application and shall state the reasons
for the rejection. The Town Clerk shall notify the applicant that the
application has been rejected.
   (C)   If, as a result of the investigation, the character and business
responsibility of the applicant is found to be satisfactory, the Town Clerk
shall approve the application and issue the license. The license shall contain
the signature of the issuing authority and shall show the name, address and
photograph of the licensee, the class of the license issued and the kind of
goods to be sold or services to be rendered thereunder, the amount of fee paid,
the date of issuance and the length of time the same shall be operative, as
well as the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle
used in the licensed business. A separate license shall be issued for each
agent of the applicant authorized by the Town Clerk and shall contain the
information described for the licensee.
   (D)   Each peddler or solicitor and each agent of the peddler or solicitor
shall be issued an individual identification badge once the applicant is
approved for a license. No identification badge shall be used at any time by
any person other than the one to whom it is issued. Each identification badge
shall state the name of the peddler or solicitor or the agent of the licensee,
the person’s physical characteristics and address, the goods to be sold, a
description of the vehicle used by the person, the issue and expiration date of
the permitted activity and a photograph of the person as submitted pursuant to
§
112.23(G) of this chapter. The Town Clerk shall keep a record of all
identification badges issued.
(2001 Code, § 8-4-5)
§ 112.25 FEES.
   (A)   Every applicant for a license under this chapter shall pay fees as
adopted by resolution.
   (B)   In addition, each applicant shall pay a deposit fee as adopted by
resolution to ensure return by licensee and licensee’s agents of all
identification cards at the conclusion of the permitted sales period. Upon
submittal of all identification cards issued to licensee and licensee’s agents,
the Town Clerk shall refund the deposit.
(2001 Code, § 8-4-6)
§ 112.26 BOND.
   Every applicant for a license under this chapter shall obtain a 1 year
peddler’s permit bond. The Town Clerk shall request a copy of the bond before a
business license is issued.
(2001 Code, § 8-4-7)
§ 112.27 EXHIBITION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Each licensee shall be required to exhibit the original certificate of
license at the request of a police officer or town official.
   (B)   Exhibition of a copy or facsimile of the original shall not be
considered compliance with this section.
   (C)   Each licensee and each licensee’s agent shall wear at all times during
any sales activity the identification badge issued by the Town Clerk in the
individual’s name.
(2001 Code, § 8-4-8)
§ 112.28 SIGNS TO BE OBSERVED.
   It is unlawful for any person to go on the premises of another for the
purpose of soliciting, peddling, hawking or canvassing, selling or vending of
goods, wares, merchandise, newspapers, magazines or services where such
premises are posted with a sign or other notice stating “No Peddlers”, “No
Solicitors” or otherwise giving notice to the public that peddlers, solicitors
or salespersons are not desired.
(2001 Code, § 8-4-9) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 112.29 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Chief of Police and the Code Enforcement Officer shall have and
shall exercise the power to file complaints against any person violating the
provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall have and shall exercise the power to cite
and release or arrest all persons violating the provisions of this subchapter.
(2001 Code, § 8-4-10)
§ 112.30 RECORDS.
   The Chief of Police shall report to the Town Clerk all complaints, citations
and convictions for violations of this subchapter, and the Town Clerk shall
maintain a record for each license issued and shall keep a record of all
complaints, citations and convictions of violations.
(2001 Code, § 8-4-11)
§ 112.31 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The Town Clerk shall refuse to issue a license to an applicant or
shall promptly revoke an existing license upon notice that the applicant or
licensee is in violation of the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   The Town Clerk or designee shall deliver to the applicant or licensee,
by certified mail, written notice of the denial of an application or the
revocation of an existing license. The notice shall state the reason for denial
or revocation. Notice shall be delivered to the address listed on the
application or license. Notice shall be deemed served as of the date of
mailing.
   (C)   Within 24 hours of receipt of notice of revocation, the licensee shall
turn in to the Town Clerk all identification badges issued to the licensee and
to any agent of the licensee. Upon compliance by the licensee with the above
requirement, the Town Clerk shall refund the deposit fee to the licensee.
   (D)   The provisions of division (B) above shall not apply to transactions
solely between merchants licensed under this subchapter or between merchants
who would be required by this subchapter to secure licenses if their
establishments were located within the town.
(2001 Code, § 8-4-12)
§ 112.32 APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by an action of the Town Clerk pursuant to this
subchapter may appeal the decision of the Town Clerk by filing a written
complaint with the Town Manager within 15 days of the decision of the Town
Clerk. The complaint shall contain a written statement setting forth fully the
grounds for the appeal of the Town Clerk’s decision. The Town Manager shall set
a time and place for a hearing on the appeal. Notice of the hearing shall be
given to the appellant within 5 working days of the filing of the complaint by
certified mail sent to the last known address or by personal service. The Town
Manager shall hold the hearing within 15 working days of receiving the
complaint. The Town Manager shall make a final determination within 10 working
days of the hearing. The determination by the Town Manager shall be final.
(2001 Code, § 8-4-13)
§ 112.33 REAPPLICATION.
   No licensee whose license has been revoked or refused shall make further
application until at least 1 year has elapsed since the last previous
revocation.
(2001 Code, § 8-4-14)
CHAPTER 113: FESTIVALS
Section
   
113.01   Purpose; definition
   
113.02   License required
   
113.03   Written application
   
113.04   Filing fee and deposit
   
113.05   Transmittal of application; hearing; issuance of license
   
113.06   Grounds for denial of license; notice of denial
   
113.07   License fee
   
113.08   Revocation of license
   
113.09   Conditions
   
113.10   Waiver
   
113.11   Violations; remedies
§ 113.01 PURPOSE; DEFINITION.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to aid and assist the town and its
appropriate officers in enforcing the applicable provisions of A.R.S. Title 9
and Title 36. It is adopted pursuant to the authority of these provisions and
A.R.S. § 9-240, as amended.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      FESTIVAL. Music festivals and other activities calculated to attract
large crowds, and includes any other activity, whether in the nature of a
festival, celebration, fiesta, rally, dance, carnival, circus, revival meeting
or similar activities, if the activity is designed, intended or reasonably
calculated to attract 100 or more people at the same time and at the same
place, whether the places be indoors or outdoors. This definition is not
intended to include gatherings of whatever magnitude, duration or frequency if
the gatherings are to be conducted both:
         (a)   At a place where permanently installed sanitation facilities
available to the public at the intended location of the gathering are of
adequate capacity for the number of persons for which the event is designed or
intended; and
         (b)   Within a use district where the gatherings are within the
legally established and authorized uses.
(2001 Code, § 8-5-1)
§ 113.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Any person wishing to operate, maintain or conduct a festival within the
town must first obtain a license to do so. No license shall be issued, however,
until all conditions required pursuant to this chapter have been met and
fulfilled. The maximum number of people permitted at any 1 event will be set by
the Parks and Recreation Director after the site where the event will take
place is established and inspected.
(2001 Code, § 8-5-2)
§ 113.03 WRITTEN APPLICATION.
   (A)   Written application to the Parks and Recreation Director should be
submitted at least 60 days before the first day of the proposed festival.
   (B)   Any person desiring to operate a festival shall file a written
application, consisting of an original and 5 copies, with the Parks and
Recreation Director, which shall contain the following facts and information:
      (1)   The name, age, residence and mailing address of the person making
the application; (If the application is made by a partnership, the names and
addresses of the partners must appear. Where the applicant is a corporation,
the application must be signed by the president and secretary thereof, and must
contain the addresses of the corporate officers, and a certified copy of the
articles of incorporation shall be submitted with the application.)
      (2)   The address or legal description and present zoning of the place or
premises where the proposed event is to be conducted, operated or carried on;
(Additionally, the applicant must submit proof of ownership of the place where
the event is to be conducted or a statement signed by the owner of the premises
indicating his or her consent that the site may be used for the proposed
event.)
      (3)   The number of days for which the license is sought; (A license
authorizes the conduct of a festival for the number of days contemplated for
the festival, not to exceed the number of days authorized by the owner of the
premises, and in no event for more than 10 days, and must thereafter be
renewed.)
      (4)   An estimate of the number of customers, spectators, participants
and other persons intended, calculated or expected to attend the event for each
day it is conducted; and
      (5)   A map or sketch showing the location of the property in relation to
surrounding properties, the area to be used, the access to the property and the
location of any proposed facilities, parking areas, campgrounds and the like.
(2001 Code, § 8-5-3)
§ 113.04 FILING FEE AND DEPOSIT.
   The Parks and Recreation Director shall collect from the applicant a filing
fee as adopted by resolution which shall be nonrefundable, and a deposit as
adopted by reference to cover expenses relating to investigation or other
service, the unused portion of which shall be refunded.
(2001 Code, § 8-5-4)
§ 113.05 TRANSMITTAL OF APPLICATION; HEARING; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of the application, the Parks and Recreation Director
shall file the original application with planning and zoning for processing,
and distribute 1 copy thereof to the Chief of Police, the Chino Valley Fire
District, and the Town Attorney. These officers and department heads shall
thereupon cause an investigation of the application insofar as their respective
offices are concerned.
   (B)   The Parks and Recreation Director shall, based upon the application
and reports of the interested officers and departments, grant the application,
deny the application, or set conditions which must be met before a license may
be granted.
   (C)   Where conditions are imposed pursuant to §
113.09 of this chapter, the Parks and Recreation Director shall notify the
applicant and thereafter must certify that all conditions have been met before
a license may be issued. The Parks and Recreation Director may require written
notice from all departments charged with responsibility under §
113.09 of this chapter that conditions have been met before issuing the
certificate.
   (D)   When the Parks and Recreation Director certifies that conditions have
been met, the Parks and Recreation Director shall thereupon issue a license
specifying the name and address of the licensee and the number of days
operation is authorized. The licensee shall keep the license posted in a
conspicuous place upon the premises at which the event is conducted.
(2001 Code, § 8-5-5)
§ 113.06 GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE; NOTICE OF DENIAL.
   (A)   After reviewing the application material, the Parks and Recreation
Director may deny issuance of a license if it finds any of the following:
      (1)   That the applicant has failed to meet the conditions imposed
pursuant to this subchapter;
      (2)   That the proposed event is intended to be conducted in a manner or
location not meeting the health, zoning, fire or safety standards established
by rules or regulations of the town, the laws of the State of Arizona or rules
and regulations adopted by any of its agencies;
      (3)   That the applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for license or in any
other document required pursuant to this subchapter;
      (4)   That the applicant, his or her employee, agent or any person
associated with applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder, associate
or manager, has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction, by final
judgment of an offense:
         (a)   Involving the presentation, exhibition or performance of an
obscene production, motion picture or play or of selling obscene matter;
         (b)   Involving lewd conduct;
         (c)   Involving the use of force and violence upon the person of
another;
         (d)   Involving misconduct with children; or
         (e)   An offense against the provisions of Arizona law respecting
narcotics and dangerous drugs, or of any equivalent offense under the law of
any other state which if committed in Arizona would have been a violation of
the Arizona statutory provisions.
   (B)   Where the application is denied, the Parks and Recreation Director
shall mail to the applicant written notice of denial within 14 days of the
action, which notice shall include a statement of the reasons the application
was denied.
(2001 Code, § 8-5-6)
§ 113.07 LICENSE FEE.
   The license fee for operating a festival shall be as adopted by resolution.
The fee shall be paid in cash prior to the issuance of the license.
(2001 Code, § 8-5-7)
§ 113.08 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the power to revoke any license, or
to revoke and reinstate any license upon suitable conditions, when either of
the following causes exists:
   (A)   The festival violates any law or regulation established by the town,
the laws of the State of Arizona or the rules and regulations adopted by any of
its agencies; and/or
   (B)   The licensee allows the festival to be conducted in a disorderly
manner or knowingly allows to remain upon the premises any delinquent or
dependent juvenile or any person regardless of age who is or who appears to be
under the influence of intoxicating liquor, or any narcotic or dangerous drug,
as those terms are defined or used in the Arizona Revised Statutes.
(2001 Code, § 8-5-8)
§ 113.09 CONDITIONS.
   (A)   The Parks and Recreation Director shall establish conditions which
must be met prior to the issuance of any license under this chapter, except
that the Parks and Recreation Director may take a matter under advisement
before determining which conditions shall be imposed. Where the Parks and
Recreation Director takes a matter under advisement and a final decision is
subsequently made, written notice of any conditions imposed as prerequisite to
the issuance of a license must be mailed to the applicant.
   (B)   The conditions which may be imposed by the Parks and Recreation
Director are as follows:
      (1)   Police protection. Every licensee may, at his or her own expense,
be required to employ a number of off-duty police officers, private patrolers,
or guards as recommended by the Chief of Police. The private patrolers or
guards shall be approved by the Chief of Police and shall be responsible for
the preservation of order and protection of property in and around the place of
the festival. The patrolers shall be required to be licensed to the extent that
licensing may from time to time be required under state law. They must be in
attendance, wearing uniforms, at all times the event is in operation. Where the
Chief of Police authorizes the employment of off duty peace officers to meet
the requirements of this chapter, the peace officers shall be under the
direction and control of the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police must be
satisfied that the requisite number of private patrolers or guards will be
provided at all times of operation before a license is issued. If a private
patrol agency is to be used, the applicant must submit a written agreement
between the applicant and the licensed private patrol agency.
      (2)   Water facilities. Every licensee shall provide an ample supply of
water for drinking and sanitation purposes on the premises where the festival
is to be conducted. Quality and quantity of water and location of facilities
must be approved by the county’s Health Department prior to the issuance of a
license. All water shall meet the standards of the state’s Department of Health
Services and shall be provided, stored and dispensed by methods approved by
that Department.
      (3)   Food concessions. In the case of any festival proposed to be held
in areas located a substantial distance from markets, restaurants or like
eating establishments, applicant shall be required to demonstrate that food
will be available at the premises for each day of operation to adequately feed
the number of persons expected to be in attendance. Concessionaires must be
licensed pursuant to local regulation and state laws. Quality and quantity of
food and location of concessions must be approved by the county’s Health
Department prior to the issuance of any license.
      (4)   Sanitation facilities.
         (a)   Every licensee shall provide and maintain adequate toilet
facilities pursuant to procedures established by the County Health Department
before any license may be issued.
         (b)   Every licensee shall be required to furnish and maintain
adequate trash cans pursuant to procedures established by the County Health
Department before any license may be issued.
      (5)   Medical facilities. Where a proposed festival is planned for a site
which is located a substantial distance from existing medical treatment
facilities, the applicant may be required to provide emergency medical
treatment facilities on the premises. The location of the facilities, number
and qualifications of medical and paramedical persons needed to staff the
facilities and the quantity of medical supplies, drugs, ambulances and other
equipment that must be on the site, must be approved by the county’s Health
Department prior to the issuance of any license under this chapter. Medical
personnel must be licensed pursuant to local regulations and state laws. The
county’s Health Department shall calculate the need for medical services, based
on the number of persons expected to attend the public amusement or festival,
their expected age group, the duration of events planned and the possibility of
exposure to inclement weather and outdoor elements.
      (6)   Parking areas. Every licensee shall provide adequate parking space
for persons attending a festival by motor vehicle. Applicants may be called
upon to provide separate space for the festival, separate from or in addition
to the premises where the festival is to be conducted. Individual parking areas
shall be clearly marked and shall be designed in accordance with minimum
standards for safe traffic engineering, including compliance with applicable
fire code regulations. Planning and zoning will establish minimum parking for
maximum capacity as per applicant’s request. The Chief of Police must approve
an applicant’s “parking plan” before a license shall be issued.
      (7)   Access and parking control. Every licensee shall provide adequate
ingress and egress to the premises where the festival is to be conducted,
together with parking areas therefor. Necessary roads, driveways and
entranceways shall exist to insure orderly flow of traffic into the premises
from a highway or road which is a part of the town's system of highways or
which is a highway maintained by the State of Arizona. The chief of police must
approve the licensee’s plan for ingress and egress before a license shall be
issued. Additionally, any applicant may be required to show that traffic guards
are under his or her employment to insure orderly traffic movement and relieve
traffic congestion in the vicinity of the festival area.
      (8)   Hours of operation. Every festival shall close and cease operation
continuously between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of each and every
day.
      (9)   Illumination. Every applicant for a license for a festival to be
conducted during hours of darkness, or planning to allow persons who attend the
festival to remain on the premises after dark, shall provide electrical
illumination to insure that those areas which are occupied are lighted at all
times. The Parks and Recreation Director must approve an applicant’s lighting
plan as a prerequisite to issuance of a license hereunder. A licensee shall be
required to illuminate specific areas on the premises in accordance with the
following scale of lighting intensity:
 
Open areas reserved for spectators 5 to 10 foot candles
Stage area                         75 to 100 foot candles
Parking and overnight areas        1 to 5 foot candles
Restroom and concession areas      20 to 50 foot candles
 
      (10)   Overnight camping facilities. Every applicant intending to allow
persons who attend the festival to remain on the premises overnight shall
indicate in his or her application, or the license, if issued, shall not
include the permission. Overnight camping shall be allowed only in officially
approved areas.
      (11)   Insurance. At least 10 days prior to the scheduled beginning of
the festival, the licensee shall provide to the town a certificate of insurance
in an amount approved by the Parks and Recreation Director, based on the risk
level of the event, for comprehensive liability with the licensee’s policy
including coverage for bodily injury, property damage, contractual liabilities,
owned/non-owned or hired vehicles. The town shall be named as an additional
insured on the policy. Further, the licensee’s policy shall state that the
licensee’s insurance is primary over any other insurance available to the town.
      (12)   Worker’s compensation. The licensee shall provide satisfactory
evidence of worker’s compensation.
      (13)   Indemnification. The licensee shall hold the town harmless from
and against any and all claims, judgments or attorney’s fees arising out of the
occurrence of any event related to the holding of the festival, including any
such claims that are based upon the negligence of the town, it being the
specific intent of the licensee to indemnify the town for any loss arising out
of the occurrence of any event related to the holding of the festival, even if
caused by the town’s own negligence.
(2001 Code, § 8-5-9)
§ 113.10 WAIVER.
   Any provision of this chapter may be waived for the benefit of a licensee by
the Town Manager or his or her designee.
(2001 Code, § 8-5-10)
§ 113.11 VIOLATIONS; REMEDIES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any licensee, employee, agent or person associated
with the licensee, to do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate, conduct or carry on a festival, as herein defined, without
first procuring a license to do so;
      (2)   Sell tickets to a festival without a license first having been
obtained;
      (3)   Operate, conduct or carry on any festival in such a manner as to
create a public or private nuisance;
      (4)   Exhibit, show or conduct within or in connection with a festival
any obscene, indecent, vulgar or lewd exhibition, show, play, entertainment or
exhibit;
      (5)   Allow any person on the premises of the festival to cause or create
a disturbance in, around or near any part of the festival, by offensive or
disorderly conduct;
      (6)   Knowingly allow any person to consume, sell or be in possession of
intoxicating liquor while at the festival except where such consumption or
possession is expressly authorized under the terms of the laws of the State of
Arizona or the rules and regulations adopted by any of its agencies; and
      (7)   Knowingly allow any person at the festival to use, sell or be in
possession of any narcotic or dangerous drug.
   (B)   The town retains any and all civil and criminal remedies, including
the right to civil injunction for the prevention of any of the aforesaid
violations, and for the recovery of money damages therefor.
(2001 Code, § 8-5-11)
CHAPTER 114: CABLE TELEVISION
Section
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Applicability; license required
   
114.03   Failure to have license; violation
   
114.04   Authorization to engage in business
   
114.05   Limitations of license
   
114.06   Acquisition of facilities by town upon termination
   
114.07   Rights reserved to the town
   
114.08   License application procedures
   
114.09   License application fees
   
114.10   Selection of licensee
   
114.11   Term of license
   
114.12   Grant of additional license and competing service
   
114.13   Renewals
   
114.14   Transfers of assignment
   
114.15   Effect of award of license
   
114.16   Payment of license fee
   
114.17   Use of telephone company’s facilities
   
114.18   Required services and facilities
   
114.19   Subscriber services; rates
   
114.20   Government access channel
   
114.21   Educational access channels
   
114.22   General provisions concerning access
   
114.23   Time is of the essence
   
114.24   Acceptance and effective date of license
   
114.25   Permits, installations and service
   
114.26   Cable system construction map and schedule
   
114.27   Line extension
   
114.28   Placement of transmission facilities
   
114.29   Construction and technical standards
   
114.30   Utility locating system
   
114.31   Resident notification of construction activity required
   
114.32   Location of property of license
   
114.33   Emergency work
   
114.34   Removal and abandonment of property of license
   
114.35   Temporary removal of wire for building improvements
   
114.36   Changes required by public improvements
   
114.37   Methods and materials of street construction
   
114.38   Failure to perform street work
   
114.39   Telephone communications service
   
114.40   Subscriber service standards
   
114.41   Subscriber and town notification
   
114.42   Billing practices; information and procedures
   
114.43   Subscriber solicitation procedures
   
114.44   Disconnection and termination of cable services
   
114.45   Protection of subscriber privacy
   
114.46   Reports
   
114.47   Inspection of property and records
   
114.48   Protection of town against liability
   
114.49   Letter of credit
   
114.50   Construction bonds
   
114.51   Liquidated damages
   
114.52   Administrative hearing
   
114.53   Hearing by Council
   
114.54   Revocation
   
114.55   Continuity of service mandatory
   
114.56   Failure of town to enforce a license; no waiver of terms thereof
   
114.57   License subject to other laws
   
114.58   Miscellaneous provisions
   
114.59   Force majeure
   
114.60   Continued use of individual antennas
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CABLE ACT. Title VI of the federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended.
   CABLE SERVICE. The transmission to subscribers of video programming or other
programming service and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for
the selection or use of the video programming or other programming service.
   CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM OR CATV SYSTEM. Any facility consisting of a set of
closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and
control equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video
programing and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community.
   CHANNEL. A band of frequencies 6 megahertz wide in the electromagnetic
spectrum capable of carrying either 1 audiovisual television and a few non-
video signals or a large number of non-video signals.
   FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION OR FCC. The present federal agency of that
name as constituted by the Communications Act of 1934, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 151
et seq., or any successor agency created by the United States Congress.
   GROSS REVENUES. All cash, credits, property of any kind or nature, or other
consideration, less related bad debt not to exceed 1½ % annually, that is
received directly or indirectly by the licensee, its affiliates, subsidiaries
or parent or any person, firm or corporation in which licensee has a financial
interest or that has a financial interest in licensee and that is derived from
licensee's operation of its cable system to provide cable service in the town.
Gross revenues include all revenue from charges for cable service to
subscribers and all charges for installation, removal, connection or
reinstatement of equipment necessary for a subscriber to receive cable service,
and any other receipts from subscribers derived from operating the cable system
to provide cable service, including receipts from forfeited deposits, sale or
rental of equipment to provide cable service, late charges, interest and sale
of program guides. Gross revenues also include all income licensee receives
from the lease of its facilities located in the public streets, roads and
alleys, unless services that the lessee provides over the leased facilities are
subject to a transaction privilege tax of the licensor. Gross revenues do not
include revenues from commercial advertising on the cable system, the use or
lease of studio facilities of the cable system, the use or lease of leased
access channels or bandwidth, the production of video programming by the
licensee, the sale, exchange, use or cablecast of any programming by licensee
in the town, sales to licensee's subscribers by programmers of home shopping
services, reimbursements paid by programmers for launch fees or marketing
expense, license fees, taxes or other fees or charges that licensee collects
and pays to any governmental authority, any increase in the value of any stock,
security or asset, or any dividends or other distributions made in respect of
any stock or securities.
   LICENSE. That ordinance or resolution that contains the right, authority or
grant, given by the Council enabling a person to construct, operate and
maintain a cable television system.
   LICENSE AREA. The current area within the boundaries of the town of Chino
Valley, Arizona, and any future annexed area, unless the terms of a license
provide otherwise.
   LICENSE FEE. The fee required to be paid pursuant to §
114.16.
   LICENSEE. The person granted a cable television license for construction,
operation, maintenance, or reconstruction of a cable system issued by the town.
   LICENSOR. The Town of Chino Valley.
   MAJOR STOCKHOLDER. A beneficial owner, directly or indirectly, of 10% or
more of the issued and outstanding voting stock of any corporation.
   OTHER PROGRAMMING SERVICE. Information that a licensee makes available to
all subscribers generally.
   PUBLIC STREET. The surface of and the space above and below any public
street, avenue, highway, boulevard, concourse, driveway, bridge, tunnel, park,
parkway, waterway, bulkhead, alley, right-of-way, and public utility easement.
   REGULAR SUBSCRIBER SERVICE. That service regularly provided to all
subscribers. It includes all broadcast signal carriage and FCC-required access
channel carriage, including origination programming. It does not include
specialized programming for which a per program or per channel charge is made.
   STANDARD DROP. A cable connection which requires no more than a 225-foot
drop measured from the nearest reasonable point of connection to a subscriber's
home or place of business (point of demarcation) to the nearest existing
technically feasible point of connection to the cable system; involves only 1
outlet and standard materials; and does not involve a wall fish. If justified
by the technology of the licensee, licensee and town may agree to a different
standard drop in the license. A Standard Drop shall exclude custom installation
work, including specific subscriber-requested work that requires nonstandard
inventory or cable routing requiring construction methods exceeding reasonable
underground or aerial work.
   SUBSCRIBER. Any person receiving regular subscriber service.
   VIDEO PROGRAMMING. Programming that is provided by, or generally comparable
to programming provided by, a broadcast television station.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.02 APPLICABILITY; LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   This chapter shall apply to a cable television license granted on or
before December 31, 2019, unless the licensee has elected to terminate its
license during the period commencing January 1, 2020, and ending June 30, 2020,
pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-1412.
   (B)   A non-exclusive license to construct, operate and maintain a cable
system within all or any portion of the town is required of any person desiring
to provide cable service in the town.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016; Am. Ord. 11-12-2019)
§ 114.03 FAILURE TO HAVE LICENSE; VIOLATION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to establish, operate or to carry on the
business of distributing any television signals or radio signals by means of a
cable system to any person in the town unless a license therefor has first been
obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless the license is
in full force and effect.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain within
any public street in the town, or within any other public property of the town,
or within any privately-owned area within the town which has not yet become a
public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on
any preliminary subdivision map approved by the town, any equipment or
facilities for distributing
any television signals or radio signals through a cable system, unless a
license authorizing such use of the street, property, or area has first been
obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless the license is
in full force and effect.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized connection,
whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with
any part of a licensed cable system within the town for the purpose of enabling
that person or others to receive any television signal, radio signal, picture,
program, sound, or any other signal transmitted on the cable system, without
the permission of a licensee.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner
licensee, to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or
equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures,
programs, sounds or any other signals transmitted on the cable system.
   (E)   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $2,500 or by imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 6 months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation
continues shall be a separate offense punishable as herein described.
   (F)   In addition to the penalties set forth in division (E), any person
violating any part of this chapter shall be subject to and shall pay any fees
required in this chapter as though they were a licensee.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.04 AUTHORIZATION TO ENGAGE IN BUSINESS.
   Any license granted shall authorize the licensee to engage in the business
of operating and providing a cable system in the town, and for that purpose to
erect, install, solicit, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and
retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along any street, such poles,
wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers,
appliances, attachments, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant
to the cable system; and in addition, so to use, operate, and provide similar
facilities or properties rented or leased from other persons, firms or
corporations, including but not limited to any public utility or other licensee
licensed or permitted to do business in the town. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, all wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduits and similar facilities
shall be placed underground unless such facilities are attached to existing
utility or telephone poles and the poles are used primarily for utility or
telephone purpose.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.05 LIMITATIONS OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Any license granted under this chapter shall be non-exclusive and
nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the Council from granting
identical or similar licenses to more than 1 person, within all or any portion
of the town.
   (B)   Any privilege claimed under any license by the licensee in any street
shall be subordinate to any lawful occupancy or use thereof by the town and
shall be subordinate to any prior easements, prior licenses to use the rights-
of-way, and any other private property rights that may be superior to the
license issued.
   (C)   Any right or power in, or duty imposed upon, any officer, employee,
department, or board of the town shall be subject to transfer by the town to
any other officer, employee, department, or board of the town.
   (D)   All licensees are subject to all existing or hereafter enacted or
established requirements of the town's rules, regulations and specifications
pursuant to the town's police powers and taxing authority. Licensees shall
comply with all applicable existing or hereafter enacted or established state
and federal laws and regulations. The town reserves the power to amend any
section of this chapter so as to require additional or greater standards of
construction, operation, maintenance or otherwise pursuant to the town's lawful
police powers or as provided in the license.
   (E)   Any license granted shall not relieve the licensee of any obligation
involved in obtaining pole space from any department of the town, utility
company, or from others lawfully maintaining poles in streets.
   (F)   Any license granted does not relieve licensee of compliance town code
provisions governing construction, work, or use of the streets and rights-of-
way. The town hereby reserves to the town the power to amend any section of the
Chino Valley Town Code related to construction in streets and public rights-of-
way pursuant to its police powers.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.06 ACQUISITION OF FACILITIES BY TOWN UPON TERMINATION.
   (A)   In accordance with Section 627 of the Cable Act, if a renewal of a
license held by a licensee is denied and the town acquires ownership of the
cable system, any such acquisition or transfer shall be at fair market value,
determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern but with
no value allocated to the license itself. If a license held by a licensee is
revoked for cause and the town acquires ownership of the cable system or
effects a transfer of ownership of the cable system to another person, such
matters as the harm to the community resulting from the licensee's breach of
the license may be considered in determining the fair market value.
   (B)   Upon the termination of a license and the rights granted thereunder,
whether by expiration or forfeiture, the Council may direct and require the
licensee as provided in §
114.34 Removal and Abandonment of Property of Licensee to remove its wires,
cables, fixtures and accessories and appurtenances from the streets. If
directed, the town shall make a claim on the letter of credit as prescribed in
§
114.50 Construction Bonds. Removal by licensee of its wires, cable, fixtures
and accessories and appurtenances from the streets shall not be required where
such wires, cables, fixtures and accessories and appurtenances are in use for
the provision of services other than cable services as to which no license from
the town is required, or as to which any license that is required has been
obtained.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.07 RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE TOWN.
   (A)   The town reserves its rights to acquire the property of the licensee,
by purchase, at fair market value, which shall not include any amount for the
license itself or for any of the rights or privileges granted. The town
reserves the right to exercise its power of eminent domain under the Arizona
Constitution and laws of the state.
   (B)   Neither the granting of any license nor the enactment of any provision
in this chapter shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any
governmental right or power of the town, now existing or hereafter granted.
   (C)   The town's right to acquire the property of the licensee shall not
require the licensee to convey such property that is in use for the provision
of services other than cable services as to which no license from the town is
required, or as to which any license that is required had been obtained. If the
cable system is operated by the owner for both telecommunications and cable
services purposes, the town must have separate authority outside of this
chapter to acquire those facilities used for telecommunications purposes.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.08 LICENSE APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   This chapter itself grants no authority to operate a cable television
system to any person. The grants are only made by the adoption of a separate
resolution awarding a specific license to an applicant who has complied with
the provisions of this chapter and any other provisions of the separate
resolution.
   (B)   Each application for a license or renewal license to construct,
operate or maintain any cable system in the town shall be filed with the Town
Clerk in a form prescribed by the town. An application shall require, but shall
not be limited to, the following information:
      (1)   The name, business address and form of business of the applicant;
      (2)   The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the
applicant, namely any other business entity owning or controlling the
applicant, in whole or in part, or owned in whole or in part by the applicant,
and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business
entity, including but not limited to cable systems owned or controlled by the
applicant, its parent and subsidiary and the areas served thereby.
      (3)    A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant,
certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year
next preceding the date of the application hereunder, and a letter or other
acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding
source, addressed to both the applicant and the Council, setting forth the
basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding source, and
a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to
provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and
operate the proposed cable system in the town, or a statement from an
independent certified public accountant, certifying that the applicant has
available sufficient free, net and uncommitted cash resources to construct and
operate the proposed cable system in the town. The Town Manager may accept an
alternative submittal that meets the purpose and intent of this section.
      (4)   A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable system
license(s) awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary; the status of
said license(s) with respect to completion thereof;
      (5)   A service area boundary map of the area that the applicant proposes
to serve and a schedule for initiation of cable service and a statement or
schedule setting forth all proposed classifications of rates and charges to be
made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of said
classifications, including installation charges and cable service charges;
      (6)   The applicant's proposal for providing access channels, facilities
and related considerations. Applicants are strongly encouraged to investigate
the needs and desires of potential users and to offer such facilities as are
technologically and economically feasible;
      (7)   A description of facilities for local programming, and facilities
to be offered to various community institutions;
      (8)   A schedule of proposed rates and charges to all classes of
subscribers for both installation and monthly service, and a copy of the
proposed service agreement between the applicant and its proposed subscribers;
      (9)   A copy of any contract which may exist between the applicant and
any public utility providing for the use of the utility's property, such as
poles, lines or conduits;
      (10)   A statement setting forth all agreements and understandings,
whether written, oral or implied, between the applicant and any other person
with respect to the proposed license or the proposed cable television
operation;
      (11)   An estimate of the cost of constructing the applicant's proposed
system, and a financial statement prepared in a form satisfactory to the
Council showing applicant's financial status and its financial ability to meet
these proposed costs;
      (12)   A sworn statement acknowledging the applicant's familiarity with
and eligibility under the provisions of this chapter and the rules of the FCC
and its intention to abide by the same;
      (13)   Other information that will assist the town in determining whether
the applicant has the financial, technical, and legal qualifications to provide
cable service in the town; and
      (14)   Any other details, statements, information or references,
pertinent to the subject matter of such application, which shall be required or
requested by the Town Council, or by any other provision of law.
   (C)   Prior to the issuance of a license, the town shall hold a public
hearing, following reasonable notice to the public, at which every applicant
and its proposals shall be examined and the public and all interested parties
afforded a reasonable opportunity to be heard. Reasonable notice to the public
shall include causing notice of the time and place of the hearing to be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town once a week for 2
consecutive weeks. The first publication shall be not less than 14 days before
the day of the hearing.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.09 LICENSE APPLICATION FEES.
   (A)   New license. Each applicant for a new license must submit an
application fee in the amount of $10,000. The fee shall be submitted in cash,
or by certified or cashier's check, wire transfer, or in any other manner
acceptable to the manager made payable to the town. The application fee is
refundable if a license is issued and shall be offset from the first license
fee payment(s) to the town. The application fee is non-refundable if an
application is denied.
   (B)   Renewal license. Each applicant for a renewal license shall submit a
renewal application fee of $5,000.00. The fee shall be submitted in cash, or by
certified or cashier's check, wire transfer, or in any other manner acceptable
to the Town Manager made payable to the town. The renewal application fee is
refundable if a license is issued, and shall be offset from the first license
fee payment(s) to town. The renewal application fee is non-refundable if an
application is denied.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.10 SELECTION OF LICENSEE.
   (A)   Compliance with town requirements. A person submitting an application
for a new license to operate a cable system shall provide all information set
forth in §
114.08 License Application Procedures or otherwise required by this chapter and
all other information requested in the town's request for applications. Each
new license application shall be responsive to the questions soliciting the
information, and shall completely, accurately and materially supply all of the
information so solicited. Any misrepresentation, failure, neglect or refusal to
provide any of such information may, at the option of the town, render an
application invalid. This requested information must be complete and verified
as true by the applicant.
   (B)   Property of town. All applications for new licenses received by the
town from an applicant shall become the sole property of the town.
   (C)   Referral to manager. Upon receipt of any application for license, the
Town Manager shall prepare or cause to be prepared a report, including
recommendations respecting such application, to be presented to the Town
Council at a public hearing on the application. The town will evaluate all
applications submitted within 180 days of receipt of the application.
   (D)   Investigations. The town may make such investigations as it deems
necessary to determine the ability of the applicant for a new license to
perform under the license, and the applicant shall furnish to the town all such
information as the town may request.
   (E)   Public hearing. Within 180 days after receiving an application for a
new license, a public hearing shall be held to consider the application and
receive public comments.
   (F)   Consideration. In making any determination regarding the application
for a license, the town may consider any and all factors relevant to interests
of the community in cable television including, but not limited to, the quality
of the cable services proposed, areas to be served, rates to subscriber,
benefit to the town, experience, character, background, and financial
responsibility of any applicant, and its management and owners, technical and
performance quality of equipment, willingness and ability to meet construction
and physical requirements, to meet all requirements set forth in this chapter,
and to abide by all policy conditions, license limitations and requirements,
and all other matters deemed pertinent by the town for satisfying the community
needs and for safeguarding the interests of the town and the public.
   (G)   Timeframes. The determination shall be completed within the following
maximum timeframes: (1) for cable operators with existing authority to access
streets, after 90 days; and (2) for persons that do not have authority to
access streets, 180 days. The times start on the date an applicant files an
application or other writing including certain minimum information which is set
forth in §
114.08 License Application Procedures and deemed complete by the town. The town
and an applicant may agree, in writing, to extend the 90- or 180-day time
period for negotiations. It may then be adopted at the date as permitted by
this section. If the 90/180-day time elapses without action by the town, the
applicant is automatically granted an interim license based on the application
submitted. Thereafter, the town and applicant may continue to negotiate the
terms of a license in an attempt to reach a negotiated license. The 90/180-day
time may be tolled by the town if it has requested and not received information
from the applicant.
   (H)   Determination. Following the public hearing, the Council may direct
staff to conduct further negotiations with an applicant, or set further public
hearings. Within 180 days following the first public hearing on an application
for a new license, the Council shall make 1 of the following determinations:
      (1)   That such application is denied, which determination shall be final
and conclusive; or
      (2)   That such license is granted with the terms and conditions approved
by Council.
   (I)   Approval or denial based on public record. It is the intention of the
town to approve or deny a new license solely on the basis of the public record.
   (J)   Town Council decisions shall be final. Any decision of the Council
approving or denying a new license shall be final.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.11 TERM OF LICENSE.
   Unless otherwise provided in the license, the term of any license shall not
exceed 15 years. A license may be renewed by the town pursuant to the procedure
established in §
114.13 Renewals and in accordance with the then-applicable law.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.12 GRANT OF ADDITIONAL LICENSE AND COMPETING SERVICE.
   Since competing or overlapping licenses may encourage the introduction of
better cable services and quality at lower prices, the town will at all times
attempt to accommodate additional entrants. At the same time it is recognized
that the introduction of overlapping cable systems could have a potential
adverse impact on the streets, and on the quality and availability of existing
cable services to the public. Accordingly, the town shall issue a license in an
area where another licensee is operating only following a public hearing to
consider the potential impact which the grant of an additional license may have
on the community and the streets. In considering whether to grant 1 or more
additional licenses, the town shall specifically consider, and address in a
written report, the following issues:
   (A)   Whether or not applicant has provided, at a minimum, information with
its application as required by §
114.08 License Application Procedures, and application fee described in §
114.09 License Application Fees;
   (B)   The legal, technical, and financial qualifications of applicant and
agreement by a licensee to comply with such requirements of the town as may be
determined by it to be applicable to a licensee in conformance with applicable
law;
   (C)   Acceptance of a license and the terms therein;
   (D)   The capacity of the streets to accommodate 1 or more additional cable
systems and the potential disruption of streets and private property that may
occur if 1 or more additional licenses are granted; and
   (E)   Such other information as the town may deem appropriate to be
considered prior to granting any competing or overlapping license.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.13 RENEWALS.
   Renewals will be processed and granted according to valid applicable law, as
amended. The town and a licensee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal
negotiations at any time during the license term of a license agreement.
Pursuant to applicable law, the town will review and evaluate the past
performance of a licensee, including compliance with an existing license. The
town will also consider review and determination of current and future
community needs and the technical, financial, and legal capabilities of a
licensee to meet the current and future cable service-related needs in a new
license considering the reasonable cost to do so.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.14 TRANSFERS AND ASSIGNMENTS.
   (A)   A license shall not be sold, assigned or transferred, either in whole
or in part, or leased, sublet, or mortgaged in any manner, nor shall title
thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or property therein,
pass to or vest in any person, without prior written consent of the town, which
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.
   (B)   The transfer of an existing license to an affiliate of licensee does
not require prior approval of the town so long as (a) licensee provided written
notice to town at least 30 days prior to the transfer and has provided
information sufficient for town to determine that the transfer is as described
in (b) or (c) of this section and the proposed transfer will not cause any
increased risks of nonperformance of the license or any loss to the town of its
bargained for consideration in the license; (b) the transfer is to an entity
controlling, controlled by, or under common control with licensee; or (c) a
transfer is in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation, or by assignment of
any rights, title, or interest of licensee in the license or cable system in
order to secure indebtedness. If town objects to the transfer, it shall notify
licensee in writing within 20 days of receipt of the written notice, in which
case the transfer of control shall be stayed until town confirms in its
discretion that it is as described in (b) or (c) above; otherwise, a transfer
of control shall be deemed to occur when the legal or practical ability to
exert actual working control over the affairs of the licensee transfers to a
person other than the licensee, either directly or indirectly, whether by
contractual agreement, majority ownership interest, any lesser ownership
interest or in any other manner. Consent of the town shall not be required for
a transfer in trust, mortgage, or other hypothecation in whole or in part to
secure an indebtedness. The transferee must assume all obligations of the
license and provide new insurance and performance bonds.
   (C)   Except for a transfer to an affiliate of licensee, no change,
transfer, or acquisition of control of the licensee shall occur without prior
written consent of the town, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.
The licensee shall promptly notify the town of any actual or proposed change
in, or transfer to, or acquisition by any other party of, control of the
licensee. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to major
stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised.
   (D)   A rebuttable presumption that transfer of control has occurred shall
arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person or affiliated group
(other than an affiliate of licensee) of more than 25% of the voting interest
of the licensee or of the person exercising management authority over the
licensee.
   (E)   Except in the case of an assignment of the license to an affiliate of
licensee, upon written notification by the licensee to the town of a proposed
assignment of the license, or transfer of control or ownership of the licensee
company, the manager shall issue his written notice fixing and setting forth
the day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest
therein may appear and be heard. The Clerk shall cause such notice to be
published in a newspaper of general circulation within the town. The Clerk also
shall cause a copy of such notice to be mailed to the licensee at least 10 days
prior to the date specified for the hearing. At the time set for such hearing,
or at any adjournment thereof, the manager shall proceed to hear the matter.
Following the close of such hearing, the manager shall prepare and file with
the Council his report of the hearing, his findings, and an opinion containing
his recommendations and the reasons therefor. If, after the expiration of 10
days following receipt of the manager's report and opinion, the Council shall
find that the assignment of the license or transfer of control or ownership of
the licensee company will not be detrimental or injurious to the best interests
and welfare of the subscribers and users, and of the town, then the Council by
resolution shall consent to the assignment of the license or transfer of
control or ownership of the licensee company. Such resolution shall thereupon
become and shall be a part of any license granted under this chapter and
affected thereby.
   (F)   The consent or approval of the Council to any transfer of a license
shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the town in and to
the streets, and any transfer shall, by its terms, be expressly subordinate to
the terms and conditions of the license.
   (G)   Except in the case of an assignment of the license to an affiliate of
licensee, each applicant for a transfer or assignment must furnish with its
request a nonrefundable filing fee in the amount of $2,500 payable in cash,
certified or cashier's check, wire transfer, or in any other manner acceptable
to the manager made payable to the town. No application for a transfer or
assignment of license shall be considered without receipt of said fee. The
licensee shall be responsible for reimbursing the town's full reasonable costs
in excess of the application fee in investigating the qualifications of the
transferee under the Cable Act as part of acting on the licensee's request for
a transfer or assignment of a license.
   (H)   The town shall act on any request for approval of a sale or transfer
within 120 days of the request if the request contains or is accompanied by the
information required by the FCC and this chapter.
   (I)   In no event shall a transfer of ownership be approved without the
successor-in-interest becoming a signatory to the license.
   (J)   As long as a grant, rent or lease does not amount to a transfer as
defined in this section and is made in the ordinary course of business with
prior notice to the town, a licensee in the normal course of providing cable
services may grant, rent, or lease use of its cable system to other persons.
Any such use shall be restricted to and consistent with (1) such uses as the
licensee is authorized in this chapter and the license, (2) other
telecommunications services which have received a license from town, or (3)
other telecommunications services for which no license is required by the town.
Any such use shall be in compliance with applicable federal and state law. Any
such grants, lease or rent by the licensee shall not, however, thereby relieve
its use of the streets and public ways, and any such grant, rent or lease shall
require that such other person comply with the appropriate provisions of this
chapter and the license as such use warrants. The grant, lease or rent shall
expressly provide for the authority of the town under applicable law to
regulate the use provided by the grant, lease or rent (including but not
limited to the authority to protect the public welfare, safety and health) and
to enforce compliance with any applicable standards established by this chapter
or the license. be a privilege which is personal to the original grantee. It
shall not be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, in whole or in
part, either by sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, without prior consent
of the Council expressed by resolution, and then only under such conditions as
may therein be prescribed.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.15 EFFECT OF AWARD OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Ordinance binding. Upon award of license pursuant to this chapter, a
licensee shall be bound by all the terms and conditions contained in this
chapter.
   (B)   Incorporation by reference of application for a license. A licensee
shall provide all of the cable service specifically set forth in its
application to provide cable services within the license area, and by its
acceptance of the license, the licensee specifically agrees that its
application is hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of the license.
In the event of a conflict between the license and the application, the
provisions of the license shall apply. Failure to provide services as promised
in licensee's application or agreed to in its license may be deemed a breach of
this chapter, to which the provisions of §
114.51 Liquidated Damages shall apply.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.16 PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   In consideration that the streets used by the licensee in the
operation of its cable system within the town are valuable public properties
acquired and maintained by the town at great expense to its taxpayers, and that
the grant to the licensee for the use of said streets is a valuable property
right without which the licensee would be required to invest substantial
capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions, and because the town will incur
costs in regulating and administering the license, the licensee shall pay to
the town a license fee in an amount no more than 5% of licensee's annual gross
revenues.
   (B)   If licensee provides its subscriber a bundling discount if the
subscriber purchases a bundle of cable service and non-cable services, then the
price of cable service included in the bundle shall be allocated based on the
licensee's standard, non-discounted rate. For example: if a subscriber's
charges for a given month for cable service alone would be $40, for local
telephone service alone would be $30, and for internet services alone would be
$30, for a total of $100; and if the 3 services are then bundled and offered at
a combined price of $80 (overall 20% discount), then the gross revenue from the
cable service will be deemed to be $32 ($40, less 20% of $40.00). Licensee may
allocate the discount differently over the services, so long as such allocation
does not reduce the gross revenues from cable services below what it would be
from the above calculation. Licensee shall not use bundled package offerings as
a means of evading the payment of financial obligations that are based on cable
service revenue.
   (C)   Should federal or state laws or regulations be amended in the future
to allow the town to receive a greater fee than the fee set forth in division
(A) of this section, then the town shall have the right to increase the fee to
the extent specified in the license, or meet with licensee to modify the
license.
   (D)   The payment of the license fee by the licensee to the town shall be
made quarterly by delivery of the same to the manager on or before the
twentieth day of the month following the quarter end, and shall become
delinquent if not paid before 45 days after the end of the quarter. Payment
shall be accompanied by a license fee payment worksheet provided by the town.
If such payment is not made by the next to the last business day of the
following month, the town shall impose interest at a rate of 1.5% per month
commencing from the date payment should have been made, unless the payment is
subject to a bona fide dispute, and continuing until the payment is made.
Fractions of a month shall be considered to constitute a full month for the
purpose of computing interest. In addition to interest which may be assessed
under this division, if licensee fails to pay any license fee, licensee shall
be subject to the following civil penalties:
      (1)    A licensee who fails to pay the license fee or any portion thereof
within the time prescribed shall pay a penalty of 10% of the unpaid fee each
month, unless the licensee shows that the failure is due to reasonable cause
and not due to willful neglect.
      (2)    A licensee who fails or refuses to pay a license fee or any
portion thereof after notice and demand by the town shall pay a penalty of 25%
of the unpaid fee, unless licensee shows that the failure is due to reasonable
cause and not due to willful neglect.
      (3)    If the cause of failure to pay the licensee fee or any portion
thereof is determined by the town to be due to civil fraud or evasion of the
license fee, the licensee shall pay a penalty of 50% of the amount of
deficiency.
   (E)   The town shall have the right to inspect the licensee's cable service
income records and the right to audit and to recompute any amounts determined
to be payable under this chapter; provided, however, that such audit shall take
place within 36 months following the close of each of the licensee's fiscal
years. Any additional amount due to the town as a result of the audit shall be
paid within 30 days following written notice to the licensee by the town, said
notice shall include a copy of the audit report; provided, however, that
licensee shall not be required to pay such deficiency until 30 days after
completion of the administrative review process if licensee commences such
process pursuant to §
114.51(A)(3). If there is a deficiency in the payment of license fees to the
town of 10% or more, the town may assess the cost of the audit to the licensee.
If town owes a refund to licensee or if licensee owes additional amounts to
town, town and licensee shall agree upon a reasonable payment schedule with
interest from the date of request until paid at the rate provided for
hereunder.
   (F)   In compliance with applicable law, licensee shall not be required to
pay any town right-of-way construction permit and development review fees which
the town imposes under town code requirements on licensee's construction permit
activities in or on the town streets for cable services and such fees shall be
included in the license fee. If facilities constructed by licensee serve not
only cable services but also internet service or telecommunications services,
then licensee shall pay a proportionate cost of the permit fees attributable to
those services for which an annual license fee is not being paid.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.17 USE OF TELEPHONE COMPANY'S FACILITIES.
   If a licensee uses a telephone company's cable system distribution channels
furnished to the licensee pursuant to tariff or contract on file with a
regulatory body having jurisdiction and licensee makes no use of the streets
independent of such telephone company furnished facilities, licensee remains
fully bound by the terms of its license and this chapter.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.18 REQUIRED SERVICES AND FACILITIES.
   (A)   A licensee shall maintain the broad categories of video programming or
other services set forth in its license. Where there has been a substantial
failure to maintain the broad categories of video programming or other services
as set forth in the license, the town may, following due notice and public
hearing as provided in §§
114.52 Administrative Hearing and
114.53 Hearing by Council, direct the licensee to comply with its obligations
in this regard. Written notice of such hearing shall be provided to the
licensee and to the public at least 30 days prior to such hearing.
   (B)   A license may require a licensee to provide channel capacity to the
town for educational and governmental programming on terms and conditions
specified in the license.
   (C)   Licensee shall provide high definition television to its subscribers
as such broadcasting becomes available from the broadcasting stations on the
channels, consistent with and as required by the regulations of the FCC.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.19 SUBSCRIBER SERVICES; RATES.
   (A)   Initial rates. A licensee shall establish and notify the town of
initial rates for its cable services prior to commencement of services. All
rates established shall be reasonable, just, and fair to the public.
   (B)   Authority to regulate rates. To the extent permitted, the town may
regulate the rates for cable service in accordance with federal and state law.
   (C)   Notice of rates. Notice of rates shall be given in accordance with §
114.41 Subscriber and Town Notification.
   (D)   Any rate established shall be reasonable, just and fair to the public,
and shall provide the grantee a return upon its investment reasonably
sufficient to:
      (1)   Assure confidence in grantee's financial soundness;
      (2)   Support its credit and attract necessary capital under efficient
and economical management; and
      (3)   Provide a return to equity owners commensurate with current returns
on investment in other enterprises having corresponding risks.
   (E)   No rate established shall afford any undue preference or advantage
among subscribers, but separate rates may be established for separate classes
of subscribers and rates may reflect the populated areas where there are less
than 50 residences per strand mile or trunk line cable to be installed.
   (F)   Changes in established rates may be made by grantee by notification to
the Council, with the changes to be supported by financial data showing a
change to be necessary in accordance with division (B) above.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.20 GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL.
   Unless otherwise provided in the license, licensee shall provide channel
capacity for a minimum of 1 government access channel dedicated for town use.
The management and operation of the government access channel shall be the
responsibility of the town.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.21 EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNELS.
   Unless otherwise provided in the license, licensee shall provide channel
capacity for a minimum of 1 educational access channel dedicated for use by all
schools in the town (as defined in this chapter), Arizona State University,
Northern Arizona University, and the Yavapai County Community College. The
management and operation of the educational access channels shall be the
responsibility of the town.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.22 GENERAL PROVISIONS CONCERNING ACCESS
   (A)   The provisions of this section shall apply to all access channels.
   (B)   Technical design of access channels and responsibilities.
      (1)   In general, the town or its designees (other than licensee) is
responsible for:
         (a)   Delivering channel signals to the licensee at origination points
and processing the signals so that they can be carried on the cable system; and
receiving signals from licensees at all connection points to public buildings
and origination points;
         (b)   Controlling the routing of signals from the origination points
to the appropriate channels; and
         (c)   Providing and maintaining the studios and equipment used to
produce programming.
      (2)   In general, licensee is responsible for transmitting access channel
signals from the origination point and/or other cities/origination points for
access programming to all connection points to public buildings and origination
points identified in the license, and to subscribers without material
degradation, and maintaining all the facilities required to do so.
   (C)   The licensee shall not take any actions that would discourage or
prevent maximum utilization of all access channels provided, and shall
cooperate with the town and managers of access channels to ensure that
subscribers are aware of the channels, can access them easily, and, to the
extent that a licensee (or some entity acting on a licensee's behalf) is
involved in publishing licensee's channel schedules, that the access channels
are similarly published.
   (D)   Public building connections. Upon request of the town and consistent
with the joint trench requirements of division (E) of this section, licensee
shall provide, without charge, at a minimum, 1 activated standard drop to all
of the following present and future public buildings, as designated by the town
from time to time:
      (1)   Town fire stations and police stations;
      (2)   All public libraries, including branches;
      (3)   Town Hall, community center, recreation facilities, senior center,
public works building and such other facilities used for municipal purposes as
may be designated in the license;
      (4)   Other locations as set forth in a license agreement. If provided in
the license, the licensee shall provide basic service free of charge to those
facilities specified above. A license may further specify the particular
conditions under which the connections will be provided.
   (E)   Joint trench requirements. The town shall notify licensee in writing
at least 30 days prior to opening trenches for use by utilities to serve public
buildings. If such notice is given and subject to the construction or rebuild
schedule and line extension policy, licensee shall install cable facilities in
order to provide the connection to the public building without charge for
trenching. If no notice is given, the town shall pay the reasonable cost of
such trenching.
   (F)   Access channel assignments. To the extent that it is legally,
economically and technically feasible, licensee will employ reasonable efforts
to use the same channel numbers for the educational and governmental access
channels as are used by another cable licensee, if any, with the greatest
number of subscribers in the town.
   (G)   Access interconnections.
      (1)   Subject to the limitations of applicable federal and state law,
licensee shall interconnect access channels with any or all other cable systems
in the town or in other nearby municipalities, owned by licensee or an
affiliate or other cable operator as provided in the license, at no cost to the
town or the other municipality.
      (2)   The town or its designated access provider shall have the right to
control and schedule the operation of all interconnected access channels. In
addition, the town shall have the right to use, at its sole discretion and at
no cost to the town, any access channels to be provided under a license
agreement for access interconnection.
      (3)   Licensee shall take all necessary technical steps to ensure that
technically adequate signal quality and routing/switching systems are initially
and continuously provided for all access interconnections between local
jurisdictions. The cost for any equipment, operation or maintenance dedicated
to such access interconnections shall be shared on pro rata basis or as
mutually agreed upon among all participating jurisdictions, and paid to
licensee.
      (4)   A licensee may be granted reasonable extensions of time to
interconnect or the town may rescind its order to interconnect upon petition by
the licensee to the town. The town shall grant said request, if it finds that a
licensee negotiated in good faith and failed to obtain an approval from another
cable system(s), governmental entity or educational institution for the
proposed interconnection.
   (H)   Access channel capital costs. The licensee voluntarily provides
grants, funding, training, services, or any other kind of support reasonably
necessary to meet the community needs of the town for the access channels, the
value of which shall be offset against the license fee in the manner provided
for by state law. If state law is amended to allow the town to require
contribution of costs, the parties shall negotiate in good faith for amendment
of this license, and licensee shall, to the extent consistent with federal law,
make capital expenditures in support of access channels and related facilities
and equipment as provided in the license. If there is more than 1 licensee
providing cable service in the town, the town will use its best efforts to
assure that the licensee's capital expenditures for access channels, facilities
and equipment are reasonably equivalent as provided in the license. To the
extent licensee's rates for cable services are subject to regulation, and to
the extent consistent with applicable law, licensee shall have the right to
treat such capital expenditures as external costs in support of access channels
in setting regulated rates for cable services.
   (I)   Access channels on basic service tier. All access channels provided to
subscribers shall be included, without limitation, on all basic tiers,
including digital basic.
   (J)   Change in technology. In the event a licensee makes any change in the
cable system and related equipment and facilities or in licensee's signal
delivery technology, licensee shall ensure that town analog signals are
converted by licensee and the signal quality or transmission of access services
or programming remains substantially the same.
   (K)   Technical quality. Licensee shall maintain all access channels and
interconnections at the same level of technical quality and reliability
required by this chapter and any license agreement and all other applicable
laws, rules and regulations for residential subscriber channels subject to the
technical quality or reliability of the signal received from the source.
Licensee shall provide routine maintenance and shall repair and replace all
transmission equipment including channel modulators, associated cable and
equipment, required to carry signal quality to and from licensee's facilities
for the access channels; provided, however, licensee shall have no duty to
provide, maintain, repair or replace equipment for which the town is
responsible under division (B)(1) of this section.
   (L)   Access cooperation. The town and licensee may agree to designate any
other jurisdiction which has entered into an agreement with the licensee or an
affiliate of the licensee to receive any access benefit due the town hereunder,
or to share in the use of access services, facilities, equipment or channel
operations hereunder. The purpose of this division shall be to allow
cooperation in the use of access channels, facilities and equipment.
   (M)   Indemnification by access programming producers and users. All local
producers and users of any of the access facilities or channels shall agree in
writing to hold harmless the licensee, the town, and any responsible
educational institution, from any and all liability or other injury (including
the reasonable cost of defending claims or litigations) arising from or in
connection with claims for failure to comply with applicable federal laws,
rules, regulations or other requirements of local, state or federal
authorities; for claims of libel, slander, invasion of privacy, or the
infringement of common law or statutory copyright; for unauthorized use of any
trademark, trade name or service mark; for breach of contractual or other
obligations owing to third parties by the licensee, town, or responsible
educational institution; and for any other injury or damage in law or equity,
which claims result from the use of an access facility or channel.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.23 TIME IS OF THE ESSENCE.
   For any license or contract entered into pursuant to this chapter, time
shall be deemed of the essence and any failure of the licensee to perform
within the time allotted, or within a reasonable time if a period is not
specified, shall be sufficient grounds for the town to invoke liquidated
damages or revocation of a license in accordance with §§
114.50 Construction Bonds and §
114.53 Hearings by Council.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.24 ACCEPTANCE AND EFFECTIVE DATE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   No license granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
become effective unless and until all insurance, letter of credit and bond
requirements are met, all of such provisions being hereby declared to be
conditions precedent to the effectiveness of any such license granted
hereunder. If any of such provisions are not done and completed in the time and
manner required, the license shall be null and void.
   (B)   Within 20 days after the date of awarding any license, or within such
extended period of time as the Council in its discretion may authorize, the
licensee shall file with the Clerk its written acceptance of the license, in a
form satisfactory to the town attorney, together with the construction bond and
insurance policies required by this chapter, and its agreement to be bound by
and to comply with and to do everything which is required of the licensee by
the provisions of this chapter and the applicable license. Such acceptance
shall be acknowledged by the licensee before a notary public, and shall, in
form and content, be satisfactory to and approved by the Town Attorney.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.25 PERMITS, INSTALLATIONS AND SERVICE.
   Within 180 after acceptance of any license, the licensee shall proceed with
due diligence to apply for necessary permits and authorizations which are
required in the conduct of its business, including, but not limited to, any
utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses, and any
other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted
regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of cable systems, or
their associated microwave transmission facilities.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.26 CABLE SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION MAP AND SCHEDULE.
   (A)   Within 180 after acceptance of any license, licensee shall submit a
specific construction plan or reconstruction plan, as applicable, which shall
be incorporated as an exhibit in the license. The plan shall include an overall
plant mileage schedule of any construction or reconstruction effort and a time
schedule of said work and system design criteria. The plan shall be updated on
each 5-year anniversary of issuance of the license.
   (B)   Within 90 days after obtaining necessary permits, licenses, and
authorizations, licensee shall commence construction and installation of the
cable system or any reconstruction of the cable system.
      (1)   Licensee shall comply with the time schedule for construction
required in division (A) of this section; provided, however, the town issues
permits in a timely manner.
      (2)   Installation and operation of the new or any rebuilt cable system
by licensee shall proceed on a nondiscriminatory basis, without regard for
subscriber affluence or other discriminatory factors.
      (3)   Immediately following commencement of construction and installation
of the cable system under a license, licensee shall diligently proceed to
deliver cable services, as described in the license.
   (C)   Failure on the part of the licensee to commence and diligently pursue
each of the foregoing requirements and to complete each of the matters set
forth herein shall be grounds for liquidated damages and/or termination of such
license pursuant to §§
114.50 Construction Bonds and
114.53 Hearings by Council; provided, however, that the Council in its
discretion may extend the time for the commencement and completion of
construction and installation for additional periods if any of the conditions
set forth in §
114.59 Force Majeure exist.
   (D)   A license may contain alternative provisions that further the purposes
of this section to provide cable services in the town.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.27 LINE EXTENSION.
   (A)   Residential service. After completion of construction in an area
pursuant to a construction schedule, a licensee shall make cable services
available to dwelling units within the town and shall extend its cable system
as follows:
      (1)   Each unit in a multiple dwelling unit (MDU) shall be counted as a
dwelling unit in determining residential density where a mutually acceptable
agreement granting licensee reasonable access to the MDU has been executed by
the owner of the property and delivered to the licensee. Licensee shall not be
required to make service available to residents of a MDU where the owner of the
property has not granted licensee such reasonable access to the property.
      (2)   When requested by a resident in the town, licensee shall, at
licensee's sole expense, extend the cable system to any single-family residence
or dwelling within the town; provided, that the residence or dwelling is
located within 225 feet of the nearest technically feasible point of connection
on the cable system. Such extension(s) shall include cutting in 1 or more taps
and extending cable as necessary.
      (3)   A license may provide for different line extension requirements
from that required in division (A)(2) of this section so long as such
requirements are not less restrictive and provide similar benefits.
      (4)   To prevent unnecessary disruption and damage to streets, rights-of-
way, and other property, the installation of underground cable shall be
accomplished in new subdivisions that meet the requirements of division (A)(2)
of this section at the same time, and in the same trench, as other
communications, electric and other permanent services to structures, unless to
do so would be economically infeasible. Except as federal law may grant them
other rights, developers of new residential buildings or mobile homes within a
new or undeveloped subdivision, new residential units within new multiple-
occupancy residential developments, and new commercial and industrial buildings
and structures shall treat cable television facilities as they treat other
communication facilities, utilities and other underground facilities, in
regards to availability and cost of trenching for undergroundings.
      (5)   A license may provide for different line extension requirements
from that required in division (A)(4).
      (6)   Absent a showing by licensee to the manager of circumstances beyond
licensee's reasonable control, an extension of service pursuant to division (A)
(2) of this section or this division shall be accomplished within 120 of the
developer's or resident's request.
      (7)   Licensee shall not be required to install the cable system or
conduit in the joint trench of a new subdivision or to provide cable service to
residents of the subdivision when the developer or homeowner's association of
the subdivision has entered into an agreement in which another party has agreed
to provide cable television or other comparable video services to all residents
of the subdivision and in which the subscribers' fees for such services are
paid to the provider from collection of homeowner's association fees. However,
upon termination of such agreement, the line extension required by this section
shall apply.
   (B)   Commercial service. After completion of construction in an area
pursuant to a construction schedule, a licensee shall make cable services
available to commercial establishments as follows, except licensee shall not be
required to make service available to commercial establishments where the owner
of the property has not granted licensee reasonable access to the property:
      (1)   When requested by the owner of a commercial establishment;
provided, that no plant extension and nothing more than a standard drop is
required to make cable services available; or provided, that the building is
located within 225 feet of the nearest technically feasible point of connection
on the cable system.
      (2)   Absent a showing by licensee to the manager of unusual
circumstances, including without limitation street crossings, an extension of
service shall be accomplished within 120 days of owner's execution of any
necessary easement documents and capital contribution agreements.
      (3)   A license may provide for different line extension requirements
from that required in divisions (B)(1) and (2).
   (C)   Service drops.
      (1)   Licensee shall make service available to any single-family
residence or any commercial establishment within the town at applicable
standard connection charge if the connection requires a standard drop.
      (2)   If making service available requires more than a standard drop,
licensee shall not be required to make such service available unless the person
requesting service pays to licensee (a) the standard connection charge and (b)
an amount equal to the reasonable actual labor and material costs incurred by
licensee for the additional facilities and work.
      (3)   Licensee may offer bulk billing service, but shall not require a
bulk billing agreement as a condition of providing service.
      (4)   Absent a showing by licensee to the manager of unusual
circumstances, including without limitation street crossings, (a) any standard
drop to a single-family residence or dwelling shall be accomplished within 7
business days after an order has been placed, and (b) any drop that is not a
standard drop shall be accomplished within a reasonable time under the
circumstances. Line extensions shall be done as provided in division (A) of
this section.
      (5)   Absent a showing by licensee to the manager of unusual
circumstances, including without limitation street crossings, (a) any standard
drop to a commercial establishment shall be accomplished within 10 days after
the owner of such commercial establishment executes any necessary easement
documents and capital contribution agreements, and (b) any commercial drop that
is not a standard drop shall be accomplished within a reasonable time under the
circumstances.
   (D)   If a licensee elects to extend cable service to a customer in a
licensed area which does not meet the standard drop requirements of this
section, the licensee shall not refuse to extend service to any other customer
in the same area solely on the grounds that service to the first customer did
not meet the standard drop requirements.
   (E)   The line extension requirements set forth in this section shall not
apply to any area covered by a construction phase described in the construction
schedule until the construction phase for that area has been completed.
   (F)   Discrimination prohibited. No person, firm or corporation in the
existing cable service area of the licensee shall be arbitrarily refused cable
services; provided, however, that the licensee shall not be required to provide
cable services to any subscriber who does not pay the applicable line extension
connection fee and/or cable service charge(s).
   (G)   Annexed territory. Newly annexed territory shall be subject to the
terms of this chapter and this section.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.28 PLACEMENT OF TRANSMISSION FACILITIES.
   Except as provided in the license, facilities shall be placed in accordance
with
Chapter 150 of the Chino Valley Town code.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.29 CONSTRUCTION AND TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Compliance with construction and technical standards.
      (1)   As provided in the license, licensee shall construct, install,
operate and maintain its system in a manner and at all times consistent with
(a) all laws, this chapter, construction standards of the town, the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) Rules and Regulations, Part 76 Subpart K
(Technical Standards), as amended from time to time, and (b) detailed standards
submitted by licensee as part of its application, which standards are to be
incorporated by reference in a license.
      (2)   When there have been multiple, similar complaints by subscribers,
or when there exists other evidence which suggests that licensee is not in
substantial compliance with the technical standards, or the cable system is not
operating in accordance with this chapter or the license, the manager shall
have the right and authority to compel licensee to test, analyze and report on
the performance of the cable system under the supervision of the manager. Such
report shall be delivered to the manager no later than 30 days after the
manager requests such test(s) in writing and shall include the following
information: the nature of the complaints that precipitated the test(s), which
cable system component(s) was/were tested, the equipment used and procedure(s)
employed in such testing, the result(s) of such test(s) and the manner in which
such complaints were resolved. If such report indicates licensee is in partial
compliance with the technical standards, but there exists evidence suggesting
that licensee is nonetheless not in substantial compliance, the manager may
require that the test(s) be repeated within 30 days of the delivery of such
report, under the supervision of a professional engineer not on the permanent
staff of licensee. Such engineer shall sign all records of such repeated test
(s) and shall forward to the manager (a) such records, (b) a report
interpreting the results, and (c) recommended corrective actions, if any. The
fees of such engineer shall be paid by (a) licensee, if the repeated test(s)
show(s) licensee is not in substantial compliance with the technical standards
of this chapter, or (b) the town, if the repeated test(s) show(s) licensee is
in substantial compliance with said standards.
   (B)   Additional specifications. Construction, installation and maintenance
of a cable system shall be performed in an orderly and professional manner. All
cables and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with and in a
manner similar to the installation of electric and telephone lines. Multiple
cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect
for engineering considerations. Underground installations shall be in
conformance with all applicable codes. Each cable system shall include
equipment capable of providing standby power as specified in the license. The
equipment shall be so constructed as to automatically revert to the standby
mode when the electrical utility power returns. The system shall incorporate
safeguards necessary to prevent injury to technicians resulting from licensee's
standby power sources. Licensee shall at all times comply with applicable
sections of:
      (1)   National Electrical Safety Code (ANSI)C2;
      (2)   National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters);
      (3)   The International Building Code as may be adopted and amended by
the town, together with applicable portions of all other uniform codes, as may
be adopted and amended by the town, promulgated by the International Conference
of Building Officials;
      (4)   Town zoning code and subdivision regulations, all as from time to
time amended and revised, and all other applicable rules and regulations now in
effect or hereinafter adopted by the town;
      (5)   The Maricopa Association of Governments Uniform Standard
Specifications for Public Works Construction including the latest town
supplement thereto.
   (C)   Emergency service. The licensee shall design and construct the system
to provide for a restricted audio override of the audio portion of all channels
during emergencies consistent with FCC regulations. Emergency or standby power
sources will be installed at the main electronic control center and appropriate
locations so as to minimize loss of signal. Key cable routings shall also be
equipped with a standby power source as set forth in the license. In case of
any declared emergency or disaster, consistent with FCC regulations, the cable
system shall, upon request of the mayor or manager, make available immediately
its facilities to the town for emergency use during the emergency or disaster
period. A "declared emergency or disaster" as used in this section means such
event that has been proclaimed by the mayor, the governor, or other competent
authority. In any event, the cable system shall not endanger or interfere with
the safety of persons or property in the license area or other areas where the
licensee may have equipment located.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.30 UTILITY LOCATING SYSTEM.
   A licensee shall be required to be a participant in the regional 1 call
utility locating system (Blue Stake). Licensee shall accurately identify its
facilities in accordance with the requirements of the 1 call utility locating
system (blue stake), and the town shall not be liable for any damages to a
licensee's facilities that have not been accurately identified. Licensee shall
use paint that dissolves within 3 weeks. In the event licensee's utility
markings paint remains visible after 3 weeks, licensee shall remove such
markings. If licensee fails to remove such markings after notice and a
reasonable time for cure, the town may cause the markings to be removed and
invoice the licensee for the removal costs, which costs shall be promptly paid.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.31 RESIDENT NOTIFICATION OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY REQUIRED.
   Licensee shall provide reasonable advance notice to all affected residents
prior to system construction or upgrade crews entering the right-of-way or
easement in front of or on their property; provided, that licensee shall not be
required to provide such notice in emergencies.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.32 LOCATION OF PROPERTY OF LICENSEE.
   (A)   Any poles, wires, cable lines, conduits or other properties of a
licensee to be constructed or installed in streets shall be so constructed or
installed only at such locations and in such manner as shall be approved by the
public works director acting in the exercise of his reasonable discretion
consistent with the town's regulations. The director's decision shall
accommodate reasonable technical requirements of the facilities.
   (B)   Except as permitted by the town, a licensee shall not install or erect
any facility or apparatus in or on any privately owned area within the town
which is intended to become a public street, whether or not designated or
delineated as a proposed public street on any preliminary subdivision approved
by the town.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter or any license
granted pursuant thereto, all cable system lines of a licensee in any public
street, shall be located underground in accordance with §
150.081 and at such depths and locations as shall be approved by the public
works director. This requirement shall not apply to existing above-ground
facilities.
   (D)   Except as provided in the license, upon the undergrounding of other
utility lines or shared overhead facilities, licensee shall concurrently (or
earlier) place its facilities underground, at its own expense, at depths and
locations approved by the public works director.
   (E)   All new underground wires or cable of licensee placed after the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be placed in
conduits except for service drop lines.
   (F)   The licensee or its authorized contractors will obtain permits, prior
to any physical work being performed in the town's rights-of-way or on town-
owned property. All work will be done in accordance with the town's technical
and permitting specifications and in accordance with the Chino Valley Town
Code.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.33 EMERGENCY WORK.
   The town reserves the right to move any portion of the licensee's equipment
and facilities as may be required in any emergency as determined by the town
without liability for interruption of cable service. Prior to taking any
actions pursuant to this section, the town shall provide, if feasible,
reasonable notice to licensee of the emergency to allow licensee the
opportunity to protect or repair licensee's facilities involved in the
emergency.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.34 REMOVAL AND ABANDONMENT OF PROPERTY OF LICENSEE.
   The following provisions shall not apply to facilities used in the provision
of services other than cable services as to which no cable license is required:
   (A)   If the use of substantial part of the cable system is discontinued for
any reason for a continuous period of 12 months, or if such cable system or
property has been installed in any street or public place without complying
with the requirements of the licensee's license or this chapter, or the license
has been terminated, canceled or has expired without renewal, the licensee
shall promptly, upon being given 10 days' written notice from the public works
director, remove from the streets or public places all such property and poles
of such cable system other than any underground cable or any other underground
property which the manager may permit to be abandoned in place. Upon such
removal, the licensee shall promptly restore the street or other area from
which such property has been removed to a condition satisfactory to the
manager.
   (B)   Any property of the licensee remaining in place 180 after the
termination or expiration of the license shall be at the option of the town
considered permanently abandoned. The town may extend such time.
   (C)   Any property of the licensee permitted to be abandoned in place shall
be abandoned in such a manner as the public works director shall prescribe.
Upon permanent abandonment of the property of the licensee in place, the
property shall become that of the town, and the licensee shall submit to the
town an instrument in writing, to be approved by the town attorney,
transferring to the town the ownership of such property.
   (D)   At the town's discretion, any property of the licensee not permitted
by the town to be abandoned in place may be removed by the town at licensee's
expense.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.35 TEMPORARY REMOVAL OF WIRE FOR BUILDING IMPROVEMENTS.
   The licensee, on the request of any person, firm or corporation holding a
building moving permit issued by the town, shall temporarily raise or lower its
wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal,
raising or lowering of wires shall be paid to the licensee by the person, firm
or corporation requesting the same, and the licensee shall have the authority
to require such payment in advance. The licensee shall be given not less than
10 days' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.36 CHANGES REQUIRED BY PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   The licensee shall from time to time, at its own expense, protect, support,
temporarily dislocate, temporarily or permanently, as may be required, remove
or relocate, without expense to the town any facilities installed, used or
maintained under the license, if and when made necessary by any lawful change
of grade, alignment, or width of any street by the town, or made necessary by
any other public improvement or alteration in, under, on, upon or about any
street, when such public improvement or alteration is at the instance of the
town, when such improvement or alteration is for a governmental or proprietary
function, or made necessary by traffic conditions, public safety, street
vacation or any other public project or purpose of the town, and when the
licensee has substantially the same obligations with respect to the cost
thereof as all other users of the public rights-of-way.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.37 METHODS AND MATERIALS OF STREET CONSTRUCTION.
   The town shall have the right to specify the methods and materials of street
construction or reconstruction, together with the horizontal and vertical
location of any underground facility proposed by licensee within any public
property or right-of-way. The town shall also have the right to limit the work
of the licensee to assure a minimum of inconvenience to the traveling public
and to impose traffic control requirements, as specified in the town's
subdivision regulations and Town Code. Licensee will be required to obtain
permits from the town, allowing licensee to work in the public rights-of-way
pursuant to chapter 150 of the Chino Valley Town Code.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.38 FAILURE TO PERFORM STREET WORK.
   If a licensee causes damage to pavement, sidewalks, driveways, landscaping
or other property, the licensee or the authorized agent shall, at its own
expense and in a manner approved by the town, replace and restore such places
in accordance with the Chino Valley Town Code and Unified Development
Ordinance.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.39 TELEPHONE COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE.
   A licensee shall provide efficient customer service to subscribers over the
telephone and, at a minimum, meet the standards set forth below:
   (A)   Licensee shall have a publicly listed, local or toll-free telephone
number, for the purpose of receiving inquiries regarding new service or
terminating service, disconnection or reconnection of service during or after
vacation, handling converters, paying bills, receiving complaints, scheduling
service calls or repairs, making changes in type of programming, and providing
information to subscribers on a 24 hours a day, 7 days a week basis.
   (B)   Trained licensee representatives will be available to respond to
subscriber telephone inquiries 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
   (C)   Under normal operating conditions, the time taken for a live licensee
representative to answer the telephone and speak directly with a subscriber,
including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds after the connection is made.
If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds.
These standards shall be met no less than 90% of the time under normal
operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis. No caller should be left
on hold more than 60 seconds without being informed of the status of the call.
   (D)   Under normal operating conditions, the subscribers will receive a busy
signal less than 3% of the time.
   (E)   Licensee shall provide reasonable methodology to measure compliance
with the telephone answering standards.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.40 SUBSCRIBER SERVICE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Each licensee shall at all times meet or exceed Federal Customer
Service Standards and the subscriber service standards for subscribers set
forth in this chapter and in its license. If there is a conflict among
standards, the stricter standard shall prevail, unless preempted by federal
law.
   (B)   Upon termination of cable services to any subscriber, a licensee shall
promptly remove its converter equipment from the premises of such subscriber
upon the subscriber's request.
   (C)   Licensee shall render efficient cable services, make repairs promptly,
and interrupt cable services only for good cause and for the shortest time
possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall occur during periods
of minimum cable system use.
   (D)   Licensee shall not knowingly allow its cable or other operations to
interfere with television reception of persons not serviced by licensee, nor
shall the cable system interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner the
operation of the various utilities serving the residents of the town.
   (E)   A licensee shall continue, through the term of the license, to
maintain the technical, operational, and maintenance standards and quality of
cable service set forth in this chapter and as specified in the license.
   (F)   Under normal operating conditions, each of the following 4 standards
for subscribers will be met no less than 95% of the time measured on a
quarterly basis:
      (1)   Standard drops will be installed within 10 business days after an
order has been placed.
      (2)   Except for conditions beyond the control of the licensee, the
licensee must take actions to correct its service problems the next business
day after notification of the service problem and will begin working on service
interruptions promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the
interruption becomes known.
      (3)   The "appointment window" for installations, service calls, and
other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at a maximum,
a 4-hour time block during normal business hours. (The licensee may schedule
service calls and other installation activities outside of normal business
hours for the express convenience of the subscriber.)
      (4)   If a licensee representative is running late for an appointment
with a subscriber and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled,
the licensee will attempt to contact the subscriber. The appointment will be
rescheduled, as necessary, at a time convenient for the subscriber.
   (G)   Licensee shall respond immediately to any outage. It shall be deemed a
violation if licensee exceeds a 4-hour average response time to outages during
any consecutive 3-month period.
   (H)   Licensee shall respond and resolve all complaints within a reasonable
time.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.41 SUBSCRIBER AND TOWN NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   The licensee shall provide written information in easy-to-understand
language on each of the following areas prior to or at the time of installation
of service, at least annually to all subscribers and the town, and at any time
upon request:
      (1)   Products and services offered;
      (2)   Prices and options for programming services and conditions of
subscription to programming and other services;
      (3)   Installation and service maintenance policies;
      (4)   Instructions on how to use the cable service;
      (5)   Information on a parental control feature that will permit a
subscriber to lock out any objectionable programming from the cable services
entering his or her home;
      (6)   Channel positions of programming carried on the system; and
      (7)   Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and
telephone number of the local business office and of the town's designated
office for handling cable television matters.
   (B)   Subscribers and the town will be notified of any changes in rates,
programming, services or channel positions as soon as possible in writing.
Notice shall be given to the town and subscribers a minimum of 30 days in
advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the licensee,
unless the town concurs that notice is not necessary. In addition, the licensee
shall notify the town and subscribers 30 days in advance of any significant
changes in the other information required by division (A) of this section.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.42 BILLING PRACTICES; INFORMATION AND PROCEDURES
   (A)   Bills to subscribers will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills
to subscribers shall be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not
limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills to
subscribers shall clearly delineate all activity during the billing period,
including optional charges, rebates and credits.
   (B)   Licensee shall bill all subscribers to its cable system in a uniform
manner, regardless of subscriber's level of service. A licensee may offer bulk
billing service, but shall not require bulk billing service as a condition of
providing service. In no case shall any subscriber be billed for services in
excess of 30 days prior to receipt of such service. Payment shall be due no
sooner than the 15th day of each billing period, and the due date shall be
listed on each bill. Bills shall be mailed no later than the first day of the
billing period. No late fee shall be charged until 7 days after the current due
date of the current billing cycle.
   (C)   In case of a billing dispute, the licensee must respond to a written
complaint from a subscriber within 30 days. The licensee shall follow a written
internal appeal or dispute resolution procedure for resolution of billing
disputes. A current copy of the procedures shall be provided to the Town Clerk
and shall be kept on file in the Town Clerk's office.
   (D)   Any subscriber shall be entitled, upon request, oral or written, to
licensee, to a refund equal to 1 day's service for each subscriber's service
interruption: (1) for each continuous 24-hour period or (2) a period of 2 or
more hours of any 4 days within a monthly billing period.
   (E)   Refunds and credits shall be issued promptly, as follows:
      (1)   Payment deposits shall be refunded after 12 months of satisfactory
customer payments.
      (2)   Billing refunds and credits shall be issued no later than the next
billing cycle following correction of the error or 30 days following the
determination that a refund or credit is warranted, whichever is earlier.
      (3)   Equipment deposits shall be refunded within 7 days after the
equipment supplied by licensee is returned to the licensee.
      (4)   Service credits will be issued no later than the subscriber's next
billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.43 SUBSCRIBER SOLICITATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   All personnel, agents and representatives of the licensee, including
subcontractors, shall wear a cable uniform or clearly display a photo-
identification badge when acting on behalf of the licensee in the town.
   (B)   The licensee shall afford each subscriber of the cable system with a
3-day right of rescission for ordering installation of cable service from the
cable system; provided, that such right of rescission shall end upon initiation
of physical installation of cable system equipment on such subscriber's
premises.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.44 DISCONNECTION AND TERMINATION OF CABLE SERVICES.
   Licensee shall only disconnect or terminate a subscriber's cable service for
good and just cause. In no event shall licensee disconnect said cable service
for nonpayment without the prior written notification to the affected
subscriber at least 7 days prior to such disconnection or termination. In no
event shall such disconnection or termination for nonpayment occur in less than
30 days after a subscriber's failure to pay a bill due. Where the licensee has
improperly discontinued cable system service to any such subscriber, it shall
provide free reconnection to the cable system to such subscriber.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.45 PROTECTION OF SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY.
   (A)   Licensee shall at all times comply with the Cable Act provisions
related to protection of subscriber privacy as set forth in 47 U.S.C. Section
551 as may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   A subscriber shall be provided, free of charge, access to all
personally identifiable information regarding that subscriber which is
collected and maintained by a licensee. Such information shall be made
available to the subscriber at reasonable times and at a convenient place
designated by licensee. A cable subscriber shall be provided reasonable
opportunity to correct any error in such information.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the town from
enacting or enforcing additional laws consistent with this section for the
protection of subscriber privacy.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.46 REPORTS.
   (A)   Annual reports. Within 90 days after the close of the licensee's
fiscal year, the licensee upon request of the town shall submit a written
annual report, in a form approved by the town including, but not limited to,
the following information:
      (1)   A summary of the previous year's (or, in the case of the initial
report year, the initial year's) activities in development of the cable system
including, but not limited to, services begun or discontinued during the
reporting year, and the number of subscribers for each class of service.
      (2)   A summary of cable system revenues subject to the license fee
provided for under §
114.16 Payment of License Fee.
      (3)   Full financial statements for the previous year, including income
statement, balance sheet, cash flow statement, and appropriate explanatory
footnotes, for the licensee or any parent company. Financial statements for the
licensee or any parent company shall be audited by an independent CPA, and all
other statements shall be certified by an officer of the licensee to be an
accurate reflection of licensee's books and records. In the event any audited
financial report has not been published by the date due under this section,
then the audited financial report shall be deemed presented on time if
presented within 30 days after publication. Upon request by the town, the
licensee shall also provide an oral briefing to the Town Manager of its
financial condition. This will include revenues, operating expenses and capital
expenditures for the previous year.
   (B)   Optional reports. Upon request of the town, licensee shall provide
within a reasonable time, any of the following reports:
      (1)   A current statement of costs of construction of the cable system,
if needed in connection with rate regulation.
      (2)   A projected income statement and statement of projected costs of
construction of the cable system for the next 2 years, in connection with rate
regulation. To protect the proprietary nature of such information, the town may
review these reports at the local business office of the licensee.
      (3)   A list of the licensee's officers, members of its board of
directors, and other principals of the licensee.
      (4)   A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding 5% or more
of the voting interest in the licensee and its parent, subsidiary and
affiliated corporations and other entities, if any.
      (5)   Licensee's annual and other periodic public reports and those of
its parent, subsidiary and affiliated corporations and other entities, as is
reasonably appropriate.
      (6)   Information or reports, as needed, to establish licensee's
compliance with the various standards and other provisions of this chapter and
the license.
   (C)   Copies of federal and state reports. Upon request of the town,
licensee shall submit to the town copies of all pleadings, applications,
reports, communications and documents of any kind, submitted by the licensee to
the Federal Communications Commission, as well as copies of all decisions,
correspondence and actions by any federal, state and local courts, regulatory
agencies and other government bodies relating to its cable television
operations within the license area. The licensee shall submit such documents to
the town simultaneously with its submission to such courts, agencies and
bodies; and within 5 days after their receipt from such courts, agencies and
bodies. The licensee hereby waives any right to claim confidential, privileged
or proprietary rights to such documents unless such confidential rights are
determined to be confidential by law or by the practices of federal or state
agencies. Such confidential data exempt from public disclosure shall be
retained in confidence by the town and its authorized agents and shall not be
made available for public inspection.
   (D)   Service complaint reports. Licensee shall make a monthly report to the
town identifying the general nature and number of all service complaints, and
summarizing the timeliness of licensee's response and the disposition of such
complaints in a form approved by the town. Licensee is free to provide any
supplemental information it wishes to the town.
   (E)   Inspection of facilities. The licensee shall allow the town to make
inspections of any of the licensee's facilities and equipment at any time upon
reasonable notice, or, in case of emergency, upon demand without prior notice,
to allow the town to verify the accuracy of any submitted report.
   (F)   Inspection of business office and files. At the licensee's area office
the licensee shall keep complete books and records. Subject to confidentiality
restrictions required by federal or state law or §
114.45 Protection of Subscriber Privacy, the town shall have the right to
inspect at any time during normal business hours all books, records,
construction maps and plans, income tax returns, financial statements, service
complaint logs, performance test results and other like materials of the
licensee which relate to the operation of the cable system. Upon request of the
town, licensee shall in advance redact any confidential information prior to
review by the town.
   (G)   Public inspection. All reports submitted by licensee to the town are
subject to public disclosure, and shall be available for public inspection at a
designated town office during normal business hours.
   (H)   Failure to report. The refusal, failure, or neglect of the licensee to
file any of the reports required, or provide such other reports as the town
reasonably may request, shall be deemed a breach of the license, and shall
subject the licensee to all remedies, legal or equitable, available to the town
under the license or otherwise.
   (I)   False statements. Any materially false or misleading statement or
representation made knowingly by the licensee in any report required under the
license shall be deemed a material breach of the license and shall subject the
licensee to all remedies, legal or equitable, available to the town under the
license or otherwise.
   (J)   Cost of reports. All reports and records of licensee required to be
provided by licensee under this or any other section shall be furnished at the
sole expense of the licensee.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.47 INSPECTION OF PROPERTY AND RECORDS.
   (A)   At all reasonable times, the licensee shall permit any duly authorized
representative of the town to examine all property of the licensee, together
with any appurtenant property of the licensee situated within or without the
town, and to examine and transcribe any and all maps and other records kept or
maintained by the licensee or under its control which relate to license
compliance and deal with the operations, affairs, transactions or property of
the licensee, subject to confidentiality restrictions required by federal or
state law or §
114.45 Protection of Subscriber Privacy.
   (B)   The licensee shall at all times make and keep full and complete design
maps showing the exact location of all cable system equipment installed or in
use in public rights-of-way and other places in the town and make them
available to the town for inspection and review upon request at the office
where licensee maintains such records.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.48 PROTECTION OF TOWN AGAINST LIABILITY.
   (A)   Indemnification.
      (1)   Licensee shall fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the town,
its officers, boards, commissions, elected officials, agents, attorneys,
representatives, servants and employees against any and all costs, damages,
expenses, claims, suits, actions, liabilities and judgments for damages,
including, but not limited to, expenses for legal fees, whether suit be brought
or not, and disbursements and liabilities incurred or assumed by town in
connection with:
         (a)   Damage to persons or property, in any way arising out of or
through the acts or omissions of licensee, its servants, officials, agents,
attorneys, representatives or employees;
         (b)   Requests for relief arising out of any licensee action or
inaction which results in a claim for invasion of right of privacy, for
defamation of any person, firm or corporation; for the violation or
infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent;
or of any other right of any person, firm or corporation;
         (c)   Any and all claims arising out of licensee's failure to comply
with the provisions of this chapter or a license or any federal, state or local
law or regulation applicable to licensee or the cable system;
         (d)   Any and all disputes arising out of a claim by any party other
than the town or licensee wherein damages or other relief is sought (1) as a
result of the town's cable system licensing of licensee or (2) as a result of
the renewal or non-renewal of licensee's cable system license.
      (2)   If a lawsuit covered by the provisions of division (A)(1) of this
section be brought against the town, either independently or jointly with a
licensee, or with any other person or municipality, the licensee, upon notice
given by the town, shall defend the town at the cost of the licensee. If final
judgment is obtained against the town, either independently or jointly with
licensee or any other defendants, the licensee shall indemnify the town and pay
such judgment with all costs and attorneys' fees and satisfy and discharge the
same. The town shall cooperate with the licensee and reserves the right to
participate in the defense of any litigation.
      (3)   A licensee shall bring no claim or demand any right to a refund of
license fees paid to the town as a percentage of gross revenues derived from
services that are later determined to be telecommunications services rather
than cable services.
      (4)   The town is in no manner or means waiving any governmental immunity
it may enjoy or any immunity for its agents, officials, servants, attorneys,
representatives and/or employees.
      (5)   A licensee shall make no settlement in any matter identified above
without the town's written consent, which shall not be unreasonably withheld.
Failure to inform the town of settlement shall constitute a breach of the
license and the town may seek any redress available to it against the licensee
whether set forth in this chapter or under any other municipal, state or
federal laws.
      (6)   All rights of the town, pursuant to indemnification, insurance,
letter of credit or performance bond(s), as provided for by this chapter, are
in addition to all other rights the town may have under this chapter or any
other chapter, rule, regulation or law.
      (7)   The town's exercise of or failure to exercise all rights pursuant
to any section of this chapter shall not affect in any way the right of the
town subsequently to exercise any such rights or any other right of the town
under this chapter or any other chapter, rule, regulation or law.
      (8)   It is the purpose of this section to provide maximum
indemnification to the town under the terms and conditions expressed and, if
there is a dispute, this section shall be construed (to the greatest extent
permitted by law) to provide for the indemnification of the town by the
licensee.
      (9)   The provisions of this section shall not be dependent or
conditioned upon the validity of this chapter or the validity of any of the
procedures or agreements involved in the award or renewal of a license, but
shall be and remain a binding right and obligation of the town and a licensee
even if part or all of this chapter, or the grant or renewal of a license, is
declared null and void in a legal or administrative proceeding. It shall be
expressly stated in a license, that it is the intent of the licensee and town,
upon the effective date of the license, that the provisions of this section
survive any such declaration and shall be a binding obligation of and inure to
the benefit of the licensee and town and their respective successors and
assigns, if any.
   (B)   Comprehensive liability insurance.
      (1)   Upon acceptance of a license, the licensee shall file with the Town
Clerk and shall thereafter during the entire term of such license maintain in
full force and effect, at its own expense, a general comprehensive liability
insurance policy or policies which shall insure licensee and provide primary
coverage for the town, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees,
against liability for loss or liability for personal injury, death, property
damage (both automobile and non-automobile caused), or other damages. Such
policy or policies shall include, but are not limited to, insurance against
damages from unfair competition, copyright infringement (common law or
statutory) and a failure of licensee to secure consents, occasioned by any
activity or operation of licensee under such license, and regardless of any
claimed or actual activities of the town, its officers, boards, commissions,
agents and employees other than gross negligence or willful misconduct. The
manager, in any license granted, may waive the requirement for insurance from 1
or more perils mentioned in the last preceding sentence upon a finding that
such insurance cannot be procured or cannot be procured at a reasonable cost,
and in connection therewith may reduce the otherwise required limits on
coverage hereafter set forth. Such policy or policies shall be issued by a
company approved by the manager and shall be in a form approved by the town
attorney, with minimum combined single limits of liability coverage in the
amount of $3,000,000. The policy or policies shall name the town, its officers,
boards, commissions, agents and employees as additional insured and contain a
provision that a written notice of any cancellation, modification or reduction
in coverage of said policy shall be delivered to the Clerk 30 days in advance
of the effective date thereof. No license granted under this chapter shall be
effective unless and until certificates of insurance evidencing coverage
required above are delivered to the Clerk. Any substitute policy or policies
shall be subject to the same approvals and shall comply with all of the
provisions of this division.
      (2)   The Council may require increases in the amount or types of
coverage no more frequently than every 3 years, based on increases in the CPI,
so as to ensure full protection of the town and the public. The licensee shall
have 6 months from the date of notification from the manager to comply with any
increase.
      (3)   A licensee may self-insure the above-described policy coverages if
such licensee or its parent is of sufficient financial standing to reasonably
provide such insurance. A licensee that elects to self-insure shall file with
the town a certificate of insurance as specified by the town.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.49 LETTER OF CREDIT.
   (A)   Within 30 days after the award or renewal of a license, a licensee
shall deposit with the town an irrevocable and replenishable letter of credit
in an amount of $25,000 issued by a federally insured commercial lending
institution. The form and substance of said letter of credit shall be used to
assure the faithful performance by a licensee of all provisions of this and
resulting license; and compliance with all orders, permits and directions of
any agency, commission, board, department, division or office of the town
having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under a license and the payment
by the licensee of any penalties, liquidated damages, claims, liens and taxes
due to the town which arise by reason of the construction, operation or
maintenance of the cable system, including cost of removal or abandonment of
any property of the licensee.
   (B)   The letter of credit may be drawn upon by the town by presentation of
a draft at sight on the lending institution, accompanied by a written
certificate signed by the public works director certifying that the licensee
has been found, pursuant to §
114.52 Administrative Hearing, division (C) or §
114.53 Hearing by Council, to have failed to comply with, its license or
license agreement, stating the nature of noncompliance, and stating the amount
being drawn. Examples of the nature of the noncompliance for drawing upon the
letter of credit include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Failure of the licensee to pay to the town any license fees or
taxes after 10 days written notice of delinquency.
      (2)   Failure of the licensee to pay to the town, after 10 days written
notice, after all judicial remedies have been exhausted, any amounts due and
owing the town by reason of the indemnity provisions of §
114.48 Protection of Town against Liability.
      (3)    Failure of the licensee to pay to the town any liquidated damages
due and owing to the town pursuant to §
114.48 Protection of Town against Liability and/or the license.
   (C)   The letter of credit shall be structured in such a manner so that if
the town at any time draws upon the letter of credit, upon notice to the
licensee by the issuing lending institution, licensee shall increase
immediately the amount of available credit to the extent necessary to replenish
that portion of the available credit exhausted by the honoring of the town's
draft. The lending institution shall notify the town of the replenishment by
licensee. The intent of this paragraph is to make available to the town at all
times a letter of credit in the amount of $25,000.
   (D)   The rights reserved to the town with respect to the letter of credit
are in addition to all other rights of the town, whether reserved by a license
or authorized by law, and no action proceeding against a letter of credit shall
affect any other right the town may have.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.50 CONSTRUCTION BONDS.
   (A)   Thirty days prior to the commencement of any construction in the
town's rights-of-way, a licensee shall obtain and maintain throughout the
period of system construction, at its cost and expense, and file with the
Clerk, a corporate surety bond issued by a company authorized to do business in
the state of Arizona, and found acceptable by the town attorney, in an amount
established in a license agreement solely for the purpose of guaranteeing the
timely construction and/or reconstruction of the cable system and the
safeguarding of private property during construction and/or reconstruction. The
bond shall provide, but not be limited to, the following condition: There shall
be recoverable by the town, jointly and severally from the principal and
surety, any and all damages, losses or costs suffered by the town resulting
from the failure of a licensee to satisfactorily complete construction and/or
reconstruction of its cable system throughout the license area pursuant to the
terms and conditions of this chapter and such licensee's license.
   (B)   Any extension of the prescribed construction or reconstruction time
limit must be authorized by the town. The construction bond shall be available
throughout any such extension period.
   (C)   The construction bond shall be terminated only after the Council finds
that a licensee has satisfactorily completed initial construction and
activation or reconstruction of its cable system pursuant to the terms and
conditions of this chapter and such licensee's license.
   (D)   The rights reserved to the town with respect to the construction bond
are in addition to all other rights of the town, whether reserved by this
chapter or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right
with respect to such construction bond shall affect any other rights the town
may have.
   (E)   (1)   The construction bond shall contain the following endorsement:
      (2)   It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be
canceled by the surety nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety
until 60 days after receipt by the town, by registered mail, of written notice
of such intent to cancel or not to renew.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.51 LIQUIDATED DAMAGES.
   (A)   Each license granted by the town shall state that a licensee
understands and shall agree that failure to comply with any time and
performance requirements as stipulated in this chapter and the license will
result in damage to the town, and that it is and will be impracticable to
determine the actual amount of such damage caused by delay or nonperformance;
the license shall include provisions for liquidated damages to be paid by the
licensee, in amounts to be negotiated and set forth in the license and
chargeable to the letter of credit for the following defaults:
      (1)   Failure to complete system construction or reconstruction in
accordance with the schedule in the license unless the Council specifically
approves the delay by motion or resolution;
      (2)   Failure to provide a cable connection within the time(s) set forth
in §
114.27 Line Extension;
      (3)   Failure to properly restore the public right-of-way or to correct
related violations of specifications, code, or standards after having been
notified by the town to correct such defects;
      (4)   Failure to test, analyze and report on the performance of the cable
system following a written request pursuant to §
114.29 Construction and Technical Standards, division (A)(2);
      (5)   Failure to provide in a continuing manner the type of services
proposed in the accepted application for license or in the final license unless
the Council specifically approves modification of a licensee's obligation;
      (6)   Failure to cure any violation of §
114.40 Subscriber Service Standards, following notice and an opportunity to
cure pursuant to the provisions of that section; and
      (7)   Any other action or non-action by the licensee, as agreed upon
between the town and licensee, and set forth in the license.
   (B)   If the manager concludes that a licensee is in fact liable for
liquidated damages pursuant to the license, he shall issue to licensee by
certified mail a notice of intention to assess liquidated damages. The notice
shall set forth the nature of the violation and the amount of the proposed
assessment or the licensee shall, within 30 days of receipt of such notice:
      (1)   Respond to the town in writing, contesting the town's assertion of
violation and providing such information or documentation as may be necessary
to support licensee's position; or
      (2)   Cure any such violation (and provide written evidence of the same),
or, if, in the town's sole discretion, such violation cannot be cured within
such 30-day period, take reasonable steps to cure said violation as soon as
practicable and diligently continue such efforts until said violation is cured.
Licensee shall report to the town, in writing, at 30-day intervals as to
licensee's efforts, indicating the steps taken by licensee to cure said
violation and reporting licensee's progress until such violation is cured.
   (C)   If licensee contests the town's assertion of violation or fails to
respond to the town's notice of intent to assess liquidated damages, within 15
days the town shall schedule a hearing in accordance with the procedures set
forth in §
114.52 Administrative Hearing.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.52 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.
   (A)   Within 15 days of: (1) receipt of licensee's notice of contest
pursuant to §
114.49(B)(1); or (2) expiration of the response time referred to in §§
114.40(G) or 114.42(C); or (3) notice from licensee that it contests an audit
determination of license fees under §
114.16(D), an administrative hearing shall be scheduled by the manager. This
shall be a public hearing, and licensee shall be afforded an opportunity to be
heard and to present relevant information.
   (B)   Within 15 days after the conclusion of such hearing, the manager shall
issue a determination. In that determination the manager may:
      (1)   Find that licensee is not in violation of the terms of the license;
      (2)   Find that the licensee is in violation, but that such violation was
with just cause and waive any liquidated damages that might otherwise be
imposed;
      (3)   Find that licensee is in violation of the terms of the license,
take corrective action, make written demand of licensee for the amount owed by
licensee as a result thereof, and if not paid by licensee within 30 days
following the date of such notice, pursue all remedies available, subject to
licensee's right to appeal the manager's decision;
      (4)   Find that licensee is in violation of the terms of the license and
impose liquidated damages; and
   (C)   In the case of a material violation recommend that the Council
terminate the license; provided, that the Council may take action on any such
recommendation only after a public hearing as set forth in §
114.53 Hearing by Council.
   (D)   If the manager determines that licensee has committed a violation, the
determination shall be accompanied by a detailed statement of reasons for the
determination, including findings of fact.
   (E)   The decision of the manager shall become final unless licensee
requests a public hearing before the Council within 15 days of its receipt of
the statement of reasons and findings of fact by the manager.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.53 HEARING BY COUNCIL.
   (A)   If a public hearing before the Council is requested by licensee or is
held pursuant to §
114.52 Administrative Hearing, it shall be on the record as supplemented by the
licensee and other relevant information. It shall convene within 30 days of the
request therefor. The Council may designate 3 of its members to act as a
hearing subcommittee in the matter and to present written findings of fact and
conclusions of law to the entire Council. The Council's decision, which shall
include findings of fact, shall be made not later than 45 calendar days after
the conclusion of the hearing. In that decision, the Council may:
      (1)   Find that licensee is not in violation of the terms of the license;
      (2)   Find that licensee is in violation but that such violation was with
just cause and waive any liquidated damages or penalty that may otherwise be
imposed;
      (3)   Find that licensee is in violation of the terms of the license,
take corrective action, make written demand of licensee for the amount owed by
licensee as a result thereof, and if not paid within 30 days following the date
of such notice, foreclose on all or any appropriate part of the letter of
credit provided pursuant to §
114.50 Construction Bonds to pay the cost thereof;
      (5)   Find that licensee is in violation of the terms of the license and
impose liquidated damages; and
      (6)   In the case of a substantial violation of the license within the
meaning of §
114.51 Liquidated Damages, declare the licensee in violation and revoke the
license.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.54 REVOCATION.
   (A)   In addition to all other rights and powers retained by the Council
under this chapter or otherwise, the Council shall have the right to revoke the
license and all rights and privileges of the licensee thereunder upon a
recurring or protracted substantial breach of the license terms and conditions,
or this chapter, which substantially affects the provision or quality of cable
services, the ability of the town to effectively regulate the licensee, or the
town's collection of all fees and charges. The power of revocation shall not be
used if the breach is a result of force majeure. The breaches appearing on the
list set forth below in this section shall be considered substantial breaches.
The list is not exhaustive:
      (1)   Failure to complete system construction or reconstruction in
accordance with a license;
      (2)   Failure to provide cable service within the time(s) specified for
line extensions;
      (3)   Each failure to properly restore streets or to correct related
violations of specifications, code, ordinance or standards;
      (4)   Each failure to comply with subscriber service standards;
      (5)   Failure to comply with operational, maintenance or technical
standards;
      (6)   Failure to provide on a continuing basis the broad categories of
programming specified in a license;
      (7)   Failure to provide the access channel requirements specified in a
license;
      (8)   An unauthorized partial or total transfer of a license;
      (9)   Failure to commence construction as required in a license;
      (10)   Failure to cure any other violation of a license after notice and
opportunity to cure;
      (11)   Any other material action or non-action of a licensee regarding a
requirement of a license.
   (B)   Before proceeding with a revocation hearing, the manager shall make a
written demand that the licensee comply. If a violation by the licensee
continues for a period beyond that set forth in the written demand without
written proof that the corrective action has been taken or is being actively
and expeditiously pursued, the manager may hold an administrative hearing in
accordance with §
114.52 Administrative Hearing or may recommend that the Council act directly.
The Council may revoke the license as provided in this section.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.55 CONTINUITY OF SERVICE MANDATORY.
   (A)   It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving cable
service insofar as their financial and other obligations to a licensee are
honored.
   (B)   If the license terminates, the licensee shall cooperate with the town
to ensure continuity of cable service to all subscribers for a period not to
exceed 90 days. Said period may be extended by mutual agreement between the
town and licensee. During such period, licensee shall be entitled to the
revenues for any period during which it operates the cable system.
   (C)   If licensee fails to operate the cable system for 96 consecutive hours
without prior approval of the town or without just cause, the town may, at its
option, operate the cable system or designate an operator until such time as
licensee restores cable services under conditions acceptable to the town or a
new permanent operator is selected. If the town is required to fulfill this
obligation for a licensee, the licensee shall reimburse the town for all
reasonable costs or damages that are the result of the licensee's failure to
perform.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.56 FAILURE OF TOWN TO ENFORCE A LICENSE; NO WAIVER OF THE TERMS THEREOF.
   A licensee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and
conditions of a license or this chapter by any failure of the town upon any 1
or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms or
conditions.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.57 LICENSE SUBJECT TO OTHER LAWS.
   (A)    The license is subject to and shall be governed by all applicable
provisions of federal, state and local law. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of the license to the contrary, the licensee shall at all times
comply with all laws and regulations of the state and federal government or any
administrative agencies thereof; provided, however, if any such state or
federal law or regulations shall require the licensee to perform any service,
or shall permit the licensee to perform any service, or shall prohibit the
licensee from performing any service, in conflict with the terms of the license
or this chapter, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, the
licensee shall notify the town attorney of the point of conflict believed to
exist between such regulation or law and this chapter or the license.
   (B)   In the event of deregulation by the FCC, conformance to current FCC
Rules or Regulations, as specified in this chapter may continue to be required
by the town.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.58 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   When not otherwise prescribed herein, all matters herein required to
be filed with the town shall be filed with the Office of the Clerk.
   (B)   Neither licensee nor any of its officers or employees shall receive
referral fees or gratuities from any television or radio sales or repair
business.
   (C)   All notices which the town may give to a licensee or which a licensee
may give to the town shall be given in writing and may be given by first class
mail, postage prepaid, addressed to licensee's most recent address on file with
the town, and addressed to the town. Such notices, when sent by mail, shall be
deemed given 1 day after deposit in the U.S. Mail.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.59 FORCE MAJEURE.
   With respect to any provision of this chapter or any license granted
pursuant thereto, the violation or noncompliance with which could result in the
imposition of a financial penalty, liquidated damages, forfeiture or other
sanction upon a licensee, such violation or noncompliance shall be excused
where such violation or noncompliance is the result of Acts of God, war, civil
disturbance, strike or other labor unrest, or similar events, the occurrence of
which was not reasonably foreseeable by licensee and is beyond its reasonable
control.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
§ 114.60 CONTINUED USE OF INDIVIDUAL ANTENNAS.
   It is not the Council's intention to prohibit the erection or continued use
of individual television antennas, and no one is or will be required to receive
cable television service or connect with a cable television system.
(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)
CHAPTER 115: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
General Provisions
   
115.01   Purpose and findings
   
115.02   Definitions
   
115.03   Classification
Licenses
   
115.20   License required
   
115.21   Issuance of license
   
115.22   Fees
   
115.23   Inspection
   
115.24   Expiration of license
   
115.25   Suspension
   
115.26   Revocation
   
115.27   Transfer of license
Conditions
   
115.40   Location
   
115.41   Adult motels
   
115.42   Exhibition of sexually explicit films, videos or live entertainment in
viewing rooms
   
115.43   Escort agencies
   
115.44   Nude model studios
   
115.45   Public nudity
   
115.46   Children in sexually oriented business
   
115.47   Hours of operation
   
115.48   Exemptions
 
   
115.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 115.01 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented
businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare
of the citizens of the town, and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually
oriented businesses within the town. The provisions of this chapter have
neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the
content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.
Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny
access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor
effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
material.
   (B)   Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult
uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to
the council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v.
Playtime Theatres. Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres
426 U.S. 50 (1976), and Barnes v. Glenn Theatre. Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), and
on studies in other communities including, but not limited to, Phoenix,
Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana;
Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier,
California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma;
Cleveland, Ohio; and Beaumont, Texas; and also on findings from the Report of
the Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented
Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the Council finds:
      (1)   Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful
and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of
the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to make the owners
of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their
premises.
      (2)   Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses defined in this
chapter as adult theaters and cabarets engage in higher incidence of certain
types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments.
      (3)   Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur
at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or
semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos or live sex shows.
      (4)   Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which
creates unhealthy conditions.
      (5)   Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades and other
sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the
premises of the sexually oriented businesses.
      (6)   At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities
occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to,
syphilis, gonorrhea, human immuno-deficiency virus infection (HIV AIDS),
genital herpes, hepatitis B. Non A, Non B amebiasis, salmonella infections and
shigella infections.
      (7)   Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing
cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS caused by the human immuno-
deficiency virus (HIV) in the United States, 600 in 1982, 2,200 in 1983, 4,600
in 1984, 8,555 in 1985 and 253,448 through December 31, 1992.
      (8)   As of November 1, 1997, there have been 5,278 reported cases of
AlDS in the state, and 63 reported cases in Yavapai County, Arizona, 37 of
which have died.
      (9)   Since 1981 and to the present, there have been an increasing
cumulative number of persons testing positive for the HIV antibody test in
Yavapai County.
      (10)   The number of cases of early (less than 1 year) syphilis in the
United States reported annually has risen, with 33,613 cases reported in 1982
and 45,200 through November of 1990.
      (11)   The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported
annually remains at a high level, with over one half million cases being
reported in 1990.
      (12)   The Surgeon General of the United States in his report of October
22, 1986, has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be
transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to
infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her
newborn.
      (13)   According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection,
as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts.
      (14)   Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and
in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of
the owners and the operators of the facilities to self regulate those
activities and maintain those facilities.
      (15)   Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found
in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view “adult”
oriented films.
      (16)   The findings noted in divisions (B)(1) through (B)(15) of this
section raise substantial governmental concerns.
      (17)   Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics,
which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial
governmental concerns.
      (18)   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to
place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators
of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will
place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on the operators to see that the
sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health,
safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the
town. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is
the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and
control of the premises and activities occurring therein.
      (19)   Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting
on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in
curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theaters.
      (20)   Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep
information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help
reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the
identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from
working in such establishments.
      (21)   The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day to day operation and maintenance of the sexually
oriented business, where the information is substantially related to the
significant governmental interest in the operation of the uses, will aid in
preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases.
      (22)   It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable
diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees
who may engage in the conduct which this chapter is designed to prevent or who
are likely to be witnesses to the activity.
      (23)   The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been
convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the
applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this chapter.
      (24)   The barring of such individuals from the management of adult uses
for a period of years serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct which leads
to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases.
      (25)   The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of
the town will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter.
(2001 Code, § 8-7-1)
§ 115.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin operated, slug operated, or for any form of consideration, electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image producing devices are
maintained to show images to 5 or fewer persons per machine at any one time,
and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the
depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE.
      (1)   A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal purposes,
offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any 1 or more of the
following:
         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides or other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas,
provided that the foregoing material, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient
interest, and lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value;
or
         (b)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use
in connection with specified sexual activities.
      (2)   A commercial establishment may have other business purposes that do
not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be
categorized as adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store. Such
other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments
from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult
video store so long as its principal business purpose is the offering for sale
or rental for consideration the specified materials which are characterized by
the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, provided that the foregoing material, taken as a whole,
appeals to the prurient interest and lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.
   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminude;
      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
      (3)   Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT MOTEL. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
      (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, and has a sign visible from the public right of way
which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic
reproductions;
      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less
than 10 hours; or
      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room
for a period of time that is less than 10 hours.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where, for any form
of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, and further provided that the foregoing material, taken as a whole,
appeals to the prurient interest, and lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.
   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity
or seminude, or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities, and further
provided that the foregoing performances, taken as a whole, appeal to the
prurient interest, and lack serious literary, artistic, political or scientific
value.
   EMPLOYEE. A person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually
oriented business on a full time, part time or contract basis, whether or not
the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or
otherwise and whether or not the person is paid a salary, wage or other
compensation by the operator of the business. EMPLOYEE does not include a
person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or
equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
   ESCORT. A person who, for monetary consideration agrees or offers to act as
a date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately perform a
striptease for another person.
   ESCORT AGENCY. A person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any of the following:
      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
      (3)   The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other
existing sexually oriented business; or
      (4)   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
   LICENSEE. A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on
the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a person in
whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a sexually
oriented business.
   NUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person who appears seminude, in a state
of nudity or who displays specified anatomical areas and is provided to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. NUDE
MODEL STUDIO shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the State of
Arizona or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in
part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and
operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a
structure:
      (1)   That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a nude or seminude person is available for
viewing; and
      (2)   Where in order to participate in a modeling session an artist must
arrange to participate in the session at least 1 day in advance of the session.
   NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva or anus, with less than a fully opaque covering,
the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any
part of the nipple, or the showing of the uncovered male genitals with less
than a fully opaque covering.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association
or other legal entity.
   SEMINUDE or IN A SEMINUDE CONDITION. The showing of the female breast below
a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point, or a
showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. This
definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast,
but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast,
exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing
apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of
its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration
activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when
one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminude.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture
theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter
center.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (1)   The human male genitals, or the human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or
      (2)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY. Any of the following offenses:
      (1)   Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of
obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual
performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public
lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized
criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a child; gambling; or
distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those
described above under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries;
      (2)   For which:
         (a)   Less than 2 years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
         (b)   Less than 5 years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later
date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
         (c)   Less than 5 years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of 2 or more misdemeanor
offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24 month
period.
      (3)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect
on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the
applicant.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following:
      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;
      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or
      (3)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth herein.
   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT (OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS). The increase in
floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%, as the floor areas exist
on the date this chapter takes effect.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL (OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS). Any of
the following:
      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest
in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device
which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing
the ownership or control.
(2001 Code, § 8-7-2)
§ 115.03 CLASSIFICATION.
   Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
   (A)   Adult arcades;
   (B)   Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores or adult video stores;
   (C)   Adult cabarets;
   (D)   Adult motels;
   (E)   Adult motion picture theaters;
   (F)   Adult theaters;
   (G)   Escort agencies;
   (H)   Nude model studios; and
   (I)   Sexual encounter centers.
(2001 Code, § 8-7-3)
LICENSES
§ 115.20 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful:
      (1)   For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a
valid sexually oriented business license issued by the town pursuant to this
chapter.
      (2)   For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ
a person to work for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a
sexually oriented business employee by the town pursuant to this chapter.
      (3)   For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented
business without having secured a sexually oriented business employee license
pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
town.
   (C)   All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter. Each applicant for a license pursuant to this chapter shall submit a
full set of fingerprints to the town’s Police Department for the purpose of
obtaining a state and federal criminal records check pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-
1750 and Pub. Law No. 92 544. The Department of Public Safety is authorized to
exchange this fingerprint data with the Federal Bureau of Investigation to
determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this
chapter.
   (D)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, the person must sign the application for a license as applicant. If
a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an
individual, each individual who has a 20% or greater interest in the business
must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be
qualified under §
115.23 of this chapter and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a
license is granted.
   (E)   The completed application for a sexually oriented business license
shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the
following documents:
      (1)   If the applicant is:
         (a)   An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and
any aliases and submit proof that he or she is 18 years of age or more.
         (b)   A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name,
and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited,
and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any.
         (c)   A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name,
the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good
standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, the names and capacity
of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, and the name of the
registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service
of process.
      (2)   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant, he or she must state:
         (a)   The sexually oriented business’s fictitious name; and
         (b)   Submit the required registration documents.
      (3)   Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has
been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter,
and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and
jurisdiction of each;
      (4)   Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has
had a previous license under this chapter or other similar sexually oriented
business ordinances from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked,
including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the
permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial,
suspension or revocation and whether the applicant or a person residing with
the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or
principal stockholder of a corporation that is licensed under this chapter
whose license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the
name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was
denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or
revocation;
      (5)   Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant holds
any other license under this chapter or other similar sexually oriented
business ordinances from another city or county and, if so, the names and
locations of such other licensed businesses;
      (6)   The single classification of license for which the applicant is
filing;
      (7)   The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including
a legal description of the property, street address and telephone number(s), if
any;
      (8)   The applicant’s mailing address and residential address;
      (9)   A recent photograph of the applicant(s);
      (10)   The applicant’s driver’s license number, social security number,
and/or his or her state or federally issued tax identification number;
      (11)   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business; (The
sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to
a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus 6 inches;
      (12)   A current certificate and straight line drawing prepared within 30
days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting the property
lines and the structures containing any existing sexually oriented businesses
within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified; the property lines of any
established religious institution/synagogue, school or public park or
recreation area within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified; and (For
purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if
it is legally in existence at the time an application is submitted.)
      (13)   If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business,
other than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing
room or booth of less than 150 square feet of floor space, films,
videocassettes, other video reproductions or live entertainment which depict
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the applicant
shall comply with the application requirements set forth in §
115.42 of this chapter.
   (F)   Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business
employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by the
town the following information:
      (1)   The applicant’s name or any other name (including “stage” names) or
aliases used by the individual;
      (2)   Age, date and place of birth;
      (3)   Height, weight, hair and eye color;
      (4)   Present residence address and telephone number;
      (5)   Present business address and telephone number;
      (6)   Date, issuing state and number of driver’s permit or other
identification card information;
      (7)   Social security number; and
      (8)   Proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age.
   (G)   Attached to the application form for a sexually oriented business
employee license as provided above, shall be the following:
      (1)   A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant’s
face, and the applicant’s fingerprints on a form provided by the Police
Department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the
applicant.
      (2)   A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the
5 years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application,
including whether the applicant previously operated or is seeking to operate,
in this or any other county, city, state or country has ever had a license,
permit or authorization to do business denied, revoked or suspended, or had any
professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked or suspended. In
the event of any such denial, revocation or suspension, state the name, the
name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction and describe in full the reason for
the denial, revocation or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation
or suspension shall be attached to the application.
      (3)   A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified
criminal activity as defined in this chapter and, if so, the specified criminal
activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each.
   (H)   The following information provided pursuant to this chapter shall not
be deemed to be a public record:
      (1)   Criminal history information obtained pursuant to A.R.S § 41-1750
and/or Pub. Law No. 92-544.
      (2)   Information required and provided pursuant to divisions (E)(8), (E)
(10), (F)(4), (F)(6) and (F)(7) above.
(2001 Code, § 8-7-4)
§ 115.21 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon the filing of the application for a sexually oriented business
employee license, the town shall issue a temporary license to the applicant.
The application shall then be referred to the appropriate town departments for
an investigation to be made on such information as is contained on the
application. The application process shall be completed within 30 days from the
date the completed application is filed. After the investigation, the town
shall issue a license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the
evidence that 1 or more of the following findings is true:
      (1)   The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form;
      (2)   The applicant is under the age of 18 years;
      (3)   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity
as defined in this chapter;
      (4)   The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for
employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or
regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this chapter; or
      (5)   The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license
revoked by the town within 2 years of the date of the current application. If
the sexually oriented business employee license is denied, the temporary
license previously issued is immediately deemed null and void. Denial,
suspension or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this subsection shall
be subject to appeal as set forth in §
115.26 of this chapter.
   (B)   A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual
renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the town
that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified criminal activity as
defined in this chapter or committed any act during the existence of the
previous license, which would be grounds to deny the initial license
application. The renewal of the license shall be subject to the payment of the
fee as set forth in §
115.22 of this chapter.
   (C)   Within 30 days after receipt of a completed sexually oriented business
application, the town shall approve or deny the issuance of a license to an
applicant. The town shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant
unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that 1 or more of
the following findings is true:
      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age;
      (2)   An applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is overdue
in payment to the town of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or
imposed upon him or her in relation to any business;
      (3)   An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the license, has failed to provide all information required by
this chapter, or has falsely answered a question or request for information on
the application form;
      (4)   An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has
been denied a license by the town to operate a sexually oriented business
within the preceding 12 months or whose license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months;
      (5)   An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has
been convicted of a specified criminal activity defined in this chapter;
      (6)   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business has not
been approved by the Health Department, Fire Department and the Building
Official as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances;
      (7)   The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid; and
      (8)   An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is
not in compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of
the sexually oriented business and the classification for which the license is
issued pursuant to §
115.03 of this chapter. All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at
or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that they may be
easily read at any time.
   (E)   The Health Department, Fire Department and the Building Official shall
complete their certification that the premises is in compliance or not in
compliance within 20 days of receipt of the application by the town.
   (F)   A sexually oriented business license shall issue for only 1
classification as found in §
115.03 of this chapter.
(2001 Code, § 8-7-5)
§ 115.22 FEES.
   (A)   Every application for a sexually oriented business license or for a
sexually oriented business employee license (whether for a new license or for
renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
application and investigation fee as adopted by resolution.
   (B)   In addition to the application and investigation fee required above,
every sexually oriented business and every employee of a sexually oriented
business that is granted a license (new or renewal) shall pay to the town an
annual nonrefundable license fee as adopted by resolution within 30 days of
license issuance or renewal.
   (C)   All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the Police
Chief of the town.
(2001 Code, § 8-7-6)
§ 115.23 INSPECTION.
   (A)   An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the Police
Department, County Health Department, Fire Department, Community Development
Department or other town departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a
sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law,
at any time it is occupied or open for business.
   (B)   A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his or her agent
or employee commits a misdemeanor if he or she refuses to permit such lawful
inspection of the premises at any time it is open for business.
(2001 Code, § 8-7-7)
§ 115.24 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Each license shall expire 1 year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in
§ 115.20 of this chapter. Application for renewal shall be made at least 30
days before the expiration date, and when made less than 30 days before the
expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected.
   (B)   When the town denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be
issued a license for 1 year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial,
the town finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been
corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days
have elapsed since the date denial became final.
(2001 Code, § 8-7-8)
§ 115.25 SUSPENSION.
   The town shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if it
determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
   (A)   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter; and
   (B)   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter.
(2001 Code, § 8-7-9)
§ 115.26 REVOCATION.
   (A)   The town shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in §
115.25 of this chapter occurs and the license has been suspended within the
preceding 12 months.
   (B)   The town shall revoke a license if it determines that:
      (1)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process;
      (2)   A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of
controlled substances on the premises;
      (3)   A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
      (4)   A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during
a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;
      (5)   Except in the case of an adult motel, a licensee has knowingly
allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or
other sex act to occur in or on the licensed premises; or
      (6)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the town, county or state
for any taxes or fees past due.
   (C)   When the town revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for 1
year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license
for 1 year from the date the revocation became effective. If, subsequent to
revocation, the town finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected
or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have
elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.
   (D)   When the decision to deny, suspend or revoke a license or permit
becomes final, the applicant or licensee shall have the right to seek judicial
review of the decision by way of special action or other available procedure in
the Superior Court. The town shall consent to an expedited hearing to be held
no later than 20 days after the filing of the action, and to an expedited
disposition. The decision to suspend, revoke or refuse to renew a license or
permit shall be stayed until a decision on the merits by the Superior Court,
provided that the applicant or licensee files the action within 30 calendar
days after final administrative action by the town.
(2001 Code, § 8-7-10)
§ 115.27 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a
licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license
at any place other than the address designated in the application.
(2001 Code, § 8-7-11)
CONDITIONS
§ 115.40 LOCATION.
   (A)   A person commits a misdemeanor if that person operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business in any zoning district other than
industrial, as defined and described in the Chino Valley Zoning Code. (See Town
of Chino Valley Zoning Code).
   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of:
      (1)   A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used
primarily for religious worship and related religious activities;
      (2)   A public or private educational facility including, but not limited
to, child daycare facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens,
elementary schools, private schools, charter schools, intermediate schools,
junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools,
secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior
colleges, and universities; school includes the school grounds, but does not
include facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as
a school;
      (3)   A boundary of a residential district as defined in the Chino Valley
zoning code;
      (4)   A public park or recreational area which has been designated for
park or recreational activities including, but not limited to, a park,
playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball
or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas or other similar
public land within the town which is under the control, operation or management
of the town park and recreation authorities, or which has been designated as
open space or similar space for use by the general public;
      (5)   The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined
in the Chino Valley zoning code;
      (6)   An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards
children or family entertainment; or
      (7)   A licensed premises, licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage
control regulations of the state, being A.R.S. §§ 4-101 et seq., other than the
licensed premises in which the sexually oriented business is located.
   (C)   A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the
operation, establishment, substantial enlargement or transfer of ownership or
control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually
oriented business; or within 1,000 feet of 2 other sexually oriented
businesses.
   (D)   A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the
operation, establishment or maintenance of more than 1 sexually oriented
business in the same building, structure or portion thereof, or the increase of
floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure or
portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business.
   (E)   For the purpose of division (B) above, measurement shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects, from
the nearest portion of the property line containing a building or structure
used as the part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is
conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a use listed in
division (B) above. Presence of a city, county or other political subdivision
boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the
distance requirements of this section.
   (F)   For purposes of division (C) above, the distance between any 2
sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to the intervening structures or objects or political boundaries, from
the closest property line in which each business is located.
   (G)   Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on February 10,
1998, that is in violation of divisions (A) through (F) of this section shall
be deemed a non-conforming use. The non-conforming use will be permitted to
continue for a period not to exceed 1 year, unless sooner terminated for any
reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. The non-
conforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except
that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If 2 or more sexually oriented
businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible
location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and
continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the
later-established business(es) is/are non-conforming.
   (H)   A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is
not rendered a non- conforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or
renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a use listed in division
(B) above within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision
applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an
application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or been
revoked.
(2001 Code, § 8-7-12)
§ 115.41 ADULT MOTELS.
   (A)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or a similar
commercial establishment has been rented and vacated 2 or more times in a
period of time that is less than 10 hours creates a rebuttable presumption that
the establishment is an “adult motel”, as that term is defined in this chapter.
   (B)   A person commits a misdemeanor if, as the person in control of a
sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that does
not have a sexually oriented license, he or she rents or subrents a sleeping
room to a person and, within 10 hours from the time the room is rented, he or
she rents or subrents the same sleeping room again.
   (C)   For purposes of division (B) above, the terms RENT or SUBRENT mean the
act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
(2001 Code, § 8-7-13) Penalty, see
§ 115.99
§ 115.42 EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS, VIDEOS OR LIVE ENTERTAINMENT IN
VIEWING ROOMS.
   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a
viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film,
videocassette, live entertainment or other video reproduction which depicts
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with
the following requirements:
      (1)   Upon application for a sexually oriented license, the application
shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof
specifying the location of 1 or more manager’s stations and the location of all
overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which
patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s station may not exceed 32 square
feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the
permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared
diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall not be
required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some
designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with
marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all
areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus 6 inches.
The town may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the
applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the
configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s
station may be made without the prior approval of the town.
      (4)   It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at
least 1 licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager’s station at
all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
      (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises has 2 or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the
premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any purpose from at least 1 of the manager’s stations. The view required in
this division must be by direct line of sight from the manager’s station.
      (6)   It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area
specified in division (A)(5) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors,
curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials and,
at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the
premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be
permitted in the application filed pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section.
      (7)   No viewing room may be occupied by more than 1 person at any time.
      (8)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access at an illumination of not less than 5 foot- candles as measured at the
floor level.
      (9)   It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.
      (10)   No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between
viewing rooms or booths.
      (11)   No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind
between viewing booths or rooms.
      (12)   The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect
the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes
exist.
      (13)   The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to
be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
      (14)   The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in
viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous,
easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous
material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor.
   (B)   A person having a duty under divisions (A)(1) through (A)(14) of this
section commits a misdemeanor if he or she knowingly fails to fulfill that
duty.
(2001 Code, § 8-7-14) Penalty, see
§ 115.99
§ 115.43 ESCORT AGENCIES.
   (A)   An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees
to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years.
(2001 Code, § 8-7-15) Penalty, see
§ 115.99
§ 115.44 NUDE MODEL STUDIOS.
   (A)   A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
   (B)   A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if the person
appears seminude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model
studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this division if the person under
18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or visible to any other
person.
   (C)   A person commits an offense if the person appears in a state of
nudity, or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area
of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-
way.
   (D)   A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or mattress
in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception
room open to the public.
(2001 Code, § 8-7-16) Penalty, see
§ 115.99
§ 115.45 PUBLIC NUDITY.
   (A)   It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly and
intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appears in a state of nudity or
depicts specified sexual activities.
   (B)   It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly or intentionally
in a sexually oriented business appears in a nude or seminude condition unless
the person is an employee who, while nude or seminude, shall be at least 10
feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least 2 feet from the floor.
   (C)   It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while nude or seminude in a
sexually oriented business, to solicit or accept any pay or gratuity from any
patron or customer or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity to
any employee, while said employee is nude or seminude in a sexually oriented
business.
   (D)   It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while nude or seminude, to
touch a customer or the clothing of a customer.
   (E)   It shall be a misdemeanor for a customer of a sexually oriented
business to touch an employee, while that employee is nude or seminude.
   (F)   It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee to allow a customer of a
sexually oriented business to touch that employee, while that employee is nude
or seminude.
(2001 Code, § 8-7-17) Penalty, see
§ 115.99
§ 115.46 CHILDREN IN A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.
   A person commits a misdemeanor if the person knowingly allows a person under
the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business.
(2001 Code, § 8-7-18) Penalty, see
§ 115.99
§ 115.47 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at
any time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and
Saturdays, and 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays.
(2001 Code, § 8-7-19) Penalty, see
§ 115.99
§ 115.48 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exempt from the provisions of this chapter are massage therapists who
have satisfied 1 of the following requirements:
      (1)   Have successfully completed the curriculum or curricula totaling a
minimum of 500 hours of 1 or more approved massage/bodywork schools, such
institutions being approved by the Arizona State Board for Private
Postsecondary Education or Arizona Department of Education, or its equivalent
in other states;
      (2)   Hold a current license from any other state whose licensure
requirements meet or exceed those defined within this section;
      (3)   Have received the designation of “Nationally Certified” or
“Internationally Certified” by the National Certification Board of Therapeutic
Massage and Bodywork or other massage therapist agency approved by the National
Commission for Certifying Agencies; or
      (4)   Are members in good standing of a national professional massage
association that establishes standards based upon educational qualifications.
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under §
115.45(A) of this chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so
in a properly licensed adult cabaret, as a part of that person’s performance;
provided, however, that compliance with §
115.45(B) through (F) of this chapter, as well as the remainder of this
chapter, shall still be required.
(2001 Code, § 8-7-20)
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
(2001 Code, § 8-7-21)
CHAPTER 116: REGULATION OF THE SALE OF PRODUCTS CONTAINING PSEUDOEPHEDRINE
Section
   
116.01   Definitions
   
116.02   Duties of retail establishments
 
   
116.99   Penalty
§ 116.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. Any product containing ephedrine or pseudoephedrine
and includes any compound, mixture, or preparation that contains any detectable
quantity of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, norpseudoephedrine, or
phenylpropanolamine or their salts, optical isomers, or salts of optical
isomers. Product packaging that lists ephedrine, pseudoephedrine,
norpseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine as an active ingredient shall
constitute prima facie evidence that the product is a pseudoephedrine product.
   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business that offers any pseudoephedrine
product for sale at retail.
(Ord. 06-648, passed 2-23-2006)
§ 116.02 DUTIES OF RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   The operator of a retail establishment shall keep all products
containing pseudoephedrine behind a store counter or otherwise in a manner that
is inaccessible to customers without the assistance of the operator or an
employee of the establishment.
   (B)   A person making a retail sale of a product containing pseudoephedrine
shall require a government-issued, photo identification from the purchaser and
shall record the purchaser’s name, date of birth, quantity of pseudoephedrine
product purchased, transaction date, and the initials of the seller.
   (C)   The information required to be obtained by division (B) of this
section will be retained by the retail establishment for a period of 90 days,
will be considered a confidential document that will only be available to the
operator of the retail establishment, and shall be available to the town Police
Department officers, Arizona Department of Public Safety officers, Yavapai
County Sheriff’s department officers, and other law enforcement officers.
(Ord. 06-648, passed 2-23-2006)
§ 116.99 PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in
§ 10.99.
(Ord. 06-648, passed 2-23-2006)
CHAPTER 117: RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA REGULATIONS
Section
   
117.01   Purpose
   
117.02   Definitions
   
117.03   Marijuana prohibited on public property
   
117.04   Marijuana establishment prohibited; dual licensee exception
   
117.05   Marijuana testing facility prohibited; exception for existing medical
marijuana testing facility
   
117.06   Marijuana cultivation facility prohibited
   
117.07   Marijuana product manufacturing facility prohibited
   
117.08   Individual’s primary residence for personal use
   
117.09   Retail sales from marijuana and marijuana products
   
117.10   Violations
   
117.11   Enforcement; penalties
§ 117.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate recreational marijuana to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the community. Except as allowed by
law for personal, private use, the Town of Chino Valley enacts reasonable
regulations and requires compliance with laws for the retail sale, cultivation,
and manufacturing of marijuana or marijuana products in a marijuana
establishment or marijuana testing facility and the cultivation, processing,
and manufacturing of marijuana in a primary residence. Nothing in this chapter
is intended to promote or condone the sale, cultivation, manufacture,
transport, production, distribution, possession, or use of marijuana or
marijuana products in violation of any applicable law.
(Ord. 2021-895, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 117.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHEMICAL EXTRACTION. The process of removing a particular component of a
mixture from others present, including removing resinous tetrahydrocannabinol
from marijuana.
   CHEMICAL SYNTHESIS. The production of a new particular molecule by adding
to, subtracting from, or changing the structure of a precursor molecule.
   CONSUME, CONSUMING, and CONSUMPTION. The act of ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body, including the inhaling or
exhaling of smoke or vapor from an electronic device that can be used to
deliver marijuana or marijuana products to a person, including, but not limited
to, an electronic or vaping cigarette, equipment, or pipe.
   CONSUMER. An individual who is at least 21 years of age and who purchases
marijuana or marijuana products.
   CULTIVATE and CULTIVATION. To propagate, breed, grow, prepare, and package
marijuana.
   DELIVER and DELIVERY. The transportation, transfer, or provision of
marijuana or marijuana products to a consumer at a location other than the
designated retail location of a marijuana establishment.
   DEPARTMENT. The State of Arizona Department of Health Services or its
successor agency.
   DUAL LICENSEE. An entity that holds both a nonprofit medical marijuana
dispensary registration and a marijuana establishment license.
   ENCLOSED AREA. A building, greenhouse, or other structure that:
      (1)   Has a complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls that
are constructed of solid material extending from the ground to the roof;
      (2)   Is secure against unauthorized entry;
      (3)   Has a foundation, slab, or equivalent base to which the floor is
securely attached; and
      (4)   Meets performance standards ensuring that cultivation and
processing activities cannot be and are not perceptible from the structure in
terms of not being visible from public view without using binoculars, aircraft,
or other optical aids and is equipped with a lock or other security device that
prevents access by minors.
   EXTRACTION. The process of extracting or separating resin from marijuana to
produce or process any form of marijuana concentrates using water, lipids,
gases, solvents, or other chemicals or chemical processes.
   MANUFACTURE and MANUFACTURING. To compound, blend, extract, infuse, or
otherwise make or prepare a marijuana product.
   MARIJUANA. All parts of the plant of the genus cannabis, whether growing or
not, as well as the seeds from the plant, the resin extracted from any part of
the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the plant or its seeds or resin; and includes cannabis as
defined in A.R.S. § 13-3401; but does not include industrial hemp, the fiber
produced from the stalks of the plant of the genus cannabis, oil or cake made
from the seeds of the plant, sterilized seeds of the plant that are incapable
of germination, or the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana
to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other products.
   MARIJUANA CONCENTRATE.
      (1)   Resin extracted from any part of a plant of the genus cannabis and
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of that
resin or tetrahydrocannabinol.
      (2)   Does not include industrial hemp or the weight of any other
ingredient combined with cannabis to prepare topical or oral administrations,
food, drink or other products.
   MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT. An entity licensed by the Department to operate a
single retail location at which the licensee may sell marijuana and marijuana
products to consumers, cultivate marijuana, and manufacture marijuana products.
   MARIJUANA PRODUCTS. Marijuana concentrate and products that are composed of
marijuana and other ingredients and that are intended for use or consumption,
including edible products, ointments, and tinctures.
   MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY. The Department or another entity that is
licensed by the Department to analyze the potency of marijuana and test
marijuana for harmful contaminants.
   NONPROFIT MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY. A nonprofit entity as defined in
A.R.S. § 36-2801(12).
   OPEN SPACE. A public park, public sidewalk, public walkway, or public
pedestrian thoroughfare.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, association, or any other
entity of whatever kind or nature.
   PROCESS and PROCESSING. To harvest, dry, cure, trim, or separate parts of
the marijuana plant.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Has the same meaning prescribed in the Smoke-Free-Arizona Act,
A.R.S. § 36-601.01.
   SMOKE. To inhale, exhale, burn, carry, or possess any lighted marijuana or
lighted marijuana products, whether natural or synthetic.
   TOWN. The Town of Chino Valley, an Arizona municipal corporation.
(Ord. 2021-895, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 117.03 MARIJUANA PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   The use, sale, cultivation, manufacture, production, or distribution
of marijuana or marijuana products is prohibited on property that is occupied,
owned, controlled, or operated by the town.
   (B)   It is unlawful for an individual to smoke or consume marijuana or
marijuana products in a public place or open space in the town.
(Ord. 2021-895, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 117.04 MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT PROHIBITED; DUAL LICENSEE EXCEPTION.
   (A)   To the fullest extent allowable by law, the operation of a marijuana
establishment is prohibited, except where authorized for a dual licensee who:
      (1)   Operates both a nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary and
marijuana establishment cooperatively in a shared location; and
      (2)   Has not forfeited or terminated the nonprofit medical marijuana
dispensary registration from the Department.
   (B)   Operation of a marijuana establishment is further subject to the
following conditions and limitations:
      (1)   Shall be allowed in only non-residential zoning districts as
specified by the Town’s Unified Development Ordinance.
      (2)   Shall not be located within 300 feet of a residentially-zoned
property. This distance shall be measured from the lot line of the property on
which the business is conducted or proposed to be conducted to the property
boundary line of the residentially zoned property.
      (3)   Shall not be located within 300 feet of a preschool; kindergarten;
elementary; secondary or high school; place of worship; public park; or
community center. This distance shall be measured from the property line of the
property on which the business is conducted or proposed to be conducted to the
property line of the protected use.
      (4)   Shall be located in a permanent building on an established
foundation adhering to town building codes and shall not include any temporary,
portable, or self-powered mobile facilities, or trailer, cargo container, or
motor vehicle.
      (5)   Shall have operating hours not earlier than 9:00 a.m. and not later
than 8:00 p.m.
      (6)   Shall not provide drive-thru services or offsite deliveries of
marijuana or marijuana products.
      (7)   Shall not allow a person to consume marijuana or marijuana products
on the premises or provide outdoor seating areas.
      (8)   Shall provide for proper disposal of marijuana remnants or by-
products. The remnants or by-products shall not to be placed within the
facility’s exterior refuse containers, town trash can, bin, or other town
facility, or in any park refuse container unless authorized by the town.
      (9)   Shall not emit dust, fumes, vapors, or odors into the environment
from the facility and shall ensure that ventilation, air filtration, building,
and design standards are compatible with adjacent uses and the requirements of
adopted building codes of the town.
      (10)   Shall not sell marijuana or marijuana products, except as
permitted by state law to consumers.
      (11)   Shall not display or keep marijuana or marijuana products that are
visible from outside the premises.
      (12)   Shall comply with applicable county health regulations for food
preparation and handling.
      (13)   Shall comply with applicable laws to safely and securely engage in
extraction processes.
      (14)   Shall submit a written security plan to the Chino Valley Police
Department that describes the actions taken to deter and prevent unauthorized
entrance into limited access areas, including use of security equipment,
exterior lighting to facilitate surveillance, and electronic monitoring such as
video cameras.
(Ord. 2021-895, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 117.05 MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION FOR EXISTING MEDICAL
MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY.
   (A)   Except as set forth in this section, to the fullest extent allowable
by law, the operation of a marijuana testing facility is prohibited in the
town. A marijuana testing facility may be permitted for a location that:
      (1)   Was operated as a medical marijuana testing facility, under the
appropriate authorization from the state, prior to the adoption of this
chapter.
      (2)   Will be operated for the purposes of testing recreational marijuana
only by a dual licensee cooperatively in a shared location with the prior-
existing medical marijuana testing facility.
   (B)   Operation of a marijuana testing facility is further subject to the
following conditions and limitations:
      (1)   Shall not be more than 1 marijuana testing facility operating in
the town.
      (2)   Shall be allowed in only non-residential zoning districts as
specified by the town’s Unified Development Ordinance.
      (3)   Shall not be located within 300 feet of a residentially-zoned
property. This distance shall be measured from the lot line of the property on
which the business is conducted or proposed to be conducted to the property
boundary line of the residentially zoned property.
      (4)   Shall not be located within 300 feet of a preschool; kindergarten;
elementary; secondary or high school; place of worship; public park; or
community center. This distance shall be measured from the property line of the
property on which the business is conducted or proposed to be conducted to the
property line of the protected use.
      (5)   Shall be located in a permanent building on an established
foundation adhering to town building codes and shall not include any temporary,
portable, or self-powered mobile facilities, or trailer, cargo container, or
motor vehicle.
      (6)   Shall not allow a person to consume marijuana or marijuana products
on the premises or provide outdoor seating areas.
      (7)   Shall provide for proper disposal of marijuana remnants or by
products. The remnants or by-products shall not to be placed within the
facility’s exterior refuse containers, town trash can, bin, or other town
facility, or in any park refuse container unless authorized by the town.
      (8)   Shall not emit dust, fumes, vapors, or odors into the environment
from the facility and shall ensure that ventilation, air filtration, building,
and design standards are compatible with adjacent uses and the requirements of
adopted building codes of the town.
      (9)   Shall not sell marijuana or marijuana products, except as permitted
by state law to consumers.
      (10)   Shall not display or keep marijuana or marijuana products that are
visible from outside the premises.
      (11)   Shall comply with applicable county health regulations for food
preparation and handling.
      (12)   Shall comply with applicable laws to safely and securely engage in
extraction processes.
      (13)   Shall submit a written security plan to the Chino Valley Police
Department that describes the actions taken to deter and prevent unauthorized
entrance into limited access areas, including use of security equipment,
exterior lighting to facilitate surveillance, and electronic monitoring such as
video cameras.
(Ord. 2021-895, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 117.06 MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITY PROHIBITED.
   Except as provided in §§
117.04 and
117.08, to the fullest extent allowable by law, the operation of a cultivation
location at which the licensee cultivates marijuana, processes marijuana, and
manufactures marijuana products, but from which marijuana and marijuana
products may not be transferred or sold to consumers, is prohibited in the
town.
(Ord. 2021-895, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 117.07 MARIJUANA PRODUCT MANUFACTURING FACILITY PROHIBITED.
   Except as provided in §§
117.04 and
117.08, to the fullest extent provided by law, the operation of a manufacturing
location at which the licensee manufactures marijuana products and packages and
stores marijuana and marijuana products, but from which marijuana and marijuana
products may not be transferred or sold to consumers, is prohibited in the
town.
(Ord. 2021-895, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 117.08 INDIVIDUAL’S PRIMARY RESIDENCE FOR PERSONAL USE.
   To the fullest extent allowable by law, marijuana possession, consumption,
processing, manufacturing, transportation, and cultivation is permitted in a
residential zoning district in the town and is subject to the following
conditions and limitation:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any individual who is at least 21 years of
age to possess, transport, cultivate, or process more than 6 marijuana plants.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for 2 or more individuals who are at least 21
year of age to possess, transport, cultivate, or process more than 12 marijuana
plants at the individuals’ primary residence.
   (C)   Except as provided by A.R.S. §§ 36-2801 et seq. and this section, it
shall be unlawful for an individual to otherwise cultivate marijuana in a
residential zoning district within the town limits.
   (D)   Individuals shall not process or manufacture marijuana by means of any
liquid or gas other than alcohol that has a flashpoint below 100 degrees
Fahrenheit.
   (E)   Kitchen, bathrooms, and primary bedroom(s) shall be used for their
intended use and shall not be used primarily for residential marijuana
processing, manufacturing, or cultivation.
   (F)   A residence shall not emit dust, fumes, vapors, or odors into the
environment and individuals shall ensure that ventilation, air filtration,
building, and design standards are compatible with adjacent uses and the
requirements of adopted building codes of the town.
   (G)   Cultivation shall be limited to a closet, room, greenhouse, or other
enclosed area on the grounds of the residence equipped with a lock or other
security device that prevents access by minors.
   (H)   Cultivation shall take place in an area where the marijuana plants are
not visible from public view without using binoculars, aircraft, or other
optical aids.
(Ord. 2021-895, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 117.09 RETAIL SALES FROM MARIJUANA AND MARIJUANA PRODUCTS.
   To the fullest extent allowable by law, the sale of marijuana and marijuana
products is authorized within the town from a marijuana establishment and is
tangible personal property, as defined in A.R.S. § 42-5001, and subject to the
transaction privilege tax in the retail classification and use tax.
(Ord. 2021-895, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 117.10 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a person to sell,
cultivate, process, manufacture or transport marijuana or marijuana products if
the person fails to meet all the requirements in this chapter or state law,
including the Department’s rules.
   (B)   It is a violation of this chapter for any person to provide false
information on any permit application.
   (C)   Each day any violation of any provision of this chapter shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2021-895, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 117.11 ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES.
   (A)   Violations of this chapter are in addition to any other violation
enumerated within town ordinances or the Town Code and in no way limits the
penalties, actions, or abatement procedures which may be taken by the town for
any violation of this chapter, which is also a violation of any other ordinance
or code provision of the town or federal or state law. Conviction and
punishment of judgment and sanction against any person under this chapter shall
not relieve such person from the responsibility of correcting prohibited
conditions, or removing prohibited structures or improvements, and shall not
prevent the enforced correction or removal thereof.
   (B)   Penalty. Violations of any provision of this chapter shall be Class 1
misdemeanors, which may be adjudicated and enforced as set forth in Town Code §
10.99.
(Ord. 2021-895, passed 2-9-2021)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
      Chapter
         
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
         
131.   NOISE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Burning
   
130.02   Water and earthen material flow upon streets prohibited
   
130.03   Curfew for minors
   
130.04   Public urination and defecation prohibited
   
130.05   Funeral picketing; unlawful acts
   
130.06   Urban camping
 
   
130.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Health and safety nuisances, see Title VIII
§ 130.01 BURNING.
   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person, firm or corporation to
kindle any grass, trash, brush, rubbish or crop fire within the town without
first securing a written permit from the Fire Chief, his or her duly authorized
assistant or other designated town officer. The permit may contain any
conditions necessary for the protection of life and property, unless such fire
is contained within a suitable container to prevent the escape of sparks or
burning materials.
(2001 Code, 10-1-1) (Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 130.02 WATER AND EARTHEN MATERIAL FLOW UPON STREETS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to willfully or
negligently permit or cause the escape or flow of water or earthen material
onto public streets in such manner as to cause flooding, or to endanger or
impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a condition which constitutes
a threat to the public health and safety, or to cause damage to the public
streets of the town. Earthen material shall include, but not be limited to
soil, silt, clay, sand, gravel, rock, dirt, mud, organic material, or a
combination thereof.
(2001 Code, 10-1-2) (Ord. 2019-864, passed 7-23-2019) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 130.03 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action.
      GUARDIAN. A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person
of a minor or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by
an authorized agency or court; or at least 21 years of age and authorized by a
parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
      INSUFFICIENT CONTROL. Failure to exercise reasonable care and diligence
in the supervision of the juvenile.
      MINOR. Any person under 18 years of age.
      PARENT. A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent
of another person.
   (B)   Offenses.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 16 years to be in,
about or upon any place in the city away from the property where the youth
resides between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any minor 16 years of age or older and under the
age of 18 years, to be in, about or upon any place in the city away from the
property where the minor resides between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.
      (3)   It is unlawful for a parent, guardian or other person having
supervisory custody of the minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient
control, allow a minor to violate the provisions of sections divisions (B)(1)
or (2) above, except as expressly provided herein. It shall not constitute a
defense hereto that such parent, guardian or other person having supervisory
custody of the minor did not have actual knowledge of the minor’s violation of
divisions (B)(1) or (2) above, if the parent, guardian or other person having
responsibility for the minor, in the exercise of reasonable care and diligence,
should have known of the aforementioned unlawful acts of the minor.
      (4)   It is unlawful for parent, guardian or other person having the
care, custody or supervision of the minor to fail or refuse to take custody of
the minor after the demand is made upon him or her by a law enforcement officer
who arrests the minor for violation of divisions (B)(1) or (2) above.
   (C)   Defenses; exceptions. It is a defense to prosecution under divisions
(B)(1) through (3) above that the minor was:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian or an adult having
supervisory custody of the minor;
      (2)   With prior permission of the parent or guardian or an adult having
supervisory custody, in motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (3)   With prior permission of the parent or guardian or an adult having
supervisory custody, in an employment activity or going to or returning home
from an employment activity without a detour or stop by the most direct route;
      (4)   On an emergency errand;
      (5)   Specifically directed to the location by the parent or guardian or
an adult having supervisory custody, on reasonable, legitimate business or some
other activity, or going to or returning home from the business or activity;
      (6)   With prior permission of the parent or guardian or an adult having
supervisory custody, engaged in a reasonable and legitimate exercise of first
amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution;
      (7)   Married and 16 years of age or over, or in the military; and/or
      (8)   On the sidewalk abutting their residence or on the next door
neighbor's property with the consent of the neighbor.
   (D)   Enforcement.
      (1)   Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police
officer shall attempt to ascertain the apparent offender’s age and reason for
being at the place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest
under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and that, based upon the circumstances, the minor’s responses and
minor’s conduct, no defense as provided in division (C) above is probably
present.
      (2)   In addition to any other powers he or she may have, any law
enforcement officer who arrests a minor for violating any of the provisions of
divisions (B)(1) or (2) above is also hereby empowered to demand of the parent,
guardian or adult having supervisory custody that the parent, guardian or other
adult come and take the minor into custody. The law enforcement officer is also
empowered to take the minor to a designated location where arrangements can be
made for a parent, guardian, an adult having supervisory custody or other
appropriate party to take the minor into custody. Should there be a failure of
the parent, guardian or other person to take custody of the minor, the officer
may then be empowered to take the minor home.
   (E)   Separate offenses. Each violation of any provisions of division (B)
above shall constitute a separate offense.
(2001 Code, 10-1-3) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 130.04 PUBLIC URINATION AND DEFECATION PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in a public place or in
any place exposed to public view, except in an established lavatory or toilet.
(2001 Code, 10-1-4) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 130.05 FUNERAL PICKETING; UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   The Council finds that:
      (1)   It is generally recognized that families have a substantial
interest in organizing and attending funerals for deceased relatives;
      (2)   The interests of families in privately and peacefully mourning the
loss of deceased relatives are violated when funerals are targeted for
picketing and other public demonstrations;
      (3)   Picketing of funerals causes emotional disturbance and distress to
grieving families who participate in funerals; and
      (4)   Full opportunity exists under the terms and provisions of this
section for the exercise of freedom of speech and other constitutional rights
at times other than within one hour prior to, during and two hours following
the commencement of funerals.
   (B)   The purposes of this section are to:
      (1)   Protect the privacy of grieving families within one hour prior to,
during and two hours following the commencement of funerals; and
      (2)   Preserve the peaceful character of cemeteries, mortuaries and
churches within one hour prior to, during and two hours following the
commencement of funerals.
   (C)   As used in this section:
      (1)   FUNERAL. The ceremonies, processions and memorial services held in
connection with the burial or cremation of the dead.
      (2)   PICKETING. Protest activities engaged in by a person or persons
stationed within 500 feet of any entrance to a cemetery, mortuary or church
within one hour prior to, during and two hours following the commencement of a
funeral.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person stationed within 500 feet of any
entrance to a cemetery, mortuary or church to engage in picketing within one
hour prior to, during and two hours following the commencement of a funeral.
   (E)   If any provision of this section or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other
provisions or applications of this section which can be given effect without
the invalid provisions or application. To this end the provisions of this
section are severable.
(Ord. 06-659, passed 5-25-2006) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.06 URBAN CAMPING.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect public health and
safety, preserve public property for the enjoyment, comfort, and convenience of
the public, and maintain a healthy and natural environment. The streets and
public areas within the town should be readily accessible and available to
residents and the public at large. The use of public areas for camping or for
storage of personal property interferes with the rights of others to use public
areas for the purposes for which they were intended. Such activity can also
constitute a public health and safety hazard that adversely impacts
neighborhoods, pedestrians, and motorists. Nothing in this section is intended
to interfere with otherwise lawful and ordinary uses of public or private
property.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CAMP or CAMPING. Temporarily or permanently living in an outdoor space,
on public property, or on any other property the participant does not own,
regardless of the intent of the participant or the nature of any other
activities in which the participant may also be engaging. Actions that
constitute camping may include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   Erecting a tent, shelter, kitchen, living area, sleeping area,
or temporary structure.
         (b)   Living in a parked motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, trailer,
camper, or makeshift or otherwise non-permanent structure.
         (c)   Remaining on public property for prolonged or repetitious
periods of time in a manner not associated with ordinary use of that public
property.
         (d)   Making preparations to sleep, which may include laying down
bedding for the purpose of sleeping or using camping paraphernalia.
         (e)   Storing personal belongings.
         (f)   Making a fire or carrying on cooking activities.
      CAMPING PARAPHERNALIA. Any accessory, equipment, or item commonly used
for camping, including tarps, cots, beds, bedding, sleeping bags, hammocks,
tents, blankets, and cooking equipment.
      CAMPSITE. An area in which a person has set up, stockpiled, or arranged
camping paraphernalia, supplies, or materials for the purpose of camping.
      CHILDCARE FACILITY. Has the meaning provided in A.R.S. § 36-881(3), as
amended.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any property owned or controlled by the Town of Chino
Valley, a public school, a utility provider, or any other governmental entity,
which includes by way of example, but is not limited to, any restroom, street,
sidewalk, right-of-way, highway, alleyway, bike path, transit stop or transit
facility, preserve, open space, park, wash, improved or unimproved land,
attraction, structure, facility, or parking lot.
      SCHOOL. Any public, charter, or private school where children attend
classes in kindergarten programs or grades 1 through 12.
      STORE. To put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for
safekeeping, or to place or leave in a location.
   (C)   Prohibited acts.
      (1)   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to:
         (a)   Establish or maintain a campsite, or use or store camping
paraphernalia, in or on any public property unless expressly permitted by the
town.
         (b)   Camp in or on any building, facility, parking lot, or structure
that is owned, possessed, or controlled by the town.
         (c)   Camp within 500 feet of any property boundary of a school or
childcare facility.
      (2)   If any camping paraphernalia or item used for camping is left
unattended on public property, it shall be collected and appropriately disposed
of in compliance with A.R.S. §§ 12-940 et seq., as amended.
   (D)   Exceptions. This section does not prohibit:
      (1)   Activities carried out pursuant to a special event permit issued by
the town.
      (2)   Temporary structures or camps set up by a government agency for
relief workers during a response to a disaster or emergency.
      (3)   Camping on private residential property, so long as all of the
following conditions are met:
         (a)   The property owner consents to the camping, and the camping is
limited to 3 or fewer consecutive nights.
         (b)   The activity does not violate any town code provision or
regulation.
         (c)   No fee or charge, or other consideration is paid for the
privilege of camping on the property.
         (d)   The camping occurs in a location that is completely obscured
from view from any public or private street.
   (E)   Penalties and enforcement.
      (1)   A violation of this section is a Class 3 misdemeanor, subject to
the penalties as set forth in A.R.S. §§ 13-707 and 13-802, as amended.
      (2)   In lieu of issuing a citation, an officer investigating a suspected
violation of this section may elect, at the officer’s discretion and with the
consent of the individual, to transport the individual to a facility providing
social services related to mental health, housing, and/or substance abuse
treatment.
      (3)   In addition to or in lieu of any sentence imposed for a violation
of this section, the court may sentence a person to perform community
restitution or order a term of education or treatment consistent with A.R.S. §
13-717, as amended.
(Ord. 2025-952, passed 5-13-2025)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who violates §
130.03(B)(1), (2) or (4) is guilty of Class 1 misdemeanor. This offense is
designated as an incorrigible offense for minors under the jurisdiction of the
juvenile court.
      (2)   Any person who violates §
130.03(B)(3) shall be guilty of a petty offense.
   (C)   A violation of §
130.05(D) is a Class 1 misdemeanor. The minimum fine for a first offense shall
be $500 and a subsequent offense shall be $1,000. Each day on which a violation
of §
130.05(D) occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
(2001 Code, 10-1-3) (Am. Ord. 06-659, passed 5-25-2006)
CHAPTER 131: NOISE REGULATIONS
Section
   
131.01   Noise generally
   
131.02   Prohibition of loud or unusual noise
 
   
131.99   Penalty
§ 131.01 NOISE GENERALLY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM. Any device, instrument or system, whether
electrical or mechanical or otherwise, for amplifying sound or for producing or
reproducing sound, including but not limited to any radio, stereo, musical
instrument, phonograph, sound or musical recorder or player, sound truck, loud
speaker or any instrument of any such kind or character.
      JAKE BRAKING. The operation of a truck or other motor vehicle in such a
manner as to cause the engine to emit additional noise from its exhaust or
muffler system through deceleration or down shifting gears.
   (B)   Offense. It is unlawful to play, operate or use any sound
amplification system which:
      (1)   Can be heard from a distance of 50 feet or more; or
      (2)   Annoys or disturbs the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in
the vicinity.
   (C)   Exceptions. Division (B) above shall not apply to:
      (1)   An authorized emergency vehicle;
      (2)   A vehicle operated by a gas, electric communications or water
utility company or governmental entity;
      (3)   A vehicle used for advertising in a parade or in a political or
other special event permitted by the town; or
      (4)   An owner of such having first applied to and received permission
from the Chief of Police to operate any such sound amplification system.
   (D)   Motor vehicles. It is unlawful for any person:
      (1)   To operate a motor vehicle which shall not at all times be equipped
with a muffler upon the exhaust thereof in good working order and in constant
operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, and it is unlawful for any
person operating any motor vehicle to use a cut out, by-pass or similar muffler
elimination appliance; and/or
      (2)   To operate a truck or other motor vehicle in such a manner as to
cause the engine to emit additional noise from its exhaust or muffler system
through deceleration or through a practice commonly known as “Jake braking”,
unless an emergency exists.
   (E)   Separate offenses. Each violation of any provisions under divisions
(B) or (D) above shall constitute a separate offense.
(2001 Code, § 10-2-1) Penalty, see
§ 131.99
§ 131.02 PROHIBITION OF LOUD OR UNUSUAL NOISE.
   (A)   Offense. It is unlawful between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.,
for any person, establishment, corporation or institution to allow or cause
excessive, loud or unusual noise regardless of the instrument, device or other
source from which the noise emits so long as such noise emits from property,
whether real or personal, owned or within the control, of 1 or more persons,
establishments, corporations or institutions. It shall be prima facie evidence
that the loud noise is loud, excessive or unusual if it can be heard by a
person, who has normal hearing ability, for a distance of 200 feet, or more
from its source.
   (B)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Persons, establishments, corporations or institutions who operate
vehicles, devices, machinery or other apparatus while engaged in interstate or
intrastate commerce which by the nature of the activities emits a noise the
volume or nature of which cannot be controlled are exempt from the operation of
this division.
      (2)   Emergency vehicles are exempt from the operation of this section so
long as said vehicles are actually engaged in emergency activity. Emergency
vehicles include, but are not limited to, fire apparatus, vehicles operated by
volunteer firefighters, vehicles operated by law enforcement agencies and
vehicles operated as ambulances.
(2001 Code, § 10-2-2) Penalty, see
§ 131.99
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99
   (B)   (1)   Any person who violates §
131.01(B) or (D)(2) is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor violation.
      (2)   Any person who violates §
131.01(B) above by means of radio, stereo, boom box, phonograph, sound or
musical recorder or player shall be subject to the following minimum fines:
         (a)   Minimum $100 fine for first offense;
         (b)   Minimum $250 fine for second offense; and
         (c)   Minimum $1,000 fine for third offense.
      (3)   Any person who violates §
131.01(D)(1) is guilty of a civil violation, having a penalty of at least $100.
(2001 Code, § 10-2-1)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
      Chapter
         
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
         
151.   DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
         
152
.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
         
153.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
         
154.   UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
         
155.   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
Building Codes Generally
   
150.001   Adoption of International Code Council Codes
   
150.002   Conformance with zoning ordinance
   
150.003   Building inspection fees
   
150.004   Electrical Code
   
150.005   MAG standards
   
150.006   Supplemental research and recommendation services
   
150.007   Building Advisory Board
   
150.008   Manufactured housing standards
   
150.009   ADA standards and regulations
Street Numbering System
   
150.020   Purpose
   
150.021   Definitions
   
150.022   Generally
   
150.023   Street naming
   
150.024   Address numbers
Rights-of-Way and Grading Permits
   
150.040   Purpose
   
150.041   Scope
   
150.042   Adoption of permit application form
   
150.043   Definitions
   
150.044   Enforcement
   
150.045   Appeals
   
150.046   Permit requirements; classes of permit
   
150.047   Life of permit
   
150.048   Denial of permit
   
150.049   Fees
   
150.050   Additional stipulations
Roadway Standards
   
150.065   Compliance with code
   
150.066   Rights-of-way
   
150.067   Construction requirements
Underground Electric, Telephone, Cable and Communication Lines
   
150.080   Definitions
   
150.081   Underground utility lines
   
150.082   Exceptions
   
150.083   Town participation as developer
   
150.084   Waiver of underground installation requirements
Mailboxes
   
150.100   General
   
150.101   Location
   
150.102   Sizes
   
150.103   Structures
   
150.104   Shoulder and parking area construction
   
150.105   Removal of nonconforming or unsafe mailboxes
BUILDING CODES GENERALLY
§ 150.001 ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL CODE COUNCIL CODES.
   (A)   International Building Code. That certain code entitled International
Building Code, 2018 edition, together with appendices B, C, I, and J, published
by the International Code Council, as amended by the Town of Chino Valley
Building and Technical Code Amendments, 2018 Edition, Amended and Restated
October 2022 is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the town for regulating
the erection, construction, enlargement, replacement, alteration, repair,
moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, location,
height, area and maintenance of all buildings or structures in the town and
said building code is hereby referred to and made a part hereof as though fully
set forth in this section. One paper copy and one electronic copy maintained in
compliance with A.R.S. § 44-7041 of said building code shall be kept on file
and available for public use in the office of the Town Clerk and Planning and
Building Department.
   (B)   International Residential Code for one- and two-family dwellings. That
certain code entitled International Residential Code, For One- and Two-Family
Dwellings, 2018 Edition, together with appendices A, B, C, H, J, L and Q,
published by the International Code Council, as amended by the Town of Chino
Valley Building and Technical Code Amendments, 2018 Edition, Amended and
Restated October 2022 is hereby adopted as the Residential Code for one- and
two-family dwellings of the Town of Chino Valley for regulating the erection,
construction, enlargement, replacement, alteration, repair, moving, removal,
demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, location, height, area and
maintenance of all one- and two-family dwellings in the town and said
residential code is hereby referred to and made a part hereof as though fully
set forth in this section. One paper copy and one electronic copy maintained in
compliance with A.R.S. § 44-7041 of said residential code shall be kept on file
and available for public use in the office of the Town Clerk and Planning and
Building Department.
   (C)   International Fuel Gas Code. That certain code entitled International
Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, together with appendices A, B, and C published by
the International Code Council, as amended by the Town of Chino Valley Building
and Technical Code Amendments, 2018 Edition, Amended and Restated October 2022
is hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of the Town of Chino Valley for
regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of
materials, location, operation and maintenance or use of fuel gas systems and
gas-fired appliances and said fuel gas code is hereby referred to and made a
part hereof as though fully set forth in this section. One paper copy and one
electronic copy maintained in compliance with A.R.S. § 44-7041 of said fuel gas
code shall be kept on file and available for public use in the office of the
Town Clerk and Planning and Building Department.
   (D)   International Mechanical Code. That certain code entitled
International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition, together with appendix A,
published by the International Code Council, as amended by the Town of Chino
Valley Building and Technical Code Amendments, 2018 Edition, Amended and
Restated October 2022, is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the Town of
Chino Valley for regulating and controlling the design, construction,
installation, quality of materials, location, operation and maintenance or use
of heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators, and
other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances in the town and said mechanical
code is hereby referred to and made a part hereof as though fully set forth in
this section. One paper copy and one electronic copy maintained in compliance
with A.R.S. § 44-7041 of said mechanical code shall be kept on file and
available for public use in the office of the Town Clerk and Planning and
Building Department.
   (E)   International Plumbing Code. That certain code entitled International
Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, together with appendices D and E, published by the
International Code Council, as amended by the Town of Chino Valley Building and
Technical Code Amendments, 2018 Edition, Amended and Restated October 2022 is
hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the Town of Chino Valley for regulating
and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, replacement, addition to, operation
and maintenance or use of plumbing systems in the town and said plumbing code
is hereby referred to and made a part hereof as though fully set forth in this
section. One paper copy and one electronic copy maintained in compliance with
A.R.S § 44-7041 of said code shall be kept on file and available for public use
in the office of the Town Clerk and Planning and Building Department.
   (F)   International Energy Conservation Code. That certain code entitled
International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 Edition, published by the
International Code Council, including all appendices, as amended by the Town of
Chino Valley Building and Technical Code amendments, 2018 Edition, Amended and
Restated October 2022, is hereby adopted as the Energy Conservation Code of the
Town of Chino Valley for regulating and governing energy efficient building
envelopes and installation of energy efficient mechanical, lighting, and power
systems of all buildings or structures in the town and said energy conservation
code is hereby referred to and made a part hereof as though fully set forth in
this section. One paper copy and one electronic copy maintained in compliance
with A.R.S. § 44-7041 of said energy conservation code shall be kept on file
and available for public use in the office of the Town Clerk and Planning and
Building Department.
   (G)   International Existing Building Code. That certain code entitled
International Existing Building Code, 2018 Edition, published by the
International Code Council, including all appendices, as amended by the Town of
Chino Valley Building and Technical Code Amendments, 2018 Edition, Amended and
Restated October 2022, is hereby adopted as the Existing Building Code of the
Town of Chino Valley for regulating the repair, alteration, change of
occupancy, addition to and relocation of existing buildings and said existing
building code is hereby referred to and made a part hereof as though fully set
forth in this section. One paper copy and one electronic copy maintained in
compliance with A.R.S. § 44-7041 of said existing building code shall be kept
on file and available for public use in the office of the Town Clerk and
Planning and Building Department.
(2001 Code, § 7-1-1) (Am. Ord. 04-569, passed 2-12-2004; Am. Ord. 04-570,
passed - -; Am. Ord. 07-686, passed 5-10-2007; Am. Ord. 07-689, passed 5-10-
2007; Am. Ord. 09-721, passed 7-23-2009; Am. Ord. 14-790, passed 11-18-2014;
Am. Ord. 2019-871, passed 5-28-2019; Am. Ord. 2022-925, passed 10-25-2022)
§ 150.002 CONFORMANCE WITH ZONING ORDINANCE.
   Whenever a building permit is issued to any person or entity and a building
inspection performed, the building must conform to the provisions of the town
zoning ordinance (also referred to as the “Unified Development Ordinance,”
which was adopted and made a part of this code in §
154.01), in addition to the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the
responsibility of the person or entity to whom the permit is issued to comply
with the provisions of the zoning ordinance and this chapter, and any damage
resulting from the lack of conformity to the zoning ordinance and this chapter
shall be chargeable to the person or entity.
(2001 Code, § 7-1-2) (Am. Ord. 04-569, passed 2-12-2004; Am. Ord. 07-686,
passed 5-10-2007)
§ 150.003 BUILDING INSPECTION FEES.
   The Council shall adopt a schedule of building inspection fees by
resolution. Building inspection fees relate to and are to be used in
conjunction with the relevant provisions of the various uniform codes described
in this chapter. When inspections are required a fee shall be charged in
accordance with the schedule as established by resolution of the Council.
(2001 Code, § 7-1-3) (Am. Ord. 04-569, passed 2-12-2004; Am. Res. 04-690,
passed 2-26-2004)
§ 150.004 ELECTRICAL CODE.
   That certain code entitled “National Electrical Code”, 2017 edition,
published by the National Fire Protection Association, including all
appendices, is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of the Town of Chino
Valley for regulating the installation, alteration and maintenance of all
electrical installations in the town and said electrical code is hereby
referred to and made a part hereof as though fully set forth in this section.
One paper copy and one electronic copy maintained in compliance with A.R.S. §
44-7041 of said electrical code shall be kept on file and available for public
use in the office of the Town Clerk and Planning and Building Department.
(2001 Code, Art. 7-2) (Am. Ord. 04-569, passed 2-12-2004; Am. Ord. 07-686,
passed 5-10-2007; Am. Ord. 07-689, passed 5-10-2007; Am. Ord. 14-790, passed
11-18-2014; Am. Ord. 2019-871, passed 5-28-2019)
§ 150.005 MAG STANDARDS.
   Those certain documents entitled Maricopa Association of Governments
Standard Specifications and Maricopa Association of Governments Uniform Details
for Public Works Construction, 1992 edition, with appendices, adopted by
Resolution No. 512 and made a part of this chapter, the same as though the code
and appendices were specifically set forth in full herein; and at least 3
copies of the code shall be filed in the office of the Clerk and kept available
for public use and inspection.
(2001 Code, Art. 7-5)
§ 150.006 SUPPLEMENTAL RESEARCH AND RECOMMENDATION SERVICES.
   In addition to the basic codes as described in §§
150.001 through
150.005 and Chapter 153, the Building Official may enforce standards as a part
of this chapter that are contained in any recognized research and
recommendation services, such as the International Conference of Building
Officials, or such other research and recommendation service as recommended by
the Building Official and approved by the Mayor and Council.
(2001 Code, Art. 7-6)
§ 150.007 BUILDING ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   Establishment; terms; termination; vacancies; compensation.
      (1)   There is hereby established a Building Advisory Board (the “Board”)
consisting of 5 members appointed by Town Council to advise the Building
Official in matters pertaining to the development and enforcement of the town’s
building, residential, fuel gas, mechanical, plumbing, energy conservation,
existing building, electrical, and property maintenance codes.
      (2)   Members shall serve 3-year terms. Any member whose term expires is
eligible for reappointment to a subsequent 3-year term.
      (3)   Town Council may remove a member, after a public hearing, for
inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. Absence from 3
consecutive meetings without just cause is grounds for removal.
      (4)   In the event of a vacancy, Town Council shall fill the vacancy for
the remainder of the unexpired term.
      (5)   Members shall serve without compensation; however, members may be
reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their duties.
   (B)   Composition. The Board members must comprise the following; however,
should no such professionals be available for appointment, Town Council may
appoint persons whose backgrounds approximate the knowledge and expertise
sought:
      (1)   One representative from the Central Arizona Fire and Medical
Authority with not less than 10 years’ relative experience, who shall be an ex
officio non-voting member, and must be consulted in manners related to fire
safety.
      (2)   The Building Official, who shall be an ex officio non-voting member
and serve as Board Secretary.
      (3)   At least 1 of each of the following, each of which must have not
less than 10 years’ experience:
         (a)   A licensed Arizona general contractor.
         (b)   A licensed Arizona plumbing contractor.
         (c)   A licensed Arizona electrical contractor or licensed Arizona
mechanical contractor.
         (d)   An Arizona registered engineer or architect.
         (e)   A citizen-at-large, who shall be indirectly associated with the
construction industry, such as an insurance agent, realtor, or appraiser.
   (C)   Officers. At the first meeting after the establishment of the Board,
and annually thereafter, the Board shall elect a Chairperson and Vice
Chairperson from among its members, who shall serve for 1 year, and until their
successors are elected and qualified. The Chairperson shall preside at all
meetings and exercise all the usual rights, duties, and prerogatives of the
head of any similar organization. The Vice Chairperson shall perform the duties
of the Chairperson in the latter’s absence or disability. In the
event of a vacancy in the chairmanship, the Vice Chairperson shall become
Chairperson to serve for the remainder of the prior Chairperson’s term, and an
election shall beheld at the next meeting to fill the office of Vice
Chairperson for the remainder of that term.
   (D)   Meetings; procedures.
      (1)   All Board meetings must be held at the call of the Chairperson and
at such other times as the Board may determine. Except for executive sessions
authorized by law, all Board meetings must be open to the public.
      (2)   Three members of the Board constitute a quorum for transacting
business. A majority vote of the members present and voting shall be required
to take official action. No member shall be excused from voting except on
matters involving the consideration of his or her own official conduct. In all
other cases, a failure to vote shall be entered in the minutes as an
affirmative vote.
      (3)   The Board shall adopt rules and regulations as it sees fit to
properly and efficiently discharge its official duties. In such rules and
regulations, the Board may delegate specific responsibilities and tasks to be
performed by one or more sub-boards.
   (E)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   The Board shall be responsible for:
         (a)   Recommending to Town Council desirable building, fuel gas,
mechanical, plumbing, energy efficiency, and electrical code standards for
commercial and residential buildings and structures, and amendments thereto.
         (b)   Soliciting or receiving input from members of the design and
construction industry, and the general public, concerning commercial and
residential building, fuel gas, mechanical, plumbing, energy efficiency, and
electrical code issues, concerns, or trends, and providing appropriate
direction to the Building Official, as required.
         (c)   Recommending commercial and residential building, fuel gas,
mechanical, plumbing, energy efficiency, and electrical code-related education
and training programs, activities, or events for members of the design and
construction industry and the public, and providing appropriate direction to
the Building Official to implement the same.
         (d)   Serving as the Board of Appeals to hear and decide appeals of
orders, decisions, or determinations made by the Building Official or Building
Division staff relative to the application and implementation of the town’s
building, residential, fuel gas, mechanical, plumbing, energy conservation,
existing building, electrical, and property maintenance codes.
      (2)   The Board does not have authority over the implementation of the
adopted administrative provisions of the town’s building, residential, fuel
gas, mechanical, plumbing, energy conservation, existing building, electrical,
and property maintenance codes, or to waive any requirements of such codes.
   (F)   Appeals; procedure. Any person may appeal the interpretation of the
town’s building, residential, fuel gas, mechanical, plumbing, energy
conservation, existing building, electrical, and property maintenance codes in
accordance with the following:
      (1)   The appeal shall be in writing to the Director of Development
Services, upon such forms as provided by the Department of Development
Services. The appellant shall set forth the code section in dispute and explain
the reasons upon which the appellant believes the Building Division staff has
incorrectly interpreted the code.
      (2)   The Building Official shall promptly review the appeal and prepare
a written report and recommendation, which shall be provided to the Board of
Appealsno later than 10 days following receipt of the appeal.
      (3)   The Board shall conduct a hearing to review the appeal and the
staff report at the Board’s convenience, no later than 20 days after the
Building Official’s receipt of the appeal. The Building Official shall, at
least 7 days prior to the hearing, notify each member of the Board, and the
appellant, of the date, time, and place of the hearing.
      (4)   At the hearing, the Board shall receive testimony concerning the
appeal from town staff, the appellant, and from the public, if applicable . The
appellant shall appear in person before the Board or may be represented by
legal counsel and may introduce evidence to support his or her claim. The
appellant shall conduct, at his or her own expense, any tests or research
required by the Board to substantiate his or her claim.
      (5)   Following the hearing, the Board shall vote to reverse or affirm,
in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, or decision of the
Building Official or Building Division staff, and make such order, requirement,
or determination as necessary, with or without conditions or alterations. The
Board Secretary shall keep an accurate record of the Board’s official
transactions and render all such decisions and findings in writing to the
appellant and to other persons as appropriate.
      (6)   The Board’s decision on the appeal is deemed final.
(Ord. 2022-925, passed 10-25-2022)
§ 150.008 MANUFACTURED HOUSING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Manufactured housing unit construction and safety standards adopted by
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) pursuant to § 7(D),
Department of Housing and Urban Development Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3535(D), Title VI,
Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. § 5401) and amendments
thereto are hereby adopted as manufactured housing unit construction and safety
standards for the town.
   (B)   The Building Official shall issue no building permit for the
installation of any manufactured housing unit within the town unless the
manufactured housing unit can be proven to comply with the standards set forth
in division (A) above. This prohibition shall also apply to any manufactured
housing unit installation permit to be issued for the relocation of a
manufactured housing unit within the town.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of permit applicants to demonstrate to
the Building Official that any manufactured housing unit for which an
installation permit is requested is in compliance with the standards set forth
in division (A) above. Proof of compliance shall be a decal certifying that the
manufactured housing unit has been inspected and constructed in accordance with
the requirements of HUD in effect at the date of manufacture wherein the date
shall not have been prior to June 15, 1976.
   (D)   All manufactured housing units placed within the town shall be
required to have skirting installed within 60 days after both the setup and
utilities have passed inspection. It shall be the permit holder’s
responsibility to call for a final inspection from the town’s Building
Inspector after skirting is completed. Any skirting installed pursuant to this
section shall comply with A.R.S. § 41-2155, A.A.C. R4-34-205, the Office of
Manufactured Housing Installation Standards and the town manufactured housing
standards, copies of which may be obtained from the Chino Valley Building
Department.
(2001 Code, Art. 7-8)
§ 150.009 ADA STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS.
   The certain document entitled “ADA Standards and Regulations,” dated
September 15, 2010, is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter, the same
as though the document were specifically set forth in full herein; and at least
3 copies of the document shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk and the
office of the Building Division, and shall be kept available for public use and
inspection.
(Ord. 12-757, passed 2-28-2012)
STREET NUMBERING SYSTEM
§ 150.020 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish an organized street and
numbering system to accommodate and facilitate the orderly growth of the Town
of Chino Valley. Additionally, this system will promote public health, safety
and welfare by providing an efficient method of identifying and locating
various properties and structures within the town.
(2001 Code, § 7-9-1)
§ 150.021 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADDRESS PREFIX. A word preceding the street name and indicating a direction.
   ADDRESS SUFFIX. A word following a street name, which indicates and shall
include the designated quadrant, i.e. N.W., N.E., S.W. or S.E.
   BLOCK INTERVAL. The hundred number interval between grid lines, or the point
when the next higher hundred number is used.
   BOULEVARD or PARKWAY. A major thoroughfare running in a diagonal direction,
rather than east-west or north-south, connecting at least 2 sections, and
acting as a collector, a special scenic or park drive or unusually wide
thoroughfares in residential sections with shade trees or shrubbery in a center
median strip.
   CIRCLE. A short street that returns to itself.
   COURT. A permanently closed street such as a cul-de-sac.
   DRIVE. A winding thoroughfare that is diagonal, curvilinear or otherwise not
aligned parallel to the gridlines that continue through to other rights-of-way.
   GRID LINES. Imaginary lines constructed approximately perpendicular and
parallel to meridian lines as defined in §
150.024. These lines indicate the point where block numbers change from one
hundred to the next higher hundred. Grid lines divide each section into ten
equal block intervals on both a north-south and east-west basis. Grid lines are
used only for the assignment of street numbers, not necessarily for street
layout purposes.
   GROUP HOUSING. Physically separate housing units under individual or common
ownership, owner occupied or leased and served by a private drive or easement.
The term GROUP HOUSING includes mobile home parks.
   HIGHWAY. A designated state or federal highway.
   LANE. A reduced right-of-way branching from a court, place or way or a
curving street of less than 1,000 feet or an uninterrupted street ending in a
cul-de-sac.
   LOOP. A short drive that begins and ends in the same street.
   PLACE or WAY. A cul-de-sac running in any direction less than 1,000 feet in
length.
   PRIVATE DRIVE OR EASEMENT. A vehicular pathway not designated for general
public use and through traffic, in private ownership and serving a few
structures.
   QUADRANT.
      (1)   A portion of the town that is divided by the following division
lines:
         (a)   North-south division line is Center Street.
         (b)   East-west division line is U.S. Highway 89.
      (2)   The respective quadrant designations N.W., N.E., S.W. and S.E.
shall be included in every street address.
   ROAD. A thoroughfare that is frequently used as a secondary facility
connecting to a U.S. or state primary highway.
   STREET and AVENUE. A thoroughfare that runs north-south or east-west.
   TRAIL or PATH. A local street serving as a collector for 1 or more local
streets.
(2001 Code, § 7-9-2)
§ 150.022 GENERALLY.
   (A)   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building unless
the building shall first have affixed thereto address numbers as assigned in
the building permit issued by the town.
   (B)   In all newly annexed areas, street addressing numbers shall be affixed
to existing buildings in accordance with §
150.024(F) within 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance effecting the
annexation.
   (C)   All new subdivisions shall be addressed in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter. No new subdivision plat shall be approved until
all proposed lots have been assigned addresses approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission. Address numbers on new buildings in such subdivision shall
be affixed in accordance with §
150.024(F).
   (D)   Private easements with 3 or more parcels or units that qualify for an
address number may be included on the street map and assigned a street name and
address number according to the provisions of this subchapter. However,
inclusion of easements or other access paths on the street map neither promises
nor implies any maintenance services or other responsibilities by the town.
(2001 Code, § 7-9-3)
§ 150.023 STREET NAMING.
   (A)   A map containing the street and address numbering system for areas
inside the corporate limits of the Town of Chino Valley, 3 copies of which are
on file and available for inspection in the office of the Clerk, is hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part of this subchapter as if fully set out in
this subchapter. All streets and roads within the town shall be named pursuant
to this subchapter in accordance with those names shown on the map described
herein.
   (B)   As far as possible, all streets presently named prior to the adoption
of this subchapter shall retain the same names. The names of future streets may
be assigned by the Zoning Commission from a list of western and local historic
names kept on file when desirable.
   (C)   The following rules shall be followed in assigning future street
names:
      (1)   Duplication of names. There shall be no duplication of street names
in the town limits. Similar sounding names are considered to be duplication
regardless of spelling. Duplication of street names within the City of Prescott
shall be avoided, if possible.
      (2)   Continuity of names. A continuous street, or one proposed to be
continuous, should bear the same name throughout, with the exception of the
suffix, even though it changes directions. If it is interrupted and eventual
connection is not probable, the segments shall bear different names.
      (3)   Guidelines for acceptable names.
         (a)   Names should be pleasant sounding, appropriate, easy to read and
should add to pride of home ownership.
         (b)   Large subdivisions should use a single, significant category of
names. A small subdivision should use the same category as the surrounding or
adjacent area to help establish locational identity.
         (c)   Prefixes are to be avoided, if possible.
         (d)   Suffix terms, including designated quadrant, that may be
utilized for future streets are listed and defined in
§ 150.021.
   (D)   Street name change procedure. Citizens may request street name changes
according to the following procedures:
      (1)   Present to the Zoning Commission a petition stating the desired
change, containing the signatures of 51% by number of the property owners
affected by the change.
      (2)   The Zoning Commission shall formulate an ordinance implementing the
change, and a recommendation on the change, to the Council.
      (3)   The Council may enact the change by adopting the ordinance.
      (4)   The following guidelines shall be considered when renaming streets:
         (a)   Does a street have any historical reason for having the name it
has?
         (b)   Which street has the least number of houses on it and thus would
require the least number of address changes?
         (c)   Which street has had its name for the longest period of time?
         (d)   Is the name appropriate according to the other street names in
the neighborhood?
         (e)   Which street name is used for the longest distance or the most
traveled section?
(2001 Code, § 7-9-4)
§ 150.024 ADDRESS NUMBERS.
   (A)   A “mile” shall be considered the distance between 2 consecutive
section lines. There shall be available 1,000 address numbers per mile. Even
digit numbers shall be used on the west and north sides of the streets, and odd
digit numbers shall be used on the east and south sides of the streets.
   (B)   For the purpose of address numbering on east-west streets, address
numbers shall increase linearly with distance from U.S. Highway 89, the
division line to be the reference meridian with an address number of 0.
   (C)   For the purpose of address numbering on north-south streets, address
numbers shall increase linearly with distance from Center Street, the division
line to be designated the reference meridian with an address number of 0.
   (D)   Each structure of human occupancy or principal building on any
building site to which all other uses on the site are subordinate shall have an
assigned number. Other permanent structures with enclosed floor areas may have
an assigned address number.
   (E)   The following rules shall be followed in assigning address numbers:
      (1)   The intersection of the grid lines should approximately and
reasonably conform to the intersections of existing streets so that a traveler
can observe a distinct change, for instance, from a 300 block to a 400 block.
Where there is no intersection within a long block interval, said block
interval shall be divided between 2 streets at a grid line. Numerical block
interval changes at minor streets should be avoided where the grid does not
indicate a new block.
      (2)   If a street changes direction drastically and for a substantial
length, the numbering should be changed to reflect the orientation with a
different meridian line.
      (3)   The address numbers on parallel streets shall be comparable except
on loops and circles.
      (4)   The numbering shall allow for expansion to accommodate future
growth in the area.
      (5)   Each location where business is conducted or mail is received shall
have an address number.
      (6)   Address numbers shall be assigned to correspond with the
predominant direction of the loop or circle. The address number assignment
shall begin with the corner nearest the appropriate meridian line and continue
around the loop in a regular manner with even numbers on the inside and odd
numbers on the outside.
      (7)   The general principle to apply when numbering diagonal streets is
to treat the street as either a north-south or an east-west street if it is not
a perfect diagonal. If it is a perfect diagonal, an arbitrary decision is made
to treat it as a north-south or an east-west street, maintaining consistency in
neighboring areas.
      (8)    When assigning a number to a building on a corner lot, assign a
number from the street upon which the front entrance faces. Dual addresses
shall be avoided. If a corner building has two entrances which both look like
front entrances, the decision is based on the general site layout. If the
direction a corner structure is facing is indeterminate, consider the street
from which the number should be most readily identified as the street upon
which the structure faces.
      (9)   Apartments, rooms and offices contained within any structure or
complex shall have an assigned address number based on an intersection point
with a street. The owner of the structure or complex shall be responsible for
assignment of appropriate numbers within the structure or complex.
      (10)   Separate numbers should be assigned to the entrances of a duplex
house, for an upstairs apartment which has an outside entrance or for separate
buildings in the rear of other buildings. If a commercial enterprise that is
part of a residence has a separate entrance from the street, it may also be
assigned a separate number. The owner of the duplex shall be responsible for
the assignment of appropriate numbers to the buildings.
      (11)   Each mobile home park shall have an assigned address number based
on an intersection point with a street which shall include appropriate space
numbers for each space within the park. The mobile home park owner shall be
responsible for the space numbering within the park.
      (12)   The same address number is assigned for all lots and units with
primary access from a private drive or private easement based upon point of
intersection with a public thoroughfare. All lots and units shall further be
assigned a lot/space number as part of the address.
      (13)   Rear houses and buildings hidden but plainly subsidiary or
auxiliary to a separate front unit and sharing the same vehicular entry shall
be assigned the next number in sequence to the front or main structure.
   (F)   Posting of designated address numbers.
      (1)   The owner, occupant or person in charge of any house or building to
which an address number and street name has been assigned will be notified in
writing by the town of the number assigned to the same. Within 60 days after
the receipt of such written notification from the Zoning Commission, the owner,
occupant or person in charge of a house or building to which a number has been
assigned shall affix the number in a conspicuous manner in a conspicuous place.
      (2)   It is the duty of the owner, occupant or person in charge thereof,
upon affixing the new number, to remove any different number which might be
mistaken for or confused with the number assigned to the structure by the
Zoning Commission.
      (3)   Numerals indicating the official numbers for each principal
building or each front entrance to the building shall be posted in a manner as
to be legible and distinguishable from the street on which the property is
located according to the following standards:
         (a)   House numbers shall be large enough to be seen easily from the
street.
         (b)   House numbers shall be set on a background of a contrasting
color.
         (c)   When a house is some distance from a road or when view of the
house is blocked by trees or shrubs, house numbers shall be on a sign attached
to a tree, fence, gate or lawn stake.
         (d)   On a corner lot, the house number shall face the street named in
the address.
         (e)   House numbers shall be easily visible at night.
         (f)   House numbers shall be plain block numerals, not script or
written numbers and a minimum 5 inches in height.
      (4)   Mobile home parks and other group housing served by private drives
or easements are assigned an address number based on the intersection point on
a street, and the point shall be posted with numerals giving that address
number and the range of lot numbers served by the easement. Additionally, the
structure on the easement having an address number shall post the designation
“Lot_____” according hereto.
(2001 Code, § 7-9-5)
RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND GRADING PERMITS
§ 150.040 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to accommodate installation and
placement of objects within town rights-of-way while providing for the public
health, safety and general welfare and protecting the natural environment. The
intent is to provide for public safety, improve traffic flow on streets and
roads, and assure that such rights-of-way are free of physical obstructions.
This is accomplished by establishing construction standards, based on sound
engineering principles, to protect the physical integrity of streets, roads and
other rights-of-way as defined in §
150.043, and their associated drainage systems.
   (B)   All work authorized and performed in public rights-of-way shall be in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter but shall not be construed to
prevent the enforcement of other laws which, prescribe more restrictive
limitations, nor shall the provisions of this subchapter be presumed to waive
any limitations imposed by other statutes or ordinances.
(2001 Code, § 7-10-1)
§ 150.041 SCOPE.
   This subchapter sets forth rules to regulate and control all construction
and maintenance performed within a right-of-way, which, has been dedicated and
declared by the town to be public. Public rights-of- way grading permit shall
include, but not be limited to, streets, roads, alleys and ways, highways,
sidewalks, bridges and public places. It establishes the administrative
procedures for issuance of permits and provides for approval of plans and
specifications and inspection of the construction. The rules shall pertain to,
but shall not be limited to, persons, organizations, public service utilities
and franchise grantees. The rules shall apply to construction and maintenance
upon, over, along, across and under present and future public rights-of-way.
(2001 Code, § 7-10-2)
§ 150.042 ADOPTION OF PERMIT APPLICATION FORM.
   The form entitled “application for permit to construct or maintain on town
grading and rights-of- way” is hereby adopted into this subchapter.
(2001 Code, § 7-10-3)
§ 150.043 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTRACTOR. The applicant or contractor hired by the applicant.
   CONTRACTING AGENCY. The applicant.
   ENGINEER. Unless otherwise specified, shall mean the applicant’s engineer.
   ENGINEERING and ENGINEERING PRACTICE. The practice of engineering, as
defined in A.R.S. § 32-101.
   GENERAL PERMIT. The permit to construct or maintain on town utilities
holding franchises with the Town of Chino Valley.
   MAG. Maricopa Association of Governments and refers to public works
standards published by that organization.
   OPTIMUM MOISTURE. The water content corresponding to the maximum soil
density, as defined by A.S.M.D.-698 or A.S.S.H.T.O. T-99 density curve obtained
from laboratory compaction test trials.
   OWNER. That party, holding title to property placed within the town rights-
of-way.
   PERMIT. The permit to construct or maintain on town rights-of-way authorized
by the Town Engineer.
   PERMITTEE. The grantee of a permit by the Town Engineer.
   PRE-CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE CONFERENCE. A meeting pursuant to §
150.046(C)(5).
   PROJECT PERMIT. The permit to construct or maintain on town rights-of-way
issued to applicants for specific construction or maintenance projects.
   PROJECT PERMIT AMENDMENT. A modification by the Town Engineer of the time
extension requirement of the permit pursuant to §
150.047(C), and any modification allowed by this subchapter.
   RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Streets, roads, alleys, ways, highways, sidewalks, bridges,
utility easements, structures, grounds and places which have been dedicated to
and declared by the town to be public and permits are not limited to public
rights-of-ways.
   SOLID ROCK. Material which results in refusal during excavation by a backhoe
with a 1-foot bucket of 55 horsepower or greater.
   STREET PAD. Any rubber or metal device of sufficient strength, thickness and
area to protect paved surfaces from damage or deformation.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL PLAN. A plan pursuant to §
150.046(C)(7), the details of which shall be specified by the Town Engineer.
   UTILITIES. Any person or business providing service to the public through
the use of lines, pipes or other distribution systems.
(2001 Code, § 7-10-4)
§ 150.044 ENFORCEMENT.
   The official charged with the enforcement of this subchapter shall be the
Town Engineer.
(2001 Code, § 7-10-5)
§ 150.045 APPEALS.
   Appeals from the decision of the Town Engineer in the interpretation of this
subchapter may be taken by filing an appeal with the Town Clerk within 10 days
of the decision. A copy of the appeal shall be provided to the Town Engineer.
The Town Council shall agendize the appeal for the next regular or special
meeting, hear arguments and decide the matter. The decision shall be final.
(2001 Code, § 7-10-6)
§ 150.046 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; CLASSES OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Compliance. No person, organization, public service utility or
franchise grantee shall be issued a permit for construction and maintenance
upon, over, along, across and under present and future public rights-of-way
without first having complied with §
150.47(B) or (C) as applicable.
   (B)   Classes of permit. There shall be 2 classes of permit.
      (1)   General permit. Public service utilities and franchise grantees may
be issued a general permit by the Town Engineer. This permit authorizes the
permittee to perform each of the following types of work on a repetitive basis.
         (a)   Above ground.
            1.   Any appurtenance located not less than 10 feet from the edge
of the traveled way. NOTE: Gas meters must meet the additional requirement of
being located within 1 foot of the right- of- way property line.
            2.   Appurtenances other than gas facilities located less than 10
feet from the edge of the traveled way not protruding more than 2 inches above
the surface.
            3.   Emergency work as necessary to protect health, safety and
welfare of the public.
         (b)   Below ground.
            1.   Emergency work as necessary to protect health, safety and
welfare of the public.
            2.   Work done in providing Blue Stake locations of utility lines
or appurtenance.
      (2)   General permit performance criteria.
         (a)   All construction shall comply with standards established in this
subchapter.
         (b)   Each installation shall be reported by the permittee on the
Monthly Summary of Utility Rights-of-Way Work form, as in Exhibit “E”, provided
by the Town Engineer.
         (c)   The Town Engineer may request compaction testing to verify
compliance with this subchapter.
         (d)   Timeliness.
            1.   All construction and maintenance shall be accomplished at such
time and in such manner as to be least inconvenient to the traveling public.
            2.   All work shall be performed between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. This shall not apply to emergency work. Work
in progress may be allowed to continue until the time specified by the Town
Engineer.
         (e)   The permittee shall be responsible and liable for replacing and
restoring the disturbed rights-of-way; including but not limited to the paving,
sidewalk, driveway, surfacing, planting and ground cover; in as good condition
as it was prior to disturbance. The permittee shall not be responsible for
replacing and restoring improvements that have been disturbed in the rights-of-
way, if these improvements constitute a hazard in the rights-of-way, and the
permittee has applied for and received approval from the Town Engineer not to
replace or restore the improvements.
         (f)   Work not specified by the General Permit may be authorized under
the project permit.
      (3)   Project permit. Persons, organizations, public service utilities
and franchise grantees, which apply for construction and maintenance projects
not specified by a general permit, may be issued a project permit by the Town
Engineer.
   (C)   Conditions for issuance of a project permit. A project permit may be
issued by the Town Engineer provided the applicant signs the permit application
agreeing to all of the following terms and conditions pertaining to the permit;
plus any additional conditions specified by the Town Engineer in the project
permit.
      (1)   Appurtenances. The exact location of the appurtenance relative to
the right-of-way boundary shall be submitted with the application for a project
permit.
         (a)   No valves, closures, transformers, standing pipes, poles and the
like will be allowed in any surface drainage ditch that requires maintenance.
         (b)   All utilities will be placed in utility easements as close to
right-of-way lines as feasible.
      (2)   Lines under pavement. All service lines located below pavement
shall be not less than 30 inches below the pavement surface at any point under
the pavement, unless connecting to existing lines that are less than 30 inches
below pavement. In such cases, lines shall be no higher than the existing
lines. Lines located below pavement in solid rock, as defined in §
150.043, shall be not less than 24 inches below the pavement surface at any
point under the pavement, unless connecting to existing lines that are less
than 24 inches below pavement. In such cases, lines shall be no higher than the
existing lines. Lines out of pavement must be 30 inches below the surface for
maintenance purposes.
      (3)   Liability.
         (a)   The permittee shall be responsible and liable for any
disturbance, injury or damage to all rights-of-way, including but not limited
to surfacing, planting and ground cover and to utility property below, in and
above the same rights-of-way.
         (b)   The permittee shall be responsible and liable for replacing and
restoring the disturbed rights-of-way; including but not limited to the paving,
sidewalk, driveway, surfacing, planting and ground cover; in as good condition
as it was prior to disturbance. The permittee shall specify the details of all
replacement work, including any deviations from the existing condition. The
permittee shall not be responsible for replacing or restoring improvements that
constitute a significant impediment to the maintenance of the roadway or
appurtenances or that constitute a hazard in the right-of-way; and the
permittee has applied for and received approval from the Town Engineer not to
replace or repair.
         (c)   The permittee shall be responsible and liable for, and shall
hold the town harmless from: any injury or damage to any person, animal or
vehicle, which may be using the rights-of-way in a lawful manner, caused by or
arising out of the exercise of the permit. The permittee shall be responsible
and liable for all maintenance work on any property to which he has title and
possession after the construction time limit has expired.
         (d)   The permittee shall be responsible and liable for, and shall
hold the town harmless from allowing any condition to exist, which may be a
hazard or source of danger to the public.
         (e)   A certificate of insurance shall be submitted with the permit
application. When the total cost of furnishing equipment, labor and materials
exceeds $1,500. This certificate shall verify Comprehensive General Liability
coverage of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 aggregate,
and shall name the town as additional named insured. Utility companies may
choose to submit a certificate of insurance upon application for a general
permit. This coverage shall be in force for a period of 1 year from the date of
issuance of the general permit.
         (f)   Applications for work that is to be performed by licensed
contractors shall include verification of licensing as required by the state’s
Registrar of Contractors. The Town Engineer may require additional insurance,
performance bonds or other bonding for large projects.
      (4)   Cost; expense. Unless otherwise agreed, the town shall not bear any
cost or expense for construction and maintenance.
      (5)   Pre-construction and maintenance conference. The Town Engineer may
require the applicant to attend a pre-construction and maintenance conference.
      (6)   Timeliness.
         (a)   All construction and maintenance shall be accomplished at such
time and in such manner as to be least inconvenient to the traveling public.
         (b)   All work shall be performed between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. Work in progress may be allowed to continue
until the time specified by the Town Engineer provided:
         (c)   The provisions of §
150.046(C)(6) shall not apply to emergency work.
      (7)   Traffic and traffic control.
         (a)   Traffic adjacent to and within the construction area shall be
controlled in accordance with the “Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices”
(MUTCD). The Town Engineer may require signs, flaggers, pilot cars and other
devices and methods. A control plan shall be submitted with the application
before the permit is issued.
         (b)   The permittee shall give notification to the Town Engineer no
less than 2 working days before work is to begin or before work is to re-
commence after stoppage.
         (c)   The permittee shall not partially or fully block rights-of-way
to pedestrian or vehicular traffic under any circumstances without a valid
permit. Whenever possible, 1-way traffic shall be maintained. In no case shall
blockage of emergency vehicle access be permitted. Notification shall be given
to the Chief of Police and the Chino Valley Fire Department.
         (d)   If flaggers are needed to control traffic, Flaggers will be
certified or show proof of having training on the correct flagging procedures,
as set forth in the (Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices) M.U.T.C.D.
         (e)   When flagging, flaggers will use a stop and slow paddle or in
the case of emergencies a red 24 inches by 24 inches flag until a stop and slow
paddle can be obtained.
      (8)   Notification to the Town Engineer.
         (a)   The Town Engineer shall be notified after any trench or
excavation has been backfilled, but before placement of any pavement courses;
         (b)   After placement of final pavement course; and
         (c)   After completion of all work.
      (9)   Routine and final inspections.
         (a)   The Town Engineer may routinely inspect work authorized by the
permit at any time.
         (b)   The Town Engineer shall perform a final inspection of all work
authorized by the permit.
         (c)   Following final inspection of all work authorized by the permit,
the Town Engineer shall determine if the completed work conforms with the
permitted work.
         (d)   In addition, the Town Engineer may request compaction testing be
performed at the expense of the contractor to verify compliance with this
subchapter.
      (10)   Actions resulting from non-compliance.
         (a)   The Town Engineer shall notify the permittee in writing that
work is not in compliance.
         (b)   If the permittee does not correct such deficiencies within the
time specified by the Town Engineer the Town Engineer shall immediately proceed
to correct the deficiencies and collect all costs from the permittee plus 28%
administration fees.
         (c)   Additional penalties may apply, pursuant to this subchapter.
      (11)   Cancellation of permit. The Town Engineer may immediately cancel
and thereby revoke the rights provided by either a general permit or a project
permit if he or she determines that, during the life of the permit, the
permittee is conducting the work permitted in a manner so as to endanger the
public or themselves or if the work is not proceeding acceptable to the Town
Engineer.
      (12)   Removal and abandonment of facilities within the right-of-way.
         (a)   The Town Engineer may, upon written notice, require the
permittee to remove or abandon in place as specified by the Town Engineer, all
property to which the permittee has title or which has been rented or leased by
the permittee, if the right-of-way is needed by the town.
         (b)   Whenever a permit is canceled by the Town Engineer, the
permittee shall be responsible and liable for replacing and restoring the
disturbed rights-of-way; including but not limited to the paving, sidewalk,
driveway surfacing, planting and ground cover; in as good condition as it was
prior to disturbance, pursuant to §
150.046(C)(3)(b).
(2001 Code, § 7-10-7)
§ 150.047 LIFE OF PERMIT.
   (A)   General permit. The Town Engineer shall determine the life of the
general permit, but it shall not exceed 1 year, as stated in the permit. The
Town Engineer may revoke this permit at any time based on unsatisfactory
performance.
   (B)   Project permit. Each project permit shall be in full force and effect
for 30 days from the date of issue, unless otherwise stated in the permit.
   (C)   Time limits. The Town Engineer may determine that a specific project
may require more than 30 days for completion and may permit such time as deemed
necessary for completion. He or she may determine the necessity for a time
extension during the life of the project permit, and thereby amend the permit.
   (D)   Time for excavation, backfillinq and compaction of trenches across
rights-of-way. The Town Engineer shall determine time for excavation,
backfilling and compaction across rights-of-way
(2001 Code, § 7-10-8)
§ 150.048 DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   The Town Engineer shall deny a project permit if he determines the proposed
work will adversely affect the integrity of public rights-of-way or impair
public safety. Applicants may appeal any such decisions pursuant to §
150.045.
(2001 Code, § 7-10-9)
§ 150.049 FEES.
   (A)   (1)   At the issuance of a permit, the Town Engineer shall collect the
permit fees set forth by resolution from time to time. The fees shall be paid
in lawful money of the United States or by collectable draft or check. Should
the draft or check be uncollectible within 15 days, the permit shall be null
and void.
      (2)   (a)   Inspection fees shall be waived for utilities holding a
general permit.
         (b)   Inspection fees for 1 inspection are included in the project
permit fees.
   (B)   Other charges:
             At the issuance of a permit, the Town Engineer shall collect the
Special fees special fees set forth in the Town of Chino Valley Ord. 411 Other
             Engineering Services. Special fees will be withheld for Utilities that
             have Franchise agreements with the Town of Chino Valley.
Samples and  The permittee shall be responsible to insure that, when so required by
testing of   the permit, he or she shall employ an independent testing laboratory
materials    to test all physical materials, at his cost, pursuant to § 106.2 of
             MAG specifications.
Use of       The permittee shall be responsible to insure that a permit for
explosives   blasting is obtained from the Chino Valley Fire Department and the
             Town Engineer.
             The permittee shall be responsible to insure that existing landscaping
Preservation shall be preserved and special care given to protect trees and large
of property  shrubbery, in accordance with  §
             150.046(C)(3)(b). The permittee shall also be responsible to insure
             that property protection shall be in accordance with MAG § 201.2.
Backfilling and compacting shall be an approved 1-sack slurry concrete mix from the
bottom of pavement to 6 inches above pipe.
All pipes and lines shall be located pursuant to  §
150.050(E)(1).
Weather and moisture condition limitations for asphaltic concrete.
Asphalt concrete shall be deposited only when the sub grade surface is dry, and
when the ambient temperature in the shade is sixty- (60) degrees Fahrenheit and is
rising.
All pavement and concrete repair shall be approved by the Town Engineer.
Variances may be granted by the Town Engineer in accordance with acceptable
engineering standards and practices.
Traffic      Traffic control measures shall be in accordance with specifications in
control      the M.U.T.C.D. Devices and measures to adequately control vehicular
measures     and pedestrian traffic adjacent to and within the construction area
             shall be provided and maintained.
 
(2001 Code, § 7-10-10)
§ 150.050 ADDITIONAL STIPULATIONS.
   (A)   Soil boring priority. Soil boring shall be required on all roads
unless the Town Engineer gives a variance.
   (B)   Samples for testing. When the permit does not require materials
testing, the Town Engineer may request and obtain materials samples in suitable
quantities from the permittee for testing to determine compliance with
specifications. The town shall charge the costs to the permittee.
   (C)   Site conditions. The permittee shall conduct the project to conform
with the following stipulations:
      (1)   Rubber-tired equipment shall be operated on paved surfaces except
that, when street pads, as defined in §
150.043, are employed to protect asphalt surfaces, the following shall apply:
         (a)   Crawler equipment with street pads may be utilized with written
permission of the Town Engineer.
         (b)   Backhoes and similar equipment with pods shall utilize street
pads as defined in §
150.043.
      (2)   Site shall be maintained during the life of the permit in a clean
and orderly condition.
      (3)   Trenches across roadways shall be bridged by suitable plate,
approved by the Town Engineer, whenever work is stopped overnight.
      (4)   All signs temporarily moved shall be reinstalled and all signs
damaged during construction shall be replaced. Arrangements may be made with
the Town Engineer to have these replaced and the costs charged to the permittee
by the town.
      (5)   Prior to final inspection by the Town Engineer, the permittee shall
clear pavement surfaces, dress shoulders, clean surfaces; and remove debris,
garbage, unused native and manufactured materials and similar objects, which
are not an integral part of the rights-of-way; to the satisfaction of the Town
Engineer.
   (D)   Road closures. All trenches shall be closed at the end of each
workday.
   (E)   Compliance. The Town Engineer in compliance with good engineering
practice may waive portions of theses requirements on a case-by-case basis.
(2001 Code, § 7-10-11)
ROADWAY STANDARDS
§ 150.065 COMPLIANCE WITH CODE.
   Any person, contractor, firm, utility company or other entity involved in
the design or construction of roads or streets within the town shall comply
with standards set forth herein. Further, and in addition thereto, the
standards and requirements of this subchapter shall be complied with.
(2001 Code, § 7-11-1)
§ 150.066 RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   The minimum widths of rights-of-way for roadways within the town shall
be as follows:
      (1)   Arterial roads. Rights-of-way for arterial roads shall be 100 feet
wide.
      (2)   Residential collectors. Rights-of-way for residential collectors
shall be 68 feet wide.
      (3)   Residential streets. Rights-of-way for residential streets shall be
50 feet wide.
   (B)   Lands for rights-of-way shall be deeded to the town and recorded prior
to any construction being accomplished.
(2001 Code, § 7-11-2)
§ 150.067 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Prior to construction of any base or subbase, the subbase shall be
scarified and compacted to a minimum depth of 6 inches. Compaction shall be a
minimum of 95% density.
   (B)   Base course shall consist of a minimum depth of 6 inches of Aggregate
Base Course (ABC) or Mineral Aggregate (MA) compacted to a minimum of 95%
density. The ABC or MA shall be shaped to the width and cross slope of the
approved typical section. Placement of any select material and minimum depth
requirements shall be approved by the Road Department. The ABC shall meet the
following gradation specifications:
GRADATION SPECIFICATIONS
                              Percentage by Weight Passing Sieve
Sieve Sizes (Square Openings) Select Material        Aggregate Base
                              Type A          Type B
GRADATION SPECIFICATIONS
                              Percentage by Weight Passing Sieve
Sieve Sizes (Square Openings) Select Material        Aggregate Base
                              Type A          Type B
3 inches                      100
1-1/2 inches                                  100
1-1/8 inches                                         100
No. 4                         30–75         30–7038–65
No. 8                         20–60         20–6020–60
No. 30                        10–40         10–4010–40
No. 200                       0–12          0–12 3–12
P.I. Maximum                  5               5      5
 
   (C)   All materials in the subbase or base course shall be placed using
moisture and density control in accordance with good engineering practice and
approval by the Road Department. Prior to the acceptance of roads for
maintenance by the town, the contractor shall provide the town with engineering
certifications of materials used and density testing.
   (D)   A dust free surface consisting of tack or prime coat penetrant asphalt
and at least a single coarse bituminous surface treatment shall be provided.
The Road Department shall have the authority to approve or disapprove the
design of the dust free surface and structural section (base/subbase).
   (E)   (1)   Engineering calculations shall be submitted for all drainage
required such as but not limited to:
         (a)   Natural watercourses;
         (b)   Subgrade;
         (c)   Side ditches;
         (d)   Surface runoff; and
         (e)   Culvert sizes.
      (2)   Minimum cross culverts shall be 18 inches diameter. Minimum
driveway culverts shall be 12 inches diameter.
   (F)   All computations and certifications required shall be performed and
sealed by an engineer licensed to practice by the Arizona State Board of
Technical Registration.
   (G)   (1)   The typical section minimum roadway for residential and
collector streets shall be:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fdd5b00a3471dbdcb2a5e74ef8fa7600d2ed792b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1177.gif]
 
      (2)   Notes:
         (a)   ABC material shall be compacted to 95% density.
         (b)   All driveways shall have minimum 12 inches C.M.P. where roadway
ditch evidenced.
         (c)   Maximum grade within 100 feet from intersection = 4%.
         (d)   Cross culverts for existing water courses shall be 18 inches
minimum. Culvert size calculations shall be required.
         (e)   Structural section to be determined by good engineering
practice.
(2001 Code, § 7-11-3)
UNDERGROUND ELECTRIC, TELEPHONE, CABLE AND COMMUNICATION LINES
§ 150.080 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEVELOPER. The individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
syndication, trust or other legal entity (other than the serving utility) that
is responsible for the development of land thereby creating a demand for
service or causes alteration of existing services.
   DISTRIBUTION FEEDER. That portion of the distribution system feeding from a
distribution substation to a specific load area and having a capacity of over 3
MVA and less than 12.5 KV.
   EXISTING UTILITY POLES AND WIRES. The poles and wires and other related
facilities that are in place and in operation as of the effective date of this
subchapter and including repairs, replacements, additions, enlargements or
betterments, changes, improvements hereinafter made to maintain or increase
service capabilities of existing utility poles, wires, service drops and other
facilities, but it does not include extensions made to existing distribution
lines.
   TRANSMISSION LINE. An electric line used for the bulk transmission of
electricity between generating or receiving points and major substations or
delivery points, having a rating greater than 12,500 volts.
   NEW UTILITY POLES AND WIRES. Poles and structures, wires, cables,
transformers and other related facilities used in or as a part of the
distribution or transmission of electricity or in the transmission of
telephone, telegraph, radio or television communications that are not in place
as of the effective date of this subchapter and constituting new extensions
made from existing poles and wires.
   UNDERGROUND POLICY. The then current policy governing payment of the cost of
undergrounding distribution feeders and service facilities as established by
the serving utility.
(2001 Code, § 7-12-1)
§ 150.081 UNDERGROUND UTILITY LINES.
   Except as exempted in §
150.082, all existing and new utility and telephone lines, electric utility
distribution lines, cable television lines and all other communication and
utility lines adjacent to or within new residential, commercial or industrial
subdivisions or other areas to be developed within the town shall be installed
underground at the time of development of the property as part of the required
off-site and on-site improvements. The developer of the property shall be
responsible for the costs of the underground construction in accordance with
the underground policy of the serving utility.
(2001 Code, § 7-12-2)
§ 150.082 EXCEPTIONS.
   The following construction may occur without meeting the underground
installation requirements:
   (A)   Transmission lines and betterment to existing utilities together with
related switch yards, substations and related equipment;
   (B)   Repair or improvement of existing utility poles and wires by the
serving utility, provided that activity is not initiated on request of or by a
developer;
   (C)   Installation of new utility poles and wires or relocation of existing
utility poles and wires not initiated by a developer;
   (D)   Pad-mounted transformers or pull boxes, service terminals, pedestal
type telephone terminals, telephone splice closures or similar on-the-ground
facilities attached to existing overhead facilities which are used for the
purpose of connecting an underground system with the existing facilities;
   (E)   Temporary service facilities, such as facilities to furnish emergency
service during an outage, facilities to provide service to construction sites
or other service of a limited duration, such as to a fair, carnival, outdoor
exhibit or function where the facilities will be installed for a temporary
period only; and
   (F)   New service drops or improvement of existing service drops from
existing overhead lines to single family residential customers, except when
underground service is required by the Town of Chino Valley subdivision
regulations.
(2001 Code, § 7-12-3)
§ 150.083 TOWN PARTICIPATION AS DEVELOPER.
   In the event of relocation, improvement or repair of existing utility poles
and wires or installation of new utility poles and wires by the serving
utility, the town may elect to act as a developer and participate in the cost
of underground installation in accordance with the underground installation
policy of the utility. Prior to commencing any relocation, improvement or
installation work within the town, the serving utility shall notify the Town
Engineer of the pending action. Within 30 days of receipt of notification, the
town will determine its intent to act as developer and notify the utility of
the decision.
(2001 Code, § 7-12-4)
§ 150.084 WAIVER OF UNDERGROUND INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Town Council, upon petition by a developer, may waive or modify
the requirements for underground installation of existing or new utility lines
based on the findings that the strict enforcement of this section would
constitute an undue hardship on the developer and the minimal benefits would
accrue to the town.
   (B)   The Council’s decision shall include but not be limited to review and
analysis of the following factors:
      (1)   The extent of existing overhead lines and poles in the immediate
area of the project;
      (2)   The location and heights of the poles and wires and their relation
to present or future roads;
      (3)   The crossing of such lines over much-traveled highways or streets;
      (4)   The proximity of such lines to schools, churches, commercial areas
or other places where people congregate;
      (5)   The aesthetic appearance of that portion of the town should the
lines be installed overhead instead of underground;
      (6)   The impact on future development expected in the area; and
      (7)   The practicality and feasibility of underground installation with
due regard for the comparative costs between underground and overhead
installations; however, a mere showing that an underground installation is more
costly than overhead shall not be the sole criteria for granting a waiver.
(2001 Code, § 7-12-5)
MAILBOXES
§ 150.100 GENERAL.
   (A)   A mailbox or newspaper delivery box, hereafter referred to as mailbox,
shall not be allowed to exist on the town’s right-of -way if it interferes with
the safety of the traveling public or the function, maintenance or operation of
the street, road or highway system.
   (B)   The location and construction of the mailboxes shall conform to the
rules and regulations of the U.S. Postal Service as well as to standards
established in this code.
   (C)   A mailbox installation that conforms to the criteria in this
subchapter shall be acceptable unless the Town Engineer determines that it
interferes with the safety of the traveling public or the function, maintenance
or operation of the street, road or highway system.
   (D)   Prior to installing a mailbox in the town right-of-way, the property
owner (or his or her agent) shall make a written application to the Town
Engineer. Written permission from the town is required prior to installation of
the mailbox.
   (E)   Where discretionary action is permitted by the postmaster for location
or construction of a mailbox, the property owner (or his or her agent) shall
make application to the postmaster. Written permission from the postmaster is
required prior to installation of the mailbox.
(2001 Code, § 7-13-1)
§ 150.101 LOCATION.
   (A)   Access. A mailbox shall not be permitted where access is obtained from
the lanes of Highway 89 or where access is otherwise prohibited by law or
regulations.
   (B)   Placement. A mailbox shall be placed on the right-hand side of the
roadway, in the direction of the delivery route, except on 1-way streets where
they may be placed on the left-hand side. The bottom of the mailbox shall be
set at an elevation established by the U.S. Postal Service, generally between
36 inches and 4 feet above the roadway surface.
   (C)   Normal offset. The roadside face of the mailbox shall be offset from
the edge of the traveled way a minimum distance of the greater 1 of the
following:
      (1)   Eight feet where no paved shoulder exists.
      (2)   The width of the all-weather shoulder present plus 8 to 12 inches.
      (3)   The width of an all-weather turnout as specified by the Town
Engineer, plus 8 to 12 inches.
   (D)   Offset on curbed streets. The roadside face of the mailbox shall be
sent back to a distance of between 6 and 12 inches.
   (E)   Driveway entrance. Mailboxes at driveway entrances shall be placed on
the near side of the driveway in the direction of the delivery route.
   (F)   Intersecting street or road.  When a mailbox is located at an
intersection, it shall be placed a minimum distance of 100 feet beyond the
center of the intersecting street in any direction of the delivery route. When
the average daily traffic on the intersecting street exceeds 400 vehicles per
day, the distance shall be 200 feet.
   (G)   Guardrail. Where a mailbox is to be installed in the vicinity of an
existing guardrail, it shall be placed behind the guardrail unless application
is made and written permission received from the Town Engineer as specified in
§
150.100.
(2001 Code, § 7-13-2)
§ 150.102 SIZES.
   The following sizes of mailboxes as authorized by the U.S. Postal Service
shall be installed in the town.
   (A)   19-inch length — 6.5-inch width — 8.5-inch height.
   (B)   21-inch length — 8.8-inch width — 10.5-inch height.
   (C)   23.5-inch length — 11.5-inch width — 13.5-inch height.
(2001 Code, § 7-13-3)
§ 150.103 STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Materials. Mailboxes shall be of light sheet metal, fiberglass or
plastic construction and conform to the requirements of the U.S. Postal
Service. Newspaper delivery boxes shall be of light sheet metal or plastic
construction and of minimum dimensions suitable for holding a newspaper.
   (B)   Support.
      (1)   Number of boxes. No more than 2 mailboxes shall be mounted on a
support structure unless the support structure and mailbox arrangement have
been shown to be safe by crash testing as conducted by the Federal Highway
Administration or the Arizona Department of Transportation. Lightweight
newspaper delivery boxes may be mounted below the mailbox on the side of the
mailbox support.
      (2)   Concrete foundation. Mailbox supports shall be placed in native
soil or in crushed aggregate base materials whenever these materials provide
adequate support. Mailbox supports shall not be placed in concrete unless
necessary for support. Mailbox supports shall not be set in concrete placed at
depth any greater than 12 inches.
      (3)   Post. A single 4 inch by 4-1/2 inch diameter wooden post or metal
post with a strength no greater than 2 inch diameter standard strength steel
pipe, and embedded no more than 24 inches into the ground shall be acceptable
as a mailbox support. A metal post shall not be fitted with an anchor plate,
but it may have an anti-twist device that extends no greater than 10 inches
below the ground surface.
      (4)   Attachment. The post-to-mailbox attachment details shall be of
sufficient strength to prevent the mailbox from separating from the post top if
the installation is struck by a vehicle. The minimum spacing between the
centers of the support posts shall be 3/4 of the height of the post above the
ground line.
(2001 Code, § 7-13-4)
§ 150.104 SHOULDER AND PARKING AREA CONSTRUCTION.
   It shall be the responsibility of the postal patron to inform the Town
Engineer of any new or existing mailbox installation where shoulder
construction of the town maintained street is inadequate to allow all- weather
vehicular access to the mailbox.
(2001 Code, § 7-13-5)
§ 150.105 REMOVAL OF NONCONFORMING OR UNSAFE MAILBOXES.
   Any mailbox that is found to violate the public safety intent of this
subchapter shall be declared unacceptable and removed by the postal patron upon
notification by the Town Engineer. At the discretion of the Town Engineer,
based on an assessment of hazard to the public, the postal patron shall be
granted not less than 24 hours, nor more than 30 days, to remove an
unacceptable mailbox. After the specified removal period has expired, the
unacceptable mailbox shall be removed by the town at the postal patron’s
expense.
(2001 Code, § 7-13-6)
CHAPTER 151: DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
Section
   
151.01   Purpose and intent
   
151.02   Definitions
   
151.03   Additional provisions
   
151.04   Appropriation of development fee funds, refunds, appeals, exemptions
and waivers
   
151.05   Fees adopted by reference
   
151.06   Delayed effective date
   
151.07   Adjustment
   
151.08   Automatic annual adjustment
§ 151.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purposes and intent of these development fee procedures are:
   (A)   To establish uniform procedures for the position, calculation,
collection, expenditure and administration of development fees imposed on new
development;
   (B)   To implement the goals, objectives and policies of the Chino Valley
General Plan relating to assuring that new development contributes its fair
share towards the costs of public facilities reasonably necessitated by the new
development;
   (C)   To ensure that new development is reasonably benefitted by the
provisions of the public facilities provided with proceeds of development fees;
   (D)   To ensure that all applicable legal standards and criteria are
properly incorporated in these procedures;
   (E)   To ensure that all applicable procedures and requirements of A.R.S. §
9-463.05 have been met.
(2001 Code, Art. 16-1) (Am. Ord. 04-588, passed 12-9-2004)
§ 151.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. Any person who files an application with the town for a building
permit.
   BUILDING PERMIT. A permit required for the erection, construction,
modification, addition to or moving of any building, structure or use in the
incorporated area of the town.
   DEDICATION. Conveyance of land to the town for public facility purposes by
deed, other instrument of conveyance, or by dedication, on a duly filed and
recorded plat or short plat.
   DEVELOPMENT FEES. A fee adopted pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05 which is
imposed on new development on a pro rata basis in connection with and as a
condition of the issuance of a building permit and which is calculated to
defray all or a portion of the costs of the public facilities required to
accommodate new development at town-designated level of service (LOS) standards
and which reasonably benefits the new project.
   DEVELOPMENT FEE ACCOUNTS. The account(s) established for each type of public
facilities for which impact fees are collected. The accounts shall be
established pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05.
   DEVELOPMENT FEE DISTRICT. A defined geographic area or sub-area of the town
and/or its planning area within which particular public facilities are provided
and in which development fees will be collected, appropriated and expended for
public facilities serving new development within such area or sub-area.
   DEVELOPMENT FEE APPROPRIATION. Includes amounts appropriated in connection
with the planning, design, engineering and construction of public facilities;
planning, legal, appraisal and other costs related to the acquisition of land,
financing and development costs; the costs of compliance with purchasing
procedures and applicable administrative and legal requirements; and all other
costs necessarily incident to provision of the public facility.
   DWELLING UNITS. A room or group of rooms within a building containing
cooking accommodations and designed to be used for living purposes. Each
apartment unit, mobile home or mobile home space, or travel trailer or travel
trailer space shall be considered a dwelling unit.
      (1)   SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling unit designed and
used only by 1 family and which unit is physically separated from any other
dwelling unit.
      (2)   MOBILE HOME DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling unit typically designed and
used only by 1 family, which may be pre-manufactured and delivered to a
building site for connection to utilities. This dwelling unit may include
travel trailer units as well.
      (3)   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling unit typically attached to
another dwelling unit, such as an apartment, duplex, townhouse, single-family
attached dwelling unit or mobile home dwelling unit located within a mobile
home park.
      (4)   ALL OTHER DWELLING UNITS. A dwelling unit not described in
divisions (1) through (3) above.
   EXISTING USE. Development which physically exists or for which the owner
holds a valid building permit as of the effective date of this chapter.
   GENERAL PLAN. A generalized coordinated land use policy statement adopted by
the Council and ratified by voters of the town pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-461.05.
   GOVERNMENT IMPACT FEES. A fee imposed on all new residential and
nonresidential development to fund the proportionate share of the costs of
municipal office space, town owned and operated vehicles and major capital
equipment.
   LEVEL OF SERVICE (LOS). An established minimum functional level of public
facilities that must be provided per unit of demand or other appropriate
measure of need.
   LIBRARY IMPACT FEES. A fee imposed on new residential and nonresidential
development to fund the proportionate share of the costs of land acquisition
for libraries; library facilities, including construction, furniture, fixtures,
equipment and technology; and collection materials including, but not limited
to books, reference materials, audio and visual materials, periodicals and
others.
   NEW DEVELOPMENT. Any construction or expansion of a building or structure,
or any changes in the use of the land that creates additional demand for public
facilities or services (such as a change which results in an increase in the
number of vehicle trips to and from the property, building or structure), and
requires a development permit from the town.
   PARKS AND RECREATION IMPACT FEES. A fee imposed on new residential and
nonresidential development to fund the proportionate share of the costs of
community parks; open space, including, but not necessarily limited to, open
space lands, agricultural land preservation, purchase of land, development
rights and/or construction easements and trails; and recreation facilities and
improvements.
   POLICE IMPACT FEES. A fee imposed on all new residential and nonresidential
development to fund the proportionate share of the costs of public safety
buildings and facilities, communication systems, vehicles and major capital
equipment.
   PUBLIC FACILITIES OR SERVICE. Public improvements, facilities or services
necessitated by new development, including, but not limited to, water
resources, transportation, police facilities, public works, fire and emergency
medical services, community facilities, municipal facilities, water facilities,
sewer facilities, flood control and drainage, solid waste disposal, open space,
parks, utilities and educational facilities.
   ROAD IMPACT FEES. A fee imposed on all new residential and nonresidential
development to fund the proportionate share of the costs of transportation
improvements and new roads designed to solve congestion-related problems that
are anticipated from increased traffic demands resulting from new development,
and including improvements to minor arterials and/or collectors needed for
access and traffic mobility, but excluding project-specific traffic and
transportation improvements such as turn lanes, individual traffic signals for
the benefit of a specific development project, and the like.
   TOWN.  The Town of Chino Valley.
(2001 Code, Art. 16-2) (Am. Ord. 04-588, passed 12-9-2004)
§ 151.03 ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   This chapter and the procedures established shall remain in effect
unless and until repealed, amended or modified by council in accordance with
applicable state law and the town code, ordinances and resolutions.
   (B)   This chapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Previously issued building permits.
      (2)   Previous payment of development fees.
      (3)   No net increase in dwelling units-No development fee shall be
imposed on any new residential development which does not add a new dwelling
unit.
      (4)   No increase in public facilities-No development fee shall be
imposed on a use, development, project, structure, building, fence, sign, or
other activity, whether or not a building permit is required, which does not
result in an increase in the demand for public facilities.
      (5)   Development projects which are the subject of a development
agreement containing provisions that are in conflict with this ordinance, but
only to the extent of the conflict or inconsistency.
      (6)   Development by other governmental entities, school districts or
charter schools. At the option of the Council, the town may enter into
intergovernmental agreements with governmental agencies to waive town
development fees and building permit fees. Governmental agencies include,
without limitation, federal and state agencies, towns, cities, colleges,
universities and emergency response entities. Pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-500.18, no
development fee shall be imposed on school districts or charter schools except
for those fees assessed for streets, water and sewer utility functions.
(2001 Code, Art. 16-3) (Am. Ord. 04-588, passed 12-9-2004)
§ 151.04 APPROPRIATION OF DEVELOPMENT FEE FUNDS, REFUNDS, APPEALS, EXEMPTIONS
AND WAIVERS.
   (A)   The town, for each category of public facility for which development
fees are imposed, shall establish a development fee account. The account shall
clearly identify the category, account or fund for which the development fee
has been imposed.
   (B)   Sub-accounts may be established for individual development fee
districts. All development fees collected by the town shall be deposited into
the appropriate development fee account or sub-account, which shall be interest
bearing. All interest earned on monies deposited to the account shall be
credited to and shall be considered funds of the account. The funds of each
account shall be capable of being accounted for separately from all other town
funds, over time. The town shall establish and implement necessary accounting
controls to ensure that the development fee funds are properly deposited,
accounted for and appropriated in accordance with this chapter, A.R.S. § 9-
463.05, and any other applicable legal requirements.
   (C)   Development fees shall be appropriated only:
      (1)   For the particular public facility for which they were imposed.
      (2)   Within the development fee district where collected unless the
development fee funds will be appropriated for a public facility necessitated
by or serving new development.
   (D)   Development fee funds may be appropriated for a public facility
located outside of the district where collected only if the demand for the
public facility is generated in whole or in part by the new development.
   (E)   The town shall each year identify public facility projects anticipated
to be funded in whole or in part with development fees. The council may include
development fee-funded public facilities in the town’s annual budget and
capital improvements program or at any other time throughout the year, as
deemed necessary. The council shall verify that adequate development fee funds
are or will be available from the appropriate development fee account for the
particular public facility.
   (F)   Eligibility for refund.
      (1)   An applicant who has paid a development fee for a new development
for which the necessary building permit has expired or which the building
permit has been revoked may be eligible to apply for a refund of development
fees paid.
      (2)   An applicant who has paid a development fee for a new development
for which a building permit has been issued, and pursuant to which construction
has been initiated, but which construction is abandoned prior to completion and
issuance of certificate of occupancy, shall not be eligible for a refund.
      (3)   Applicant must request the refund in writing and must do so within
30 days following the expiration. Full documentation must be provided along
with any documentary evidence. The town manager or designee(s) shall review the
application and information provided that is deemed relevant, and make a
determination as to whether a refund is due. Additionally, applicant must be
the property owner or designated agent of the property owner. Proof of fees
paid must be provided with the request for refund. The town shall pay no
interest on the funds refunded.
         (a)   A 5% administrative fee shall be deducted from the amount of any
refund granted and shall be retained by the town to defray the administrative
expenses associated with the processing of a refund application.
         (b)   The town may, at its option, make refunds of development fees
direct payment, by offsetting the refunds against other development fees due
for the same category of public facilities for new development on the same
property, or by other means subject to agreement with the property owner.
   (G)   An appeal from any decision of a town official pursuant to this
chapter shall be made to the council by filing a written appeal with the Town
Clerk within 30 days following the decision which is being appealed; provided,
however, that if notice of appeal is accompanied by a cash bond or letter of
credit in a form satisfactory to the Town Attorney and the Finance Director in
an amount equal to the development fee calculated to be due, a building permit
may be issued to the new development. The filing of an appeal shall not stay
the imposition or the collection of the development fee calculated by the town
unless a cash bond or other sufficient surety has been provided.
      (1)   The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to demonstrate that
the decision of the town is erroneous.
      (2)   All appeals shall detail the specific grounds therefor and all
other relevant information and shall be filed on a form provided by the town
for such purposes.
   (H)   Petitions for exemptions or waivers from specific development fee
shall be filed with the Town Manager or designee and must be done so in
writing.
   (I)   Nothing herein shall be deemed to limit the town's authority or
ability to enter into development agreements pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-500.05 with
applicants for new development who may provide for dedication of land, payments
in lieu of development fees, or actual infrastructure improvements. The
development agreements may allow offsets against development fees for
contributions made or to be made in the future in cash, or by taxes or
assessments or dedication of land, or by actual construction of all or part of
a public facility by the affected property owner.
(2001 Code, Art. 16-4) (Am. Ord. 04-588, passed 12-9-2004)
§ 151.05 FEES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Development impact fees for police. New construction within the town
limits shall be assessed a development impact fee for police.
   (B)   Development impact fees for library. New construction within the town
limits shall be assessed a development impact fee for library.
   (C)   Development impact fees for parks and recreation. New construction
within the town limits shall be assessed a development impact fee for parks and
recreation.
   (D)   Development impact fees for general government. New construction
within the town limits shall be assessed a development impact fee for general
government.
   (E)   Development impact fees for roads. New construction within the town
limits shall be assessed a development impact fee for roads.
(2001 Code, Art. 16-5) (Ord. 507, passed - -2002; Am. Ord. 04-588, passed 12-9-
2004)
§ 151.06 DELAYED EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The effective date of Ord. 507 shall be from and after September 1, 2002.
(2001 Code, Art. 16-6) (Am. Ord. 04-588, passed 12-9-2004)
§ 151.07 ADJUSTMENT.
   For the period from September 1, 2002 through June 30, 2003 the development
impact fees shall be as set forth above. Thereafter, the amount of the
development impact fees shall be adjusted by the Finance Director in the manner
set forth herein. Development impact fees shall be payable prior to issuance of
a building permit.
(2001 Code, Art. 16-7) (Am. Ord. 04-588, passed 12-9-2004)
§ 151.08 AUTOMATIC ANNUAL ADJUSTMENT.
   On July 1 of each year, commencing in 2003, the amount of the development
impact fees to be paid to the town pursuant to this chapter shall be increased
by the percentage change in the annual average of the ENR Index between the
prior 2 calendar years. The Finance Director shall make the required
calculation by April 1 of each year, and the amount of the development impact
fees for the next 12 month period beginning July 1 of that year, as calculated
by the Finance Director and reviewed by the Town Manager, shall then be fixed
by the Finance Director based upon such calculation, without the necessity of
further action by the Council. In no event shall the amount of the development
impact fees be reduced based upon a change in the ENR Index. No later than 30
days after the development impact fees are adjusted each year as provided in
this section, the Town Clerk shall cause to be published a public notice
setting forth the amount of the adjusted development impact fees. The notice
shall be published 1 time in a newspaper of general circulation in the town,
provided, however, that the failure of the Town Clerk to cause the notice to be
published shall not affect the validity of the adjustment to the development
impact fees as made by the Finance Director pursuant to this section. In the
event the ENR Index information for the prior calendar years is unavailable by
April 1, the development impact fees as previously fixed for the prior fiscal
year (July 1 to June 30) shall continue in effect until such time as the ENR
Index for the prior years is available and the finance director makes the
required calculation.
(2001 Code, Art. 16-8) (Am. Ord. 04-588, passed 12-9-2004)
CHAPTER 152: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Statutory authorization
   
152.002   Findings of fact
   
152.003   Statement of purpose
   
152.004   Methods of reducing flood losses
   
152.005   Definitions
   
152.006   Lands to which chapter applies
   
152.007   Basis of establishing special flood hazard areas
   
152.008   Compliance
   
152.009   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
152.010   Interpretation
   
152.011   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
152.012   Statutory exemptions
   
152.013   Declaration of public nuisance
   
152.014   Abatement of violations
   
152.015   Unlawful acts
Administration
   
152.030   Development permit
   
152.031   Floodplain Administrator
Flood Hazard Reduction
   
152.045   Standards of construction
   
152.046   Standards for storage of materials and equipment
   
152.047   Standards for water supply and waste disposal systems
   
152.048   Standards for subdivisions
   
152.049   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles
   
152.050   Floodways
Variance Procedures
   
152.065   Nature of variances
   
152.066   Appeal board
   
152.067   Conditions for variances
   
152.068   Minor variances
Amendments
   
152.080   Map amendments
   
152.081   Ordinance amendments
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The legislature of the State of Arizona has, in A.R.S. § 48-3610, enabled
the Town of Chino Valley to adopt regulations in conformance with A.R.S. § 48-
3609 designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its
citizenry.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.002 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the Town of Chino Valley are subject to
periodic inundation, which may result in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses may be caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in special flood hazard areas, which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other areas. Uses
that are inadequately flood-proofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood
damage also contribute to the flood loss.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.003 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
   (A)   To protect human life and health;
   (B)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in special flood hazard areas;
   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   (G)   To participate and maintain eligibility for state and federal disaster
relief.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.004 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
   (A)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
   (D)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   (E)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other
areas.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.005 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure that is on the same parcel of property as a
principal structure, the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal
structure.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use that is incidental and subordinate to the principal use
of the parcel of land on which it is located.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO, OR, or AH zone on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet;
a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable
and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The computed elevation to which floodwater is
anticipated to rise during the BASE FLOOD.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   COMMUNITY. Any state or area or political subdivision thereof, or any Indian
tribe or authorized tribal organization, or authorized native organization that
has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for the
areas within its jurisdiction.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, drainage
facilities, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, and storage of materials and equipment in the special flood hazard
area.
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. An administrative tool of the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP) that is used to provide elevation information
necessary to ensure compliance with community floodplain management ordinances,
to determine the proper insurance premium rate, and to support a request for a
letter of map amendment (LOMA) or letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-
F).
   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill,
excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain
that may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EROSION. The process of the gradual wearing away of a landmass. This peril
is not, per se, covered by the National Flood Insurance Program.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from (1) the overflow of flood waters,
(2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source, and/or (3) the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake
or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or
currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by
an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a
severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event
which results in flooding as defined in this definition.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP or FIRM. The official map of a community on which
FEMA has delineated both SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by FEMA that includes
flood profiles, the FIRM, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOOD-PROOFED. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to non-residential structures that reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents by means other than elevation.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source (see definition of FLOODING).
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The Town Manager or his or her designee, who is
the community official designated to administer and enforce the floodplain
management regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN BOARD. The Town Council at such times as they are engaged in the
enforcement of this chapter.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited
to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations, and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as grading and erosion control), and other applications of
police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term
describes federal, state, or local regulations in any combination thereof,
which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.
   FLOOD PROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to nonresidential structures which reduce or eliminate
risk of flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents by means other than
elevation.
   FLOOD-RELATED EROSION. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of
a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or
currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by
an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a
severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or
an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event
which results in flooding.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas necessary in order to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. Also
referred to a REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
   FLOODWAY FRINGE. That area of the floodplain on either side of the
REGULATORY FLOODWAY where encroachment may be permitted.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, and does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   GOVERNING BODY. The local governing unit, i.e. county or municipality, that
is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public
health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.
   HARDSHIP. As related to §§
152.065 through
152.068, meaning the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to
grant the requested variance. The council requires that the variance be
exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or
financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic
considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of
one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship.
All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a
variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property
owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally
intended.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LEVEE. A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that the
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent.
   MARKET VALUE. Determined by estimating the cost to replace the structure in
new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation
which has accrued since the structure was constructed. The cost of replacement
of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by
reference to a building cost estimating guide recognized by the building
construction industry. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking
into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional
obsolescence as approved by the Floodplain Administrator, but shall not include
economic or other forms of external obsolescence. Use of replacement costs or
accrued depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized
building cost estimating guides may be considered only if such factors are
included in a report prepared by an independent professional appraiser and
supported by a written explanation of the differences.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a
community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For floodplain management purposes, structures for which
the START OF CONSTRUCTION commenced on or after June 18, 1975. For the purposes
of determining insurance rates, structures for which the START OF CONSTRUCTION
commenced on or after the effective date of an initial flood insurance rate map
or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, NEW
CONSTRUCTION means structures for which the START OF CONSTRUCTION commenced on
or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel,
refuse, fill, structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across or
projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the
direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its
propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.
   ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD. The flood having a one percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (see BASE FLOOD).
   PERSON. An individual or his agent, firm, partnership, association or
corporation, or agent of the aforementioned groups, or this state or its
agencies or political subdivisions.
   PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND. At least 51% of the actual cash value of the
structure, less land value, is above ground.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION. An elevation one foot above the base flood
elevation.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with federal, state or local floodplain management regulations, or,
if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the
chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal
financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   REPETITIVE LOSS STRUCTURE. A structure, covered by a contract for flood
insurance issued pursuant to the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, being 42
U.S.C. §§ 4001 et seq., that has incurred flood-related damage on two occasions
during any ten year period ending on the date of the event for which a second
claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the flood damage, on average,
equaled or exceeded 25% of the market value of the structure at the time of
each flood event.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream or brook, among other similar water channels.
   SHEET FLOW AREA. See AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. An area in the floodplain subject to a one
percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on a FIRM
as Zone A, AO, AE, AH or A99.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground;
this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
other improvement of a structure, the total cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure before the START OF CONSTRUCTION of the
improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred SUBSTANTIAL
DAMAGE, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local Code Enforcement Official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a HISTORIC STRUCTURE, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
HISTORIC STRUCTURE.
   VARIANCE. Means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) OF 1988 (or
other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies
in the floodplains of riverine areas.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
   ZONE A. No base flood elevations determined.
   ZONE AE. Base flood elevations determined.
   ZONE AH. Flood depths of one to three feet (usually areas of ponding); base
flood elevations determined.
   ZONE AO. Flood depths of one to three feet (usually sheet flow on sloping
terrain); average depths determined. For areas of alluvial fan flooding,
velocities also determined.
   ZONE A99. Area to be protected from one percent annual chance flood by a
federal flood protection system under construction; no base flood elevations
determined.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.006 LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
boundaries of the Town of Chino Valley and all lands determined by the Town
Engineer to be located in flood-prone areas.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.007 BASIS OF ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   (A)   The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) in a scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood
Insurance Study for Yavapai County, Arizona, and Incorporated Areas," dated
September 3, 2010 with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps dated September
3, 2010 and subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. These flood insurance
studies are on file at the town's Community Development Department and public
library. The flood insurance study and attendant mapping is the minimum area of
applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other
areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to
the floodplain board by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (B)   The Floodplain Board, within its area of jurisdiction, shall delineate
(or may, by rule, require developers of land to delineate) for areas where
development is ongoing or imminent, and thereafter as development becomes
imminent, floodplains consistent with the criteria developed by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and the Director of the Arizona Department of Water
Resources. The FIS and FIRM panels are on file at 1982 Voss Drive, Chino
Valley, Arizona 86323.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.008 COMPLIANCE.
   All development of land, construction of residential, commercial or
industrial structures or future development within delineated floodplain areas
is subject to the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.009 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.010 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.011 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within
such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not
create liability on the part of the Town of Chino Valley, any officer or
employee thereof, the State of Arizona or the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on the chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.012 STATUTORY EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   In accordance with A.R.S. § 48-3609(I), unless expressly provided,
this and any regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter do not affect:
      (1)   Existing legal uses of property or the right to continuation of
such legal use. However, if a nonconforming use of land or a building or
structure is discontinued for 12 months or destroyed to the extent of 50% of
its market value, as determined by a competent appraiser, any further use shall
comply with this chapter and regulations of the Town of Chino Valley;
      (2)   Reasonable repair or alteration of property for the purposes for
which the property was legally used on August 3, 1984, or any regulations
affecting such property takes effect, except that any alteration, addition or
repair to a nonconforming building or structure which would result in
increasing its flood damage potential by 50% or more shall be either flood-
proofed or elevated to or above the regulatory flood elevation;
      (3)   Reasonable repair of structures constructed with the written
authorization required by A.R.S. § 48-3613; and
      (4)   Facilities constructed or installed pursuant to a Certificate of
Environmental Compatibility issued pursuant to A.R.S. Title 40, Chapter 2,
Article 6.2.
   (B)   In accordance with A.R.S. § 48-3613, written authorization shall not
be required, nor shall the Floodplain Administrator prohibit:
      (1)   The construction of bridges, culverts, dikes and other structures
necessary to the construction of public highways, roads and streets
intersecting or crossing a watercourse;
      (2)   The construction of storage dams for watering livestock or
wildlife, structures on banks of a watercourse to prevent erosion of or damage
to adjoining land if the structure will not divert, retard or obstruct the
natural channel of the watercourse or dams for the conservation of floodwaters
as permitted by A.R.S. Title 45, Chapter 6;
      (3)   Construction of tailing dams and waste disposal areas for use in
connection with mining and metallurgical operations. This division does not
exempt those sand and gravel operations which will divert, retard or obstruct
the flow of waters in any watercourse from complying with and acquiring
authorization from the Board pursuant to regulations adopted by the Board under
this chapter;
      (4)   Other construction if it is determined by the Administrator that
written authorization is unnecessary;
      (5)   Any flood control district, county, city, town or other political
subdivision from exercising powers granted to it under A.R.S. Title 48, Chapter
21, Article 1;
      (6)   The construction of streams, waterways, lakes and other auxiliary
facilities in conjunction with development of public parks and recreation
facilities by a public agency or political subdivision; and
      (7)   The construction and erection of poles, towers, foundations,
support structures, guy wires and other facilities related to power
transmission as constructed by any utility whether a public service corporation
or a political subdivision.
   (C)   Before any construction authorized by A.R.S. § 48-3613(B) above may
begin, the responsible person must submit plans for the construction to the
Administrator for review and comment pursuant to A.R.S. § 48-3613(C).
   (D)   In accordance with A.R.S. § 48-3613(D), in addition to other penalties
or remedies otherwise provided by law, this state, a political subdivision or a
person who may be damaged or has been damaged as a result of the unauthorized
diversion, retardation or obstruction of a watercourse has the right to
commence, maintain and prosecute any appropriate action or pursue any remedy to
enjoin, abate or otherwise prevent any person from violating or continuing to
violate this section or regulations adopted pursuant to A.R.S. Title 48,
Chapter 21, Article 1. If a person is found to be in violation of this section,
the court shall require the violator to either comply with this section if
authorized by the board or remove the obstruction and restore the watercourse
to its original state. The court may also award such monetary damages as are
appropriate to the injured parties resulting from the violation including
reasonable costs and attorney fees.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.013 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   All development located or maintained within any special flood hazard area
after August 8, 1973 in violation of this chapter is a public nuisance per se
and may be abated, prevented or restrained by action of this political
subdivision.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.014 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   After discovery of a violation of this chapter, the Floodplain
Administrator shall take such steps as he or she deems necessary to abate the
violation as provided by this chapter and state law. The Floodplain
Administrator shall give first priority to those violations which he or she
deems pose the greatest potential for loss of life and property, or as directed
by the Town Manager upon consultation with the Town Engineer.
   (B)   In the event the Floodplain Administrator is unable to promptly cure a
violation, a declaration for denial for insurance shall be submitted to the
Administrator of Federal Insurance Administrator pursuant to § 1316 of the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, being 42 U.S.C. § 4023, as amended.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.015 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in any development or to
divert, retard or obstruct the flow of waters in any watercourse if it creates
a hazard to life or property without securing the written authorization
required by A.R.S. § 48-3613. Where the watercourse is a delineated floodplain,
it is unlawful to engage in any development affecting the flow of waters
without securing written authorization of the Floodplain Administrator.
   (B)   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter
section shall be guilty of a Class 2 Misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 152.030 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development, including placement of manufactured homes, within any special
flood hazard area. Each application for a development permit or extension of a
development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Floodplain
Administrator.
   (B)   The Floodplain Administrator may require at a minimum, the applicant
to submit:
      (1)   Engineered plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the nature
and location of the area, regulatory flood elevations, dimensions and contours
or key elevations, watercourses, and the locations of existing and proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, and drainage facilities. All elevations
or vertical distances must reference an established datum or base elevation;
      (2)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of the proposed development and cumulative
development;
      (3)   When structures are involved:
         (a)   Structures shall be designed and constructed so as to offer the
minimum obstruction to the flow of flood waters. Foundation systems shall be
designed and certified by a registered professional engineer;
         (b)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all structures, plus elevation of existing grade,
in relation to mean sea level, all elevations shall be certified by a
registered civil engineer or a registered land surveyor, registered in the
State of Arizona;
         (c)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which each
non-residential structure shall be flood-proofed;
         (d)   Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the flood-proofing methods for each non-residential structure meet the
flood-proofing criteria in §
152.045(C)(3);
         (e)   Base flood elevation data for subdivision proposals or other
development greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser; and
         (f)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
      (4)   More extensive submissions if the proposed development is in a
designated floodway or in an area that will act as a floodway during a major
flood. Developers in these areas, including gravel and sand excavators, shall
submit a plan, a time schedule and a report, all signed by a registered civil
engineer. The plan, in duplicate, shall be to a scale of one inch equals 100
feet or greater and shall contain contours with a contour interval of two feet
or less.
   (C)   In the case of gravel and sand excavation, the plan shall indicate the
locations and depths of excavations, and the locations of trees and banks and
how they will be protected or disposed of, and the time schedule shall indicate
approximate volumes to be removed on a quarterly basis up to the end of the
operation. The report shall deal with the hydrology, hydraulics and sediment
aspects of the development, shall demonstrate that no increase in flood levels
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge would occur, shall address
concerns over loss of life and property damage, shall treat bank erosion and
channel aggradation and degradation, and shall contain water surface profile
studies and quantitative or semi-quantitative sediment analyses if required to
support the conclusions in the report. A registered civil engineer may make a
written request to waive certain items, accompanied by explanations. It is
stressed that encroachments in floodways are prohibited, as per § 152.050, and
that only in rare cases would exceptions be made.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.031 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   Duties of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
   (A)   Review all development permits to determine that:
      (1)   The permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
      (2)   All required state and federal permits have been obtained;
      (3)   The site is reasonably safe from flooding;
      (4)   In areas where a floodway has not been designated, the proposed
development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base
flood elevations have been determined; and
      (5)   The proposed development does not adversely affect the water and
sediment carrying capacity of the floodway. For purposes of this chapter,
"adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, and all other existing and anticipated developments shall not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at
any point, and shall not risk aggravating bed and bank scour which could
directly or indirectly endanger human life or cause property damage.
   (B)   Review all development permits for improvements and/or damages to
existing structures to determine if the application of the substantial
improvement rules apply, including establishing a definition of market value
determination and verifying that the estimated improvement and/or repair costs
are less than 50% of the market value of the structure;
   (C)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with §
152.007, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer §§
152.045 et seq. Any such information shall be consistent with the requirements
of the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Director of Water Resources
and may be submitted to the board for adoption.
   (D)   Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed
for flood insurance policies:
      (1)   The certification of elevation required in §§
152.045(C)(1) and
152.049(A)(1), (2);
      (2)   The certification of flood-proofing required in §
152.045(C)(3);
      (3)   The certification of elevation required in §
152.048(A)(2);
      (4)   Permit records for repair of flood-related damage to structures on
a cumulative basis for repetitive loss structure purposes over the life of the
structure;
      (5)   Certification of elevation required by §
152.031(E)(1);
      (6)   Certification required by §
153.045(B)(4); and
      (7)   Records of all variance actions, including justification for their
issuance.
   (E)   Notification requirements.
      (1)   Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated:
         (a)   Notify adjacent communities and the Arizona Department of Water
Resources prior to such alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit
evidence of the notification to FEMA through appropriate notification means;
and
         (b)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or
relocated portion of the watercourse is maintained.
      (2)   Base flood elevation and rate of flow due to physical alterations:
         (a)   Base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting from
physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but not
later than six months after the date such information becomes available, the
Floodplain Administrator shall notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency
of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data in accordance with
volume 44 C.F.R. § 65.3. Such a submission is necessary so that upon
confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk
premium rates and floodplain management requirements will be based upon current
data; and
         (b)   Within 120 days after completion of construction of any flood
control protective works which changes the rate of flow during the base flood
or the configuration of the floodplain upstream or downstream from or adjacent
to the project, the person or agency responsible for installation of the
project shall provide to the governing bodies of all jurisdictions affected by
the project a new delineation of all floodplains affected by the project. The
new delineation shall be done according to the criteria adopted by the Director
of Water Resources.
      (3)   The Federal Emergency Management Agency of acquisition by means of
annexation, incorporation or otherwise, of additional areas of jurisdiction.
   (F)   Advise in writing and provide a copy of any development plan, to any
neighboring city, town or county Floodplain Administrator having assumed
jurisdiction over its floodplains in accordance with A.R.S. § 48-3610, of any
application for a floodplain use permit (development permit) or variance to
develop land in a floodplain or floodway within one mile of the corporate
limits of such city or town or unincorporated village or urbanized area. The
town Floodplain Administrator shall also advise such city or town and county
Floodplain Administrator in writing and provide a copy of any development plan
of any major development proposed within a floodplain or floodway which could
affect floodplains, floodways, or watercourses within such county, city or town
area of jurisdiction. Written notice and a copy of the plan of development
shall be sent to such county, city or town no later than three working days
after having been received by the town Floodplain Administrator.
   (G)   Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the special flood hazard areas (for example, where there appears
to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The
person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in §§
152.065 et seq.
   (H)   Take actions on violations of this chapter as required in §
152.014.
   (I)   Establish a reasonable fee schedule, including higher fees for late
compliance, all fee structures to be approved by the Town Council.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 152.045 STANDARDS OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In all special flood hazard areas the following standards are required:
   (A)   Anchoring.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic loads and hydrostatic loads including the effects of
buoyancy. A foundation design and certification by a registered professional
engineer may be required to ensure the standards of this division.
      (2)    All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of §
152.049(B).
   (B)   Construction materials and methods.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
      (3)   All new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed
new development shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
      (4)   Require within Zones AH or AO that adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes guide floodwaters around and away from proposed or
existing structures.
   (C)   Elevation and flood-proofing.
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above
the regulatory flood elevation. Upon the completion of the structure, the
elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a
registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain
Administrator.
      (2)   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure in Zone AO shall have the lowest floor, including basement, higher
than the highest adjacent grade at least one foot higher than the depth number
on the FIRM, or at least two feet if no depth number is specified. Upon the
completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including
basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor
and provided to the Floodplain Administrator that the elevation of the
structure meets this standard.
      (3)   Nonresidential construction and new and substantial improvement
shall either be elevated in conformance with §
152.045(C)(1) or (2) or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities:
         (a)   Be flood-proofed so that below the regulatory flood level the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water; nonresidential structures may meet the standards in §
152.045(C)(3);
         (b)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
         (c)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the standards of this division are satisfied. Such certifications shall be
provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
      (4)   Require for all new construction and substantial improvements of
non-residential structures or fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor, that
are useable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed
to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be designed or certified by a registered engineer or
architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided;
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters, as certified by the owner's engineer.
      (5)   Manufactured homes shall meet the above standards and also the
standards in §
152.049.
      (6)   Fill, if used to elevate structures, must meet all of the following
standards:
         (a)   The top of such fill shall be at no point lower than the
regulatory flood elevation;
         (b)   The fill shall extend at least 15 feet beyond the walls or
supporting frame of the structure;
         (c)   Fill must be placed and compacted in accordance with the
International Building Code, 2012 edition;
         (d)   Fill shall not interfere with local drainage or tributary flow
to the channel of any watercourse; and
         (e)   Fill proposed in excess of the volume and extent required herein
must be shown to have no detrimental effect and the amount of fill cannot be
greater than is necessary to achieve the purpose for which it is intended as
demonstrated by a plan submitted by the applicant indicating the uses to which
the filled land will be put and the final dimensions and extent of the proposed
fill. Fill shall not include junk, trash, wood or other buoyant or hazardous
material and shall be protected as needed against scour and erosion by riprap
or other protective measures as approved by the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.046 STANDARDS FOR STORAGE OF MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   The storage or processing of materials that could be injurious to
human, animal or plant life if released due to damage from flooding is
prohibited in special flood hazard areas.
   (B)   Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject
to major damage by floods, and if firmly anchored to prevent flotation, or if
readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.047  STANDARDS FOR WATER SUPPLY AND WASTE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
   (A)   All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system and discharge from systems into flood waters.
   (B)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (C)   Waste disposal systems shall not be installed wholly or partially in a
regulatory floodway.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.048 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   All new subdivision proposals and other proposed development
(including proposals for mobile home parks or subdivisions) greater than 50
lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall:
      (1)   Identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood;
and
      (2)   For all final subdivision plans and plats, provide the elevation(s)
of proposed structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood,
the final lowest floor and pad elevation shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
   (B)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
   (D)   All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide adequate
drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards, including easements dimensioned
to facilitate construction and maintenance of drainage facilities, and shall
not concentrate or increase flows without providing remedial works.
   (E)   All subdivision plan and other proposed development submittals shall
include the information, and shall be in the form required by the Floodplain
Administrator.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.049 STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   All new and replacement manufactured homes and additions to
manufactured homes shall:
      (1)   Be elevated so that the bottom of the structural frame or the
lowest point of any attached appliances, whichever is lower, is at or above the
regulatory flood elevation; and
      (2)   Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system
designed by a registered professional engineer, to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements
for resisting wind forces.
   (B)   All recreational vehicles placed on site shall:
      (1)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
      (2)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle
is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached
to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and
has no permanently attached additions; or
      (3)   Meet the permit requirements of §
152.030 and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in
division (A)(2) of this section.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.050 FLOODWAYS.
   (A)   Located within special flood hazard areas established in §
152.007 are areas designated as floodways.
   (B)   Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity
of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion
potential, the following provisions apply:
      (1)   (a)   Encroachments in floodways are prohibited, including fill,
new construction, substantial improvements, and other development, unless
certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating
that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels and that
the structural integrity of the development is not susceptible to the base
flood velocities, bed scour and other physical mechanisms during the occurrence
of the base flood discharge; and
         (b)   The certified demonstration must meet the procedures as set
forth in §
152.030, and if approved by the Floodplain Administrator a development permit
may be obtained.
      (2)   (a)   The minimum setback from the edge of a floodway, or from the
edge of a bank of a watercourse if no floodway is to be defined, shall be 20
feet; and
         (b)   Along reaches of streams or watercourses where hazards from
eroding banks and/or channel meandering are considered by the district
administrator to be severe, special engineering studies shall be made by the
property owner or developer and requirements for setbacks from banks of streams
or watercourses and/or other protection measures shall be established in
accordance with findings that are concurred with by the Floodplain
Administrator.
      (3)   No activity is permitted within a floodway that might cause lateral
migration of waters at high or low stages or channel bed degradation or
aggradation without a development permit.
      (4)   If §
152.050 is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall
comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of §§
152.045 et seq.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
VARIANCE PROCEDURES
§ 152.065 NATURE OF VARIANCES.
   (A)   The variance criteria set forth in §§
152.065 through
152.068 are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain
to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be
granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that
complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional
hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The
characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent
parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the
structure, its inhabitants or the property owners.
   (B)   It is the duty of the Town Council to help protect its citizens from
flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of
insuring a structure built below the regulatory flood elevation are so serious
that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in this
chapter are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood
loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore,
the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain
multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted.
The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives
other than a variance are more appropriate.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.066 APPEAL BOARD.
   (A)   The Floodplain Board shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   The Floodplain Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the
Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
   (C)   In considering such applications, the Floodplain Board shall consider
all technical evaluations, including an opinion of the Town Engineer, all
relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water system, and streets and
bridges.
   (D)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing §§
152.030 and
152.045 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
   (E)   Upon consideration of the factors of §§
152.065 et seq. and the purposes of this chapter, the Floodplain Board may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
   (F)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency
upon request.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.067 CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.
   (A)   Variances may be issued for the repair, rehabilitation or restoration
of structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the State
Inventory of Historic Places, upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
   (B)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (C)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   (D)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
      (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
      (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of, the
public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   (E)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
      (2)   The construction below the regulatory flood elevation increases
risks to life and property.
   (F)   The notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance
actions as required in § 152.065(E). The notice will also state that the land
upon which the variance is granted shall be ineligible for exchange of land
pursuant to any flood relocation and land exchange program. A copy of the
notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain Board in the office of the Yavapai
County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the
chain of title of the affected parcel of land.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.068 MINOR VARIANCES.
   The Floodplain Board may identify uses which are not allowed by this chapter
but which are minor in nature. The Floodplain Board may adopt written policies
detailing specific conditions in addition to the conditions listed in §
152.066 under which minor variances may be granted. The Floodplain
Administrator may grant minor variances if all necessary conditions have been
satisfied. The denial of a minor variance may be appealed to the Floodplain
Board.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
AMENDMENTS
§ 152.080 MAP AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   The Town Council may direct the Floodplain Administrator to study
areas of special flood hazard that may be in error either because of changed
conditions or engineering error. Any person may submit engineering reports
consistent with criteria developed by the Director of the Arizona Department of
Water Resources to demonstrate error. The Floodplain Administrator may submit
any proposed changes to the Arizona Department of Water Resources and the
Federal Insurance Administration, including supporting engineering.
   (B)   Where areas of special flood hazard have not been delineated and
development is ongoing or imminent, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
direct the Floodplain Administrator or developers of land to prepare and submit
reports to the Floodplain Administrator. If it appears that the report(s) are
consistent with the criteria developed by the Director of the Arizona
Department of Water Resources, they shall be adopted and submitted to the
Arizona Department of Water Resources and the Federal Insurance Administration.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.081 ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS.
   Amendments to this chapter may be adopted after a public hearing at which
any person has an opportunity to be heard. At least 30 days before the hearing,
a notice of the time and place of hearing shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation within the county. A notice of the hearing and the proposed
ordinance changes shall be submitted to the Director of the Arizona Division of
Emergency Management (DEM) at least 30 days prior to the hearing. A copy of any
adopted ordinance change shall be filed within five days from adoption with the
Director of the Arizona Division of Emergency Management (DEM) and with each
neighboring political subdivision, County Floodplain Administrator and
municipal corporation within one mile of the boundary of the town.
(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)
CHAPTER 153: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
   
153.01   International Fire Code adopted
§ 153.01 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE ADOPTED.
   That certain document entitled International Fire Code, 2018 Edition,
together with appendices A, D, I and J, published by the International Code
Council, as amended by the CAFMA 2018 International Fire Code Amendments is
hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the Town of Chino Valley to regulate and
govern the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards
arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials
and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life and property in the
occupancy of buildings and premises and said fire code is hereby referred to
and made a part hereof as though fully set forth in this section. One paper
copy and one electronic copy, maintained in compliance with A.R.S. § 44-7041,
of said fire code shall be kept on file and available for public use in the
office of the Town Clerk and Community Development Department.
(2001 Code, Art. 7-14) (Am. Ord. 04-569, passed 2-12-2004; Am. Ord. 14-791,
passed 11-18-2014; Am. Ord. 2020-886, passed 9-22-2020)
CHAPTER 154: UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Section
   
154.01   Regulations adopted by reference
§ 154.01 REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
Note: Unified Development Ordinance is maintained in a separate volume at:
www.amlegal.com
   That certain code entitled the “Unified Development Ordinance of the Town of
Chino Valley” is hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of this code
as if fully set forth herein. At least three copies of the code shall be kept
on file in the office of the Town Clerk, and kept available for public use and
inspection during normal business hours.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
CHAPTER 155: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS
Section
   
155.01   Purpose
   
155.02   Agreements optional
   
155.03   Form of agreements
   
155.04   General requirements
   
155.05   Offset
   
155.06   Developer
§ 155.01 PURPOSE.
   Inasmuch as it is often in the public interest to extend public capital
improvements or infrastructure to undeveloped areas in the town, or for one
development to size certain public capital improvements or infrastructure
larger than would otherwise be necessary for the development itself (so as to
better accommodate nearby development), the Town Manager or his or her designee
is hereby authorized to specify that developers either extend certain
improvements off-site to connect with existing improvements or “upsize” certain
on-site or off-site improvements (at developer’s cost) so as to facilitate
connection thereto by other developments.
(Ord. 05-627, passed 10-27-2005)
§ 155.02 AGREEMENTS OPTIONAL.
   In the event the Town Manager or his or her designee specifies such
extensions of off-site improvements or such upsizing of on-site or off-site
improvements, nothing herein shall preclude the town from entering into
agreements with developers to reimburse from buy-in fees charged to other
developers over time some or all of the additional costs involved. However, it
is expressly understood that nothing herein requires the town to enter into
such agreements where the requirement of such extensions or upsizing at
developer’s sole cost is justified by significant other benefits accruing to
developers, or as a consequence of development agreements, or as consideration
for zoning, development plan, or site approvals or for other appropriate
reasons. Developers shall pay the costs of the assessment process to determine
the reasonable buy-in fee to charge other developers who use or connect to the
improvement, including, without limitation, consultant fees to prepare studies,
such as traffic, water, and sewer studies.
(Ord. 05-627, passed 10-27-2005)
§ 155.03 FORM OF AGREEMENTS.
   Any agreements to reimburse some or all costs of off-site improvements
extensions or upsizing of on-site or off-site improvements extension shall
address one or more of the following:
   (A)   Whether or not the improvement must be competitively bid in accordance
with A.R.S. § 34-201;
   (B)   When and according to what processes the improvement becomes the
property of the town;
   (C)   Whether and to what extent any improvement district assessments, in-
lieu of assessment fees, connection charges, or development fees charged to
developers will be offset by the extra costs of the improvement incurred by
developers;
   (D)   Whether and to what extent developers shall be reserved a specific
amount of capacity in the improvement;
   (E)   The amount of reimbursable costs, after accounting for any offsets for
the extra costs to developers (and any capacity in the improvement reserved to
developers) and for capacity in the improvement that will remain available for
use or connection by the other developers (for which developers should be
reimbursed). Engineering costs may be included as reimbursable costs;
   (F)   The reasonable buy-in fee to charge other developers who use or
connect to the improvement;
   (G)   How such buy-in fees shall be paid to the town and repaid to
developers after deduction of a reasonable administrative fee by the town;
   (H)   That the total of such repayments shall not exceed the amount
established in §
155.03(E) above and may be less if sufficient buy-in fees are not collected
during the term of the agreement;
   (I)   That the term of any such agreement shall not be longer than 10 years
or when the amount set forth in §
155.03(E) above is reimbursed (whichever is earlier);
   (J)   That the town has the option to reimburse developers with a credit
against development fees, connection charges, improvement district assessments,
or in lieu of assessment fees imposed by the town (in which case the town shall
reimburse the appropriate fund accounts with the applicable buy-in fees
collected);
   (K)   How and under what circumstances the agreement may be assigned to
successors-in-interest;
   (L)   That such agreements shall be recorded in the office of the Yavapai
County Recorder.
(Ord. 05-627, passed 10-27-2005)
§ 155.04 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All required extensions of off-site improvements or upsizing of on-site or
off-site improvements shall be constructed in accordance with specifications
approved by the Town Engineer. Upon approval and acceptance of said extensions
or upsized improvements by the Town Engineer, the same shall be dedicated by
appropriate instrument to the town, and the town shall exercise exclusive
control over who may connect or use the same and the procedures therefor.
(Ord. 05-627, passed 10-27-2005)
§ 155.05 OFFSET.
   Buy-in fees paid by other developers as a result of such reimbursement
agreements with developers may be offset, in whole or in part, against any
development fees, connection charges, improvement district assessments, or in
lieu of assessment fees charged those other developers for such improvements.
(Ord. 05-627, passed 10-27-2005)
§ 155.06 DEVELOPER.
   A developer is defined as an individual, firm, corporation, association,
syndicate, trust, or other legal entity that files the application and
initiates proceeding for the development or any division of land, including but
not limited to a subdivision, minor division of land, site development plan,
and/or a zone change in accordance with this code.
(Ord. 05-627, passed 10-27-2005)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Reserved
PARALLEL REFERENCES
REFERENCES TO ARIZONA STATUTES ANNOTATED
REFERENCES TO 2001 CODE
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
REFERENCES TO ARIZONA STATUTES ANNOTATED
A.R.S. Cites Code Section
A.R.S. Cites                             Code Section
1-211 through 1-215                      10.05
Title 3                                  90.16
4-101 et seq.                            115.40
Title 9                                  113.01
9-240                                    10.19,
                                         113.01
9-240(28)(b)                             10.99
9-414                                    92.46
9-461.05                                 151.02
                                         151.01,
9-463.05                                 151.02,
                                         151.04
9-499.07                                 34.05
9-499.07.N.                              34.05
9-500.05                                 151.04
9-500.18                                 151.03
9-511.02                                 51.290
Title 9, Ch. 7, Art. 4                   50.17
9-832 through 9-834                      50.01
9-1412                                   114.02
11-251 et seq.                           32.08
11-1002                                  90.01
11-1003                                  90.01
11-1010                                  90.01
11-1016                                  90.01
11-1017                                  90.01
11-1020                                  90.01
12-116.01                                10.99
12-116.02                                10.99
12-940 et seq.                           130.06
12-2212                                  51.290
13-707                                   130.06
13-717                                   130.06
13-802                                   130.06
13-2316                                  92.48
13-3214                                  34.05
13-3401                                  117.02
13-3601                                  34.05
13-3707                                  92.48
13-3899                                  90.05,
                                         90.07
13-3903                                  90.05,
                                         90.07
16-204                                   37.031
Title 17                                 90.16
17-101                                   90.16
Title 28                                 92.05
Title 28, Chapter 3, Articles 1-15       34.22
Title 28, Chapter 4                      34.22
Title 28, Chapter 5                      34.22
Title 28, Chapter 7, Article 5           34.22
Title 28, Chapter 8, Articles 4, 6 and 8 34.22
Title 28, Chapter 9, Article 4           34.22
Title 28, Chapter 25, Article 3          34.22
28-101 et seq.                           71.13
28-701                                   71.12
28-703                                   71.12
28-873                                   72.03
28-884                                   72.03
28-1381                                  34.05
28-1382                                  34.05
28-1592 et seq.                          10.99
28-1598                                  10.99
28-8271                                  34.22
28-8272                                  34.22
28-8275                                  34.22
28-4033                                  51.233
32-1021 et seq.                          34.23
32-101                                   150.043
                                         32.05,
Title 34                                 32.08 ,
                                         51.059
Title 34, Chapter 2                      32.05
                                         32.02,
34-201                                   32.05,
                                         155.03
34-502                                   92.48
Title 36                                 113.01
36-136(H)(10)                            50.01
36-495 et seq.                           50.01
36-601.01                                117.02
36-881(3)                                130.06
36-2801 et seq.                          117.08
36-2801(12)                              117.02
38-232                                   30.006
38-260                                   30.007
38-431 et seq.                           92.46
Title 40, Chapter 2, Article 6.2         152.012
41-1346                                  70.01
41-1354                                  92.48
41-1750                                  115.20
41-2155                                  150.008
41-2501(C)                               32.05
41-2535                                  32.07
41-2574                                  32.07,
                                         32.08
42-5001                                  117.09
44-1201                                  84.09
                                         150.001,
44-7041                                  150.004,
                                         153.01
Title 45, Chapter 6                      152.012
45-141                                   50.01
45-516                                   50.01
45-565(A)(6)                             50.01
Title 48, Chapter 21, Article 1          152.012
48-3609                                  152.001
48-3609(I)                               152.012
48-3610                                  152.001,
                                         152.031
48-3613                                  152.012,
                                         152.015
48-3613(B)                               152.012
48-3613(C)                               152.012
48-3613(D)                               152.012
49-391C                                  51.279
                                         
 
REFERENCES TO 2001 CODE
2001 Code 2005 Code
2001 Code 2005 Code
Art. 1-1  10.01
Art. 1-3  10.05
Art. 1-4  10.08,
          10.17
Art. 1-5  10.04
Art. 1-8  10.99
Art. 1-9  10.13,
          10.16
Art. 5-1  34.01
Art. 5-3  34.03
Art. 7-2  150.004
Art. 7-5  150.005
Art. 7-6  150.006
Art. 7-7  150.007
Art. 7-8  150.008
Art. 7-14 153.01
Art. 9-5  52.01
Art. 9-8  51.020
Art. 16-1 151.01
Art. 16-2 151.02
Art. 16-3 151.03
Art. 16-4 151.04
Art. 16-5 151.05
Art. 16-6 151.06
Art. 16-7 151.07
Art. 16-8 151.08
2-5-1     36.01
2-5-2     36.02
2-5-3     36.03
2-5-4     36.04
2-5-5     36.05
2-5-6     36.06
2-5-7     36.07
2-6-1     35.01
2-6-2     35.02
2-6-3     35.03
2-6-4     35.04
4-1-1     33.01
4-1-2     33.02
4-1-3     33.03
4-1-4     33.04
4-1-5     33.05
4-1-6     33.06
5-2-1     34.02
5-2-2     34.02
5-4-1     34.04
5-4-2     34.04
5-4-3     34.04
5-5-1     34.20
5-5-2     34.21
5-5-3     34.22
5-5-4     34.23
7-1-1     150.001
7-1-2     150.002
7-1-3     150.003
7-9-1     150.l020
7-9-2     150.021
7-9-3     150.022
7-9-4     150.023
7-9-5     150.024
7-10-1    150.040
7-10-2    150.041
7-10-3    150.042
7-10-4    150.043
7-10-5    150.044
7-10-6    150.045
7-10-7    150.046
7-10-8    150.047
7-10-9    150.048
7-10-10   150.049
7-10-11   150.050
7-11-1    150.065
7-11-2    150.066
7-11-3    150.067
7-12-1    150.080
7-12-2    150.081
7-12-3    150.082
7-12-4    150.083
7-12-5    150.084
7-13-1    150.100
7-13-2    150.101
7-13-3    150.102
7-13-4    150.103
7-13-5    150.104
7-13-6    150.105
8-1-1     110.01
8-1-2     110.02
8-1-3     110.03
8-1-4     110.04
8-1-5     110.05
8-1-6     110.06,
          110.07
8-1-8     110.08
8-1-9     110.09
8-1-10    110.10
8-1-11    110.11
8-1-12    110.99
8-2-1     111.01
8-2-2     111.02
8-2-3     111.03
8-2-4     111.04
8-3-1     112.01
8-3-2     112.02
8-3-3     112.03
8-3-4     112.04
8-3-5     112.05
8-3-6     112.06
8-3-7     112.07
8-4-1     112.20
8-4-2     112.21
8-4-3     112.22
8-4-4     112.23
8-4-5     112.24
8-4-6     112.25
8-4-7     112.26
8-4-8     112.27
8-4-9     112.28
8-4-10    112.29
8-4-11    112.30
8-4-12    112.31
8-4-13    112.32
8-4-14    112.33
8-5-1     113.01
8-5-2     113.02
8-5-3     113.03
8-5-4     113.04
8-5-5     113.05
8-5-6     113.06
8-5-7     113.07
8-5-8     113.08
8-5-9     113.09
8-5-10    113.10
8-5-11    113.11
8-7-1     115.01
8-7-2     115.02
8-7-3     115.03
8-7-4     115.20
8-7-5     115.21
8-7-6     115.22
8-7-7     115.23
8-7-8     115.24
8-7-9     115.25
8-7-10    115.26
8-7-11    115.27
8-7-12    115.40
8-7-13    115.41
8-7-14    115.42
8-7-15    115.43
8-7-16    115.44
8-7-17    115.45
8-7-18    115.46
8-7-19    115.47
8-7-20    115.48
8-7-21    115.99
9-1-1     52.40
9-1-2     52.41
9-1-3     52.42
9-1-4     52.43
9-7-1     51.001
9-7-2     51.002
10-1-1    130.01
10-1-2    130.02
10-1-3    130.03,
          130.99
10-1-4    130.04
10-2-1    131.01,
          131.99
10-2-2    131.02
11-1-1    92.01
11-1-2    92.02
11-1-3    92.03
11-1-4    92.04 
11-1-5    92.05
11-1-6    92.06
11-1-7    92.07
11-1-8    92.08 
11-1-9    92.09
11-1-10   92.10
11-1-11   92.11
11-1-12   92.12 
11-1-13   92.13
11-2-1    92.30
11-2-2    92.31
11-2-3    92.32
11-2-4    92.33
11-2-5    92.34
11-3-1    92.45
11-3-2    92.46
11-3-3    92.47
11-3-4    92.48
11-3-5    92.49
11-3-6    92.99
12-1-1    70.01
12-1-2    70.02
12-1-3    70.03
12-1-4    70.04
12-1-5    70.05
12-2-1    71.01
12-2-2    71.02
12-2-3    71.03
12-2-4    71.04
12-2-5    71.05
12-2-6    71.06
12-2-7    71.06
12-2-8    71.07
12-2-9    71.08
12-2-10   71.09
12-2-11   71.10
12-2-12   71.11
12-2-13   71.12
12-2-14   71.13
12-3-1    72.01
12-3-4    72.04
12-3-6    72.06
15-1-1    50.01
15-1-2    50.15
15-1-3    50.15
15-1-4    50.16
15-1-5    50.17
15-1-6    50.18
15-1-7    50.30
15-1-8    50.31
15-1-9    50.32
15-1-10   50.33
15-1-11   50.34
15-1-12   50.35
15-1-13   50.35
15-1-14   50.35
15-1-15   5.50
15-1-16   50.51
15-1-17   50.52
15-1-18   50.53
15-1-19   50.54
15-1-20   50.55
          
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
614      - -2000     32.25
537      - -2003     32.25
614      - -2003     32.25
04-581   6-24-2004   32.25
04-690   2-26-2004   150.003
06-791   5-25-2006   32.25
06-824   12-14-2006  32.25
08-876   6-12-2008   32.25
09-916   9-10-2009   32.25
11-967   9-13-2011   32.25
                     90.01–
12-999   12-11-2012  90.15,
                     90.99
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
04-570   - -         150.001
                     92.45-
491      - -2002     92.49,
                     92.99
                     34.01-
492      - -2002     34.04,
                     34.23
507      - -2002     151.05
523      - -2002     31.20
537      - -2003     32.25
614      - -2003     32.25
485      12-13-2003  50.56
04-564   2-12-2004   110.07
                     150.001-
04-569   2-12-2004   150.004,
                     153.01
04-690   2-26-2004   150.003
04-581   6-24-2004   32.25
                     50.01,
                     50.15-
                     50.18,
                     50.30-
                     50.35,
                     50.50-
                     50.55,
                     51.035-
                     51.041,
                     51.055-
                     51.062,
                     51.075-
                     51.081,
                     51.095-
                     51.101,
                     51.115-
                     51.120,
04-578   7-22-2004   51.135,
                     51.136,
                     51.138,
                     51.142,
                     51.156-
                     51.163,
                     51.175-
                     51.183,
                     51.195-
                     51.200,
                     51.215-
                     51.218,
                     51.230-
                     51.238,
                     51.250-
                     51.261,
                     51.275-
                     51.280
05-588   12-9-2004   151.01-
                     151.08
05-617   8-11-2006   36.07
05-627   10-27-2005  155.01-
                     155.06
                     116.01,
06-648   2-23-2006   116.02,
                     116.99
06-656   4-13-2006   34.20-
                     34.23
06-658   5-25-2006   32.25
06-659   5-25-2006   130.05,
                     130.99
06-662   6-8-2006    34.21
06-681   12-14-2006  32.25
                     150.001,
07-686   5-10-2007   150.002,
                     150.004
07-689   5-10-2007   150.001,
                     150.004
07-697   12-13-2007  51.253
08-704   6-12-2008   32.25
08-705   8-14-2008   33.07
09-717   3-12-2009   34.21,
                     34.22
09-721   7-23-2009   150.001
09-722   9-10-2009   32.25
09-723   10-22-2009  30.065
10-735   9-9-2010    51.250
10-737   8-12-2010   30.065
10-741   10-28-2010  51.290
11-744   3-22-2011   71.12
11-751   9-13-2011   32.25
11-755   11-8-2011   30.004,
                     30.006
12-757   2-28-2012   150.009
12-758   6-12-2012   52.02
12-759   6-26-2012   34.01,
                     34.02
                     90.01–
12-760   12-11-2012  90.15,
                     90.99
13-763   1-22-2013   10.20
13-768   4-9-2013    31.20,
                     35.04
13-775   10-22-2013  32.01,
                     32.11
14-781   2-11-2014   30.065,
                     30.066
                     30.003,
14-783   4-22-2014   30.020,
                     30.021
14-790   11-18-2014  150.001,
                     150.004
14-791   11-18-2014  153.01
15-792   1-13-2015   51.250,
                     51.261
15-796   4-28-2015   35.04,
                     35.05
15-800   6-9-2015    35.05
15-801   7-28-2015   30.023
15-802   9-22-2015   30.023
16-807   1-12-2016   37.021
16-809   1-26-2016   34.20–
                     34.22
                     51.001,
16-815   3-22-2016   51.002,
                     51.135
16-825   9-13-2016   114.01–
                     114.60
16-826   12-13-2016  32.25
17-833   9-12-2017   72.01–
                     72.06
                     90.01­
17-834   10-24-2017  90.16,
                     90.99
18-843   2-13-2018   32.25
18-859   11-13-2018  71.14,
                     71.99
                     152.001–
                     152.015,
                     152.030,
                     152.031,
2019-863 1-8-2019    152.045–
                     152.050,
                     152.065–
                     152.068,
                     152.080,
                     152.081
2019-871 5-28-2019   150.001,
                     150.004
                     52.02,
                     81.01,
                     81.02,
                     82.01–
                     82.12,
2019-864 7-23-2019   83.01–
                     83.10,
                     84.01–
                     84.09,
                     130.01,
                     130.02
2019-874 11-12-2019  114.02
2019-875 11-12-2019  84.08
2020-884 8-11-2020   32.02–
                     32.09
2020-886 9-22-2020   153.01
2020-895 2-9-2021    117.01–
                     117.11
2021-905 9-28-2021   34.05
                     50.01,
                     50.02,
                     50.15–
                     50.18,
                     50.30–
                     50.35,
                     50.50–
                     50.57,
                     51.002–
                     51.004,
                     51.020,
                     51.035–
                     51.041,
                     51.055–
                     51.060,
                     51.062,
                     51.075–
                     51.081,
                     51.095–
                     51.101,
2022-913 2-22-2022   51.115–
                     51.120,
                     51.136,
                     51.138,
                     51.139,
                     51.142,
                     51.155–
                     51.161,
                     51.163,
                     51.176–
                     51.183,
                     51.195–
                     51.197,
                     51.215–
                     51.218,
                     51.230–
                     51.238,
                     51.250–
                     51.261,
                     51.275–
                     51.280,
                     51.290
2022-922 9-13-2022   34.05
2022-925 10-25-2022  150.001,
                     150.007
                     90.02,
                     90.05,
2023-926 2-14-2023   90.06,
                     90.12,
                     90.99
2024-939 2-13-2024   31.20
                     50.01,
                     51.035,
2024-940 7-9-2024    51.075,
                     51.155,
                     51.159
2025-951 5-13-2025   51.251,
                     51.253
2025-952 5-13-2025   130.06
                    
 
 
TOWN OF CHINO VALLEY, ARIZONA
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
2025 S-6 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance No. 2025-953, passed 6-25-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
www.amlegal.com
CHAPTER 154: UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Section
1   Administration and Procedures
   
1.1   Short Title
   
1.2   Purpose
   
1.3   Interpretation and Application
     
1.4   Planning and Zoning Commission 
      
1.4.1   Establishment; Composition; Terms of Members; Vacancies; Compensation
of Members
      
1.4.2   Powers and Duties
      
1.4.3   Selection of Officers
      
1.4.4   Quorum; Voting
      
1.4.5   Rules; Regulations; Records; Meetings
      
1.4.6   Ethics
   
1.5   Board of Adjustment
      
1.5.1   Establishment; Composition; Terms of Members; Vacancies; Compensation
of Members
      
1.5.2   Powers and Duties
      
1.5.3   Application
      
1.5.4   Selection of Officers
      
1.5.5   Quorum; Voting
      
1.5.6   Rules; Regulations; Records; Meetings
      
1.5.7   Ex Parte Communications
      
1.5.8   Ethics
   
1.6   Zoning Administrator and Assistant Zoning Administrator
      
1.6.1   Creation
      
1.6.2   Powers and Duties
      
1.6.3   Zoning Administrator
   
1.7   RESERVED
   
1.8   RESERVED
   
1.9   Review and Approval Processes
      
1.9.1   Site Plan Review and Approval Processes
         
1.9.1.1   Application Submittal
         
1.9.1.2   Application Contents
         
1.9.1.3   Application Review
         
1.9.1.4   Site Plan Approval
      
1.9.2   Amendment
      
1.9.3   Conditional Use Permits
      
1.9.4   Planned Area Development Overlay District; PAD
         
1.9.4.1   Purpose
         
1.9.4.2   Permitted Uses
         
1.9.4.3   PAD Procedures
      
1.9.5   Citizen Review Process
   
1.10   Violation and Penalty
      
1.10.1   General
      
1.10.2   Civil Infractions
      
1.10.3   Habitual Offender
      
1.10.4   Voluntary Compliance
      
1.10.5   Right of Entry
      
1.10.6   Civil Infraction
   
1.11   Violation and Penalty
      
1.11.1   Purpose
      
1.11.2   Applicability
      
1.11.3   Enforcement Officers
      
1.11.4   Civil Citations, Rules, Contents and Records
      
1.11.5   Citations - Service
      
1.11.6   Citations: Disposition Without Hearing
      
1.11.7   Civil Citations: Hearings
      
1.11.8   Municipal Court Decision
      
1.11.9   Collection of Civil Penalties
      
1.11.10   Reserved
      
1.11.11   Civil Penalties
   
1.12   Severability
2   Definitions
   
2.1   Rules of Construction
   
2.2   Meanings of Words and Terms
3   Zoning Districts
   
3.1   Establishment of Zoning Districts
   
3.2   Location and Boundaries of Districts
   
3.3   Zoning Descriptions and Requirements
   
3.4   “OS”- Open Space Resource Conservation
   
3.5   “AR-36” - Agricultural Residential
   
3.6   “AR-5” - Agricultural/Residential
   
3.7   “AR-4” - Agricultural/Residential
   
3.8   “SR-2.5” - Single Family Residential
   
3.9   “SR-2” - Single Family Residential
   
3.10   “SR-1.6” - Single Family Residential
   
3.11   “SR-1” - Single Family Residential
   
3.12   [Reserved]
      
3.12.1   “SF-24,000” - Single-Family Residential
      
3.12.2   “SF-12,000” - Single-Family Residential
   
3.13   “MR” - Multiple Family Residential
   
3.14   “MHP-4” - Mobile Home Park
   
3.15   “CL” - Light Commercial
   
3.16   “CH” - Commercial Heavy
   
3.17   “I” - Industrial
   
3.18   “PL” - Public Land Designation
   
3.19   “BP” - Business Park
   
3.20   Obsolete Zoning Districts
4   General Regulations
   
4.1   General Provisions
   
4.2   Permitted Uses
   
4.3   Non-Conforming Lots of Record
   
4.4   Re-Dividing of Lots
   
4.5   Yard, Lot and Area Requirements
   
4.6   Building and Height Requirements
   
4.7   Height Limitations on Corner Lots
   
4.8   Walls and Fences
   
4.9   Outdoor Storage
   
4.10   Special Purpose and Temporary Housing
   
4.11   Home Occupations
   
4.12   Garage Sales, Swap Meets and Outdoor Sales
   
4.13   Temporary Festivals, Circuses, Carnivals, Celebrations, Fiestas,
Rallies, Dances, Revival Meetings and Similar Activities
   
4.14   Public Service Facilities
   
4.15   Structure near Airplane Runways or Landing Strips
   
4.16   Schools
   
4.17   Prohibited Uses
   
4.18   Fees
   
4.19   Campgrounds
   
4.20   Non-Conforming Uses and Structures
   
4.21   Sign Regulations
      
4.21.1   Purpose
      
4.21.2   Permits Required
      
4.21.3   General Sign Regulations
      
4.21.4   Measurement of Signs
      
4.21.5   Sign Standards
      
4.21.6   Temporary Signs, Special Event Signs and Auxiliary Signs
      
4.21.7   Prohibited Signs
      
4.21.8   Non-Conforming Signs
      
4.21.9   Violations; Removal
      
4.21.10 [Reserved]
   
4.22   Off-Street Parking and Loading
      
4.22.1   General Parking Regulations
      
4.22.2   Off-Street Parking Spaces
      
4.22.3   Access
      
4.22.4   Parking Design Standards
      
4.22.5   Parking Standards for Non-Residential or Mixed Uses
      
4.22.6   Parking Standards for Residential Uses
      
4.22.7   Parking Space Allocation Requirements
      
4.22.8   Determination of Required Spaces
      
4.22.9   Off-Street Loading
      
4.22.10   Spaces Required
      
4.22.11   Standards for Off-Street Loading Facilities
   
4.23   Public Street System and Public Use Access System
   
4.24   Outdoor Lighting
   
4.25   Wireless Communications Facilities
   
4.26   Landscape Requirements
      
4.26.1   Intent
      
4.26.2   Landscape Plans: When Required, Unless Modified by the Zoning
Administrator
      
4.26.3   Landscaping Requirements, General
      
4.26.4   Determination of Requirements Unless Modified by the Zoning
Administrator
      
4.26.5   Alternative Landscape Plans
      
4.26.6   Preservation of Existing Landscaping
   
4.27   Animals and Pets
   
4.28   Front Yard and Street Side Yard Building Setbacks When Adjacent to a
Street
   
4.29   Design Concepts
   
4.30   Commercial Greenhouse Standards
   
4.31   Medical Marijuana Dispensaries, Off-Site Cultivation Sites, and Infusion
Facilities
   
4.32   Metal Storage Containers
5   Subdivision Regulations
   
5.1   Intent
      
5.1.2   Short Title
      
5.1.3   Authority
      
5.1.4   Jurisdiction
      
5.1.5   General Regulations; Administration
      
5.1.6   Platting or Division Required
      
5.1.7   Subdivision Applicability
   
5.2   Subdivision Application Procedures
      
5.2.1   General Provisions
      
5.2.2   Pre-Application Conference
      
5.2.3   Preliminary Plat
      
5.2.4   Final Plat
      
5.2.5   Subdivision Plat Amendments
      
5.2.6   Land Splits and Other Divisions of Land not Requiring a Subdivision
      
5.2.7   Minor Subdivision
      
5.2.8   Rural Subdivision
   
5.3   Design Principles and Development Standards
      
5.3.1   Street Location and Arrangement
      
5.3.2   Street Design
      
5.3.3   Water Facilities Design
      
5.3.4   Sewer Facilities Design
      
5.3.5   Drainage Design
      
5.3.6   Block Design
      
5.3.7   Lot Planning
      
5.3.8   Easement Planning
   
5.4   Improvement Requirements and Specifications
   
5.5   Enforcement
   
5.6   Floodplain Management
6   Reserved
1 ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
1.1 SHORT TITLE 
This Ordinance shall be known as “The Unified Development Ordinance of the Town
of Chino Valley.”
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-795, passed 4-28-2015)
1.2 PURPOSE
The purposes of this Ordinance are to secure safety from fire, panic, and other
dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to lessen congestion in the
streets; to prevent the over crowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of
population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water,
sewage disposal; schools, parks, and other public requirements; to provide for
the social, physical, and economic advantages resulting from comprehensive and
orderly planned use of land resources; to allow for the orderly implementation
of the General Plan; and to otherwise promote the health, safety, convenience,
and general welfare of the citizens of Chino Valley, Arizona.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
1.3 INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION 
In its interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall
be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of General Plan as
adopted by the Council and for the promotion of the public health, safety and
general welfare. It is not intended by this Ordinance to repeal, abrogate,
annul, or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws
or ordinances, except those specifically repealed by this Ordinance, or with
restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed or other agreement between
parties, provided that where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction on
land, buildings, or structures than is imposed or required by such existing
provisions of law, ordinance, contract, or deed, the provisions of this
Ordinance shall control.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
1.4 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 
1.4.1 ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION; TERMS OF MEMBERS; VACANCIES; COMPENSATION OF
MEMBERS 
A.   There is hereby established a Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town,
(“Commission”) to consist of seven (7) regular members and one (1) alternate
member, appointed by the Town Council. Members of the Commission shall be
qualified electors of the Town. The term of each regular member shall be three
(3) years, except as hereinafter provided. The term of the alternate
Commissioner shall be one (1) year.
B.   The alternate member of the Commission shall act as a regular member in
the absence of a regular member at any meeting or hearing of the Commission.
The alternate member shall not, however, substitute for a regular member who is
present at a meeting or hearing but has declared a conflict of interest.
C.   Termination; vacancy.
1.   Planning and Zoning Commissioners serve at the pleasure of the Council and
may be removed by the Council.
2.   A Commission seat shall be deemed vacant if any of the following occurs:
a.   Death, resignation or removal of a regular member from the Commission; or
b.   A regular member of the Commission is absent at three (3) consecutive
meetings or a total of four (4) meetings within any one (1) year period; or
c.   At the discretion of the Council, a member of the Commission is removed.
3.   In the event of a vacancy, the Council shall fill the vacancy for the
remainder of the unexpired term.
D.   All members shall serve without pay. However, members may be reimbursed
for actual expenses incurred in connection with their duties.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-795, passed 4-28-2015)
1.4.2 POWERS AND DUTIES 
A.   The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
1.   Recommend to the Town Council a General Plan and amendments thereto;
2.   Annually review progress towards implementation of the General Plan and
recommend to the Town Council changes desired due to new legislation,
development trends and changing economic, social and environmental conditions;
3.   Review and make recommendation to the Town Council on proposals to amend
the Town zoning map or the provisions of the Unified Development Ordinance;
4.   Initiate changes to the Town zoning map or the provisions of the Unified
Development Ordinance;
5.   Review and recommend approval to the Town Council of design guidelines or
standards of development.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-795, passed 4-28-2015)
1.4.3 SELECTION OF OFFICERS 
The Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among its
own members, who shall serve for one (1) year and until their successors are
elected and qualified. The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings and
exercise all the usual rights, duties and prerogatives of the head of any
similar organization. The Vice Chairperson shall perform the duties of the
Chairperson in the latter’s absence or disability. In the event of vacancy in
the Chairmanship of the Commission, the Vice-Chairperson shall become
Chairperson to serve for the remainder of the prior Chairperson’s term, and an
election shall be held at the next meeting to fill the office of Vice-
Chairperson for the remainder of that term.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-795, passed 4-28-2015)
1.4.4 QUORUM; VOTING 
A.   Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum. The affirmative vote a
majority of members voting shall be required for approval or recommendation to
Council of any matter before the Commission.
B.   A member who has, or appears to have, or whose relative has, or appears to
have, a conflict of interest pursuant to Title 38, Chapter 3, Article 8 of the
Arizona Revised Statutes regarding any matter before the Commission, shall
disclose such interest in the official records of the Commission, and shall
refrain from participating in any discussion, vote or any other manner as a
Commission member in such matter.
C.   Each member present shall not abstain from voting on an item unless he or
she has declared a conflict of interest.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-795, passed 4-28-2015)
1.4.5 RULES; REGULATIONS; RECORDS; MEETINGS 
A.   The Commission shall make and publish rules and regulations to govern its
proceedings and to provide for its meetings.
B.   All meetings of the Commission shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at such other times as the Commission may determine. Except for
executive sessions authorized by law, all meetings of the Commission shall be
open to the public.
C.   The minutes and records of all Commission proceedings shall be kept and
filed as public records in the office of the Town Clerk. Minutes of each
meeting shall contain a record of the number of votes cast for and against each
item requiring a vote.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-795, passed 4-28-2015)
1.4.6 ETHICS
Commissioners as appointed officers of the Town are subject to and shall comply
with the ethics provisions set forth in Chapter 35 of the Chino Valley Town
Code.
(Ord. 15-785, passed 4-28-2015)
1.5 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 
1.5.1 ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION; TERMS OF MEMBERS; VACANCIES; COMPENSATION OF
MEMBERS 
A.   There is hereby established a Board of Adjustment of the Town to consist
of five (5) regular members and one (1) alternate member, each of whom shall be
appointed by the Town Council.
1.   The terms of the regular members of the Board shall be three (3) years.
The term of the alternate member shall be one (1) year.
2.   All members shall serve without pay. However, members of the Board may be
reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their duties.
3.   The alternate member shall act as a regular member in the absence of a
regular member at any meeting or hearing of the Board. The alternate member
shall not, however, substitute for a regular member who is present at a meeting
or hearing but has declared a conflict of interest. The term of the alternate
members shall be one (1) year.
4.   Members of the Board of Adjustment serve at the pleasure of the Council
and may be removed by the Council. In the event of a death, resignation or
removal from the Board, the Council shall fill the vacancy for the unexpired
term. A Board seat shall be deemed vacant if a member is absent at three (3)
consecutive meetings or a total of four (4) meetings in any one (1)-year
period.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-795, passed 4-28-2015)
1.5.2 POWERS AND DUTIES 
A.   It shall be the duty of the Board of Adjustment to:
1.   Hear and decide appeals from a decision, determination or interpretation
made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement of the Unified Development
Ordinance; and to reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order,
requirement or decision of the Zoning Administrator appealed from, and make
such order, requirement, decision or determination as necessary;
2.   Hear and decide applications for a variance from the terms of this
Ordinance only if, because of special circumstances applicable to the property,
including its size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, the strict
application of the Unified Development Ordinance will deprive such property of
privileges enjoyed by other property of the same classification in the same
zoning districts. Any variance granted is subject to such conditions as will
assure that the adjustment authorized shall not constitute a grant of special
privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the same
zoning district in which such property is located.
B.   The Board of Adjustment shall not:
1.   Make or permit any changes in uses permitted in any zoning classification
or zoning district, or make any changes in the terms of the Unified Development
Ordinance, provided the restrictions in this paragraph shall not affect the
authority of granting variances pursuant to this article.
2.   Grant a variance if the special circumstances applicable to the property
are not self-imposed by the property owner.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-795, passed 4-28-2015)
1.5.3 APPLICATION 
Applications for a variance shall be filed on a form provided by the
Development Services Department and shall be accompanied by the appropriate
fee, together with a site plan of the premises and other data required by the
Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
1.5.4 SELECTION OF OFFICERS 
The officers of the Board of Adjustment shall be a Chairperson and Vice-
Chairperson who shall be selected by the Board each year at its first meeting
following July 1st. In the event of vacancy in the Chairmanship of the Board,
the Vice-Chairperson shall become Chairperson for the remainder of the prior
Chairperson’s term, and an election shall be held at the next meeting to fill
the office of Vice-Chairperson for the remainder of the prior Vice-
Chairperson’s term.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-795, passed 4-28-2015)
1.5.5 QUORUM; VOTING
A.   Three (3) members shall constitute a quorum. The affirmative vote of a
majority of members voting shall be required for approval of any matter before
the Board. In the event the matter before the Board is an appeal from a ruling
by the Zoning Administrator, a tie vote shall result in upholding the original
ruling of the Zoning Administrator.
B.   A member who has, or appears to have, or whose relative has, or appears to
have, a conflict of interest pursuant to Title 38, Chapter 3, Article 8 of the
Arizona Revised Statutes regarding any matter before the Board, shall disclose
such interest in the official records of the Board, and shall refrain from
participating in any discussion, vote or any other manner as a member of the
Board in such matter.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-795, passed 4-28-2015)
1.5.6 RULES; REGULATIONS; RECORDS; MEETINGS 
A.   The Board shall make and publish rules and regulations to govern its
proceedings and to provide for its meetings.
B.   All meetings of the Board shall be at the call of the Chairperson and at
such other times as the Board may determine. Except for executive sessions
authorized by law, all meetings shall be open to the public.
C.   The minutes and records of all Board proceedings shall be kept and filed
as public records in the office of the Town Clerk. Minutes of each meeting
shall contain a record of the number of votes cast for and against each item
requiring a vote. Each member present shall not abstain from voting on an item
unless he or she has declared a conflict of interest.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-795, passed 4-28-2015)
1.5.7 EX PARTE COMMUNICATIONS
Prohibition of ex parte communications. The Board of Adjustment acts as a
quasi-judicial body. To ensure that the decision-making process is fair and
impartial, members of the Board shall not, directly or indirectly, participate
in any ex parte communication relevant to an application or appeal pending
before that body. Ex parte communications are oral or written communications
related to the matter to be heard by the Board and which is made to or by a
member of the Board, including in person, telephonic or electronic
communications that occur outside of a public meeting of the Board.
(Ord. 15-795, passed 4-28-2015)
1.5.8 ETHICS
Boardmembers as appointed officers of the Town are subject to and shall comply
with the ethics provisions set forth in Chapter 35 of the Chino Valley Town
Code.
(Ord. 15-795, passed 4-28-2015)
1.6 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR AND ASSISTANT ZONING ADMINISTRATOR 
1.6.1 CREATION
There is created the position of Zoning Administrator who may be hired by the
Town or appointed by Town Council. The Town Manager or his/her designee shall
serve as the Zoning Administrator in the absence of the position being filled.
The Zoning Administrator may appoint an Assistant Zoning Administrator with the
approval of Town Council. The Assistant Zoning Administrator shall have the
same duties and powers of the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
1.6.2 POWERS AND DUTIES 
The Zoning Administrator and Assistant Zoning Administrator shall perform the
following functions:
1.   Enforce this Ordinance by ensuring that all activities, construction, and
development within the Town are in conformance with the Town zoning
regulations.
2.   Accomplish all administrative tasks required by this Ordinance including
receiving and processing applications for all persons requesting a rezone,
use permit, plan review, Zoning Administrator, appeal, or other action of the
Commission, Board of Adjustment, or Town Council.
3.   Subject to the policies of the Commission and Town Council, interpret this
Ordinance to members of the public, Town departments, and other branches of
government.
4.   Serve as planning staff to Council and Commission, and, as necessary,
attend meetings of these and other organizations and agencies.
5.   Administer the Town’s Development Guidelines as may be adopted from time
to time by the Town Council.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 2019-862. Passed 7-23-2019; Ord. 2019-875,
passed 11-12-2019)
1.6.3 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR 
Wherever the term Zoning Administrator appears in the Ordinance, this term is
amended to include both the Zoning Administrator and the Assistant Zoning
Administrator.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
1.7 RESERVED.
1.8 RESERVED.
1.9 REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESSES
The processes set forth in this section shall apply to development within the
Town of Chino Valley: Site Plan Review, Amendments to Zoning, Conditional Use
Permits, Planned Area Development Overlay Zoning District, and Citizen Review
Process.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-798, passed 6-23-2015)
1.9.1 SITE PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESSES
A.   Purpose. Site plan review is intended to provide the Town and applicants
an opportunity to review new development projects to ensure compliance with
adopted codes and ordinances and to harmonize new development with existing
structures.
B.   When required. Site plan review is required for all new construction,
exterior site and structure alterations, signs and subdivision plats prior to
issuance of a building permit, including Town facilities, with the following
exceptions:
1.   Accessory structures within single family zoning districts;
2.   Single family residences on separate lots within an approved and platted
subdivision;
3.   Minor exterior site and structure alterations that do not materially
affect the design concept or function of the site or structure;
4.   Repairs that do not alter exterior design of a structure;
5.   Approved temporary construction offices;
6.   Changes to the face of an existing approved sign.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-798, passed 6-23-2015)
1.9.1.1 APPLICATION SUBMITTAL
1.   An application shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator, or his/her
designee on a form approved by the Zoning Administrator.
2.   Applications shall be made by the owner of the property or an agent
authorized in writing by all owners of the property.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-798, passed 6-23-2015)
1.9.1.2 APPLICATION CONTENTS
A Site Plan application shall include, at a minimum, the following information:
A.   An accurate Site Plan drawn at an appropriate scale showing the boundaries
and dimensions of the site; acreage of the site, and a north arrow;
B.   Proposed and existing structures with dimensions and dimensions between
structures and from property boundaries to new and existing structures;
C.   Location and name(s) of adjacent and abutting streets, alleys, rights-of-
way and any required dedications thereof;
D.   Off-street parking in compliance with UDO Section
4.22 Off-Street Parking and Loading;
E.   Landscaping in compliance with UDO Section
4.26 Landscape Requirements;
F.   Screening in compliance with Section
4.8 Walls and Fences;
G.   Outdoor lighting in compliance with Section
4.24 Outdoor Lighting;
H.   Locations of all signage in compliance with Section
4.21 Sign Regulations;
I.   Outdoor storage and related activities/uses in compliance with Section
4.9 Outdoor Storage;
J.   Pedestrian, vehicle, and service vehicle access; onsite circulation plans;
K.   Location of water lines, sewer lines, fire hydrants, and other utilities;
L.   Compliance with Section
4.29 Design Concepts;
M.   Other information as deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator or his/
her designee.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-798, passed 6-23-2015)
1.9.1.3 APPLICATION REVIEW
After submittal, the site plan shall be reviewed for compliance with the Town’s
regulations. The review procedure may be applied in a flexible manner to allow
for creative designs, varying development concepts, locations and innovative
response to requirements. In addition to compliance with the Town’s
regulations, the Zoning Administrator may consider the following criteria and
principles of development:
A.   The proposed development complies with all provisions of this Ordinance
and all other ordinances, master plans, General Plans, goals, objectives and
standards of the Town.
B.   The proposed site plan promotes a desirable relationship of structures to
one another, to open spaces, and to topography both on the site and in the
surrounding neighborhood.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-729, passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 15-798,
passed 6-23-2015)
1.9.1.4 SITE PLAN APPROVAL
A.   Upon determination that the site plan is in compliance with all
development standards and any conditions of development set forth in the zoning
ordinance pertaining to the property, the site plan shall be approved by the
Zoning Administrator or his/her designee.
B.   Prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit, all site development
standards set forth in Section
1.9.2 shall be constructed or installed in compliance with the approved site
plan. In lieu of such installation or where weather conditions necessitate a
delay, upon approval by the Town Engineer, a cash deposit, bond, or letter of
credit, in the Town’s discretion, in an amount that guarantees complete
installation of site plan requirements, naming the Town of Chino Valley as
beneficiary, shall be filed with the Town.
(Ord. 15-798, passed 6-23-2015)
1.9.2 AMENDMENT
A.   Intent. Regulations set forth in this Ordinance and boundaries of Zoning
Districts established by the Town may be amended, supplemented, changed,
modified or repealed when deemed necessary to best serve the public interest,
health, comfort, convenience, safety and general welfare of the residents of
the Town.
B.   Review. Except as otherwise set forth in Subsection 1.9.2(C), upon receipt
of an application for an amendment, including requests for Planned Area
Development Overlay Zoning Districts, Use Permits and Conditional Use Permits,
the Zoning Administrator or designee shall review the application for
completeness and applicability to this Ordinance and the General Plan, comment
on the proposal, and adhere to the posting and publication requirements
required by Arizona law, including compliance with the Citizen Review Process
provided in Section 1.9.5, prior to the public hearing before the Planning and
Zoning Commission . Requests for amendments or changes of zoning shall be
considered by the Commission for the purpose of making a written
recommendation, which shall, after holding a public hearing at which parties of
interest and citizens have been heard, include the reasons for such
recommendations, to the Mayor and Council. Council may adopt the recommendation
of the Commission without holding a second public hearing if there is no
objection, request for public hearing, or other protest.
1.   Council shall hold a public hearing if requested in writing by the
applicant, or by any person appearing in opposition at the Commission hearing,
or by any person who has filed a written protest, in accordance with Arizona
law.
2.   If an application for amendment is denied by Council, or the application
is withdrawn after Commission hearing, the Commission shall not consider an
application for the same amendment within one (1) year from the date of the
original hearing.
C.   Residential Zoning Applications. This subsection applies to requests for a
change of zoning from one type of zoning district to a residential-type zoning
district, including from one type of residential district to another.
1.   Administrative Completeness Review Timeframe. Within 30 calendar days of
receipt of an application for a change of zoning from one type of zoning
district to a residential-type zoning district, including from one type of
residential district to another, the Town shall determine whether the
application is administratively complete. If the Town determines the
application is not administratively complete, the Town shall follow the
procedures prescribed in A.R.S. § 9-835(E) until the application is determined
complete. The Town shall determine whether a resubmitted application is
administratively complete within 15 calendar days after receiving the
resubmitted application. Upon determination that an application for amendment
is administratively complete, the Zoning Administrator or designee shall
forward the application to the Commission.
2.   For residential zoning applications that do not affect land within a
district of historical significance per A.R.S. § 9-462.01, an area designated
as historic on the National Register of Historic Places, or a Planned Area
Development, the Town Council shall approve or deny the application no later
than 180 calendar days after the Zoning Administrator has determined the
application to be administratively complete. This time frame may be extended
beyond 180 calendar days for either of the following reasons:
a.   For extenuating circumstances, the Town may grant a one-time extension of
not more than 30 calendar days.
b.   If the applicant requests an extension, the Town may grant extensions of
30 calendar days for each extension requested.
D.   Adoption. Adoption of an amendment may be subject to such conditions
Council deems applicable to enforce this Ordinance. If one condition is a
schedule for development of specific uses for which zoning is requested, and at
expiration of that period the property has not been developed according to said
schedule, it may be reverted to its former zoning classification by the
Council.
E.   Application. An application for an amendment shall be filed and signed by:
1.   The owner of the property;
2.   One or more of several joint owners of property whose collective ownership
constitutes a majority interest in the property;
3.   Seventy-five percent or more of the owners of property in the area to be
affected, when the application affects more than one property; or
4.   An agent of any property owner(s) authorized to sign as above when the
authority of the agent is in writing and filed with the application.
In addition to other requirements that the Town may adopt, any application for
amendment shall include a statement of purpose for the amendment, a statement
regarding access and utility availability, and a statement demonstrating
conformance with the Town’s General Plan
F.   Protests. If the owners of 20 percent or more of the area of the lands
included in a proposed ordinance or zoning map change, or those immediately
adjacent in the rear or any side extending 150 feet therefrom, or those
directly opposite extending 150 feet from the street frontage of opposite lots,
file a protest in writing against a proposed ordinance amendment, such
amendment shall not become effective except by favorable vote of three-fourths
of the Council. If any member of Council is unable to vote because of a
conflict of interest, then the required number of votes shall be three-fourths
of the remaining Council members (provided that required number of votes shall
not be less than a majority of the full Council). Written protests must be
filed with and received by the Town Clerk at least three business days prior to
the date of the public hearing at which the Ordinance or zoning map change will
be heard by the Council.
G.   Annexation. Areas, when annexed to the Town of Chino Valley, shall, until
officially zoned by the Council, be considered to be zoned to match comparable
County zoning designations as shown on the Official Zoning Map of Yavapai
County at the time of annexation. Such County zoning shall apply for not more
than six months.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 14-786, passed 7-22-2014; Ord. 15-797,
passed 6-23-2015; Ord. 2025-950, passed 2-25-2025)
1.9.3 Conditional Use Permits
A.   Conditional Use Permits may be granted only when expressly permitted by
this Ordinance, and only after the Commission has made recommendation, and
Council has approved the request by motion based upon a finding that the
authorizing of the Use Permit: (1) will not be materially detrimental to
persons residing or working in the vicinity adjacent to the property, to the
neighborhood, or to the public welfare; and (2) that the proposed use is
reasonably compatible with uses permitted in the surrounding area. The burden
of proof satisfying these requirements rests with the applicant.
B.   Applications for Conditional Use Permit approval shall be filed on a form
provided by the Development Services Department and shall be accompanied by the
appropriate fee, together with a Site Plan of the premises and other data
required by the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee.
C.   The Commission shall conduct a public hearing prior to forwarding its
written recommendation to the Council. A notice of the time and place of the
public hearing shall be posted on the property at least five (5) days prior to
the Commission meeting. A notice of the public hearing shall be published in an
official newspaper of general circulation in the Town at least fifteen (15)
days prior to the scheduled hearing date. Notice shall be provided by first
class mail to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet at least
fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing.
D.   The Commission may recommend and the Council may impose specific
conditions or requirements pertaining to the site or operation of the requested
use.
1.   A Use Permit may be granted for a designated period with a date of
expiration stated therein or may be granted for an indefinite period. Should
the use not be established as proposed within one (1) year, the Use Permit
approval shall become null and void.
2.   Additional conditions that may be considered, include, but are not limited
to the following:
a.   Mitigation of potential impacts on surrounding properties such as, but not
limited to, noise, lighting, odor, or placement of trash receptacles.
b.   Assurance of adequate parking, ingress and egress so as not to increase
traffic congestion.
c.   Hours of operation.
d.   Maintenance of a positive appearance, with appropriate screening,
landscaping and buffering to preserve reasonable use and enjoyment of adjacent
properties.
E.   After the hearing, the Commission shall render its decision in the form of
a written recommendation to Council. The recommendation shall include the
reasons for the recommendation and be transmitted to Council in such form and
manner as may be specified by Council.
The Council may adopt the recommendations of Commission without holding a
second public hearing if there is no objection, request for public hearing, or
protest. The Council shall hold a public hearing if requested in writing by the
applicant, or any person who has filed a written protest, or requested by any
member of Council. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given
in the time and manner provided for the giving of notice of the hearing by the
Commission. In addition, the municipality may give notice of the hearing in
such other manner, as it may deem necessary or desirable.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
1.9.4 PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT: PAD
1.9.4.1 PURPOSE
The purposes of the Planned Area Development overlay district (“PAD OVERLAY
DISTRICT”) are:
A.   Provide for the orderly development of land consistent with the Unified
Development Ordinance of the Town of Chino Valley to permit flexibility in the
design of residential, commercial and/or industrial developments in conformity
with the intent and purpose of the General Plan and Unified Development
Ordinance.
B.   Modify underlying zoning district regulations to permit flexibility and
innovation in developmental design and provide opportunities for unique or
mixed-use development.
C.   Promote economical construction and maintenance of streets and utilities
without compromising public safety and welfare.
D.   Preserve and utilize open space and offer recreational opportunities close
to residential use.
E.   Encourage the preservation of community character and stabilization of
surrounding neighborhoods.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-742, passed 11-9-2010; Ord. 14-786,
passed 7-22-14)
1.9.4.2 PERMITTED USES
A.   A single PAD overlay district may overlay one or more underlying zoning
districts.
B.   Use and development of land within a PAD overlay district shall conform to
and comply with the underlying zoning district(s) regulations and other
requirements set forth in the Unified Development Ordinance, except as modified
by the PAD Zoning Ordinance.
C.   A PAD overlay district may allow for onsite density transfer within a
residential development, permitting the density regulations of the underlying
zoning districts to be applied to the total area of the PAD overlay district
rather than separately to individual lots or underlying zoning districts.
D.   Applications for changes in the underlying zoning district(s) may be
submitted and processed concurrently with an application requesting approval of
a Planned Area Development overlay district.
E.   The minimum area for a pad overlay district shall be two (2) acres.
F.   Pad overlay district modifications to uses permitted in the underlying
zoning district(s) shall be reasonably compatible with and not averse to the
uses permitted in the underlying zoning district(s).
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-742, passed 11-9-2010; Ord. 14-786,
passed 7-22-14)
1.9.4.3 PAD PROCEDURES
A.   Creation of a PAD overlay district shall be considered and treated as a
change in zoning and shall be subject to the procedures required for changes in
zoning, including citizen review, public hearing by the Planning Commission and
approval by the Town Council.
B.   Development plan requirements.
1.   Development plan. A PAD application and approval shall include a
development plan consisting, at a minimum, of a site plan showing the locations
of buildings and street layout plans. Where a modification of the underlying
zoning regulations related to building setbacks, height, design, open space or
other site regulation is requested, the applicant shall provide building
elevations, building heights, design guidelines, residential lot layout, and
any additional information relevant to the request and as determined by the
Planning Department.
2.   Use and development of the property located within the PAD overlay
district shall substantially conform to the development plan which shall be
approved by the Town Council as an exhibit to the PAD overlay district zoning
ordinance.
C.   Zoning conditions. The Planning Commission may recommend and the
Town Council may impose conditions of approval including, but not limited to,
the following:
1.   Timing or phasing of development;
2.   Off-site improvements to mitigate the impacts of the proposed development;
3.   Development standards;
4.   Design guidelines;
5.   Conditions of use;
6.   Dedication of land for public purposes;
7.   Dedication to the Town of parcels or rights-of-way for use as streets,
alleys, drainage and public utilities as are reasonably required by or related
to the effect of the rezoning;
8.   Dedication of easements for public use as trails and open space areas;
9.   Establishment by the developer of a homeowners or property owners
association to ensure continued maintenance and ownership of open space and
landscaped areas within the PAD overlay district; and
10.   Reservation of land for future public acquisition.
D.   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the PAD overlay
district and rezoning request pursuant to the requirements of the Unified
Development Ordinance and Arizona State Law.
E.   After the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a written
recommendation to the Town Council that the Council approve, approve with
modifications and/or conditions, or deny the proposed change in zoning and
creation of a PAD overlay district. The recommendation shall include the
reasons for the recommendation and shall be transmitted to the Town Council in
such form and manner as may be specified by the Council.
F.   The Planning Commission shall recommend approval only after making the
following findings:
1.   That the rezoning as proposed or modified is consistent with and conforms
to the General Plan; and
2.   That all properties within the proposed PAD overlay district will have
adequate access to public or private streets appropriate to their use.
G.   The Council may approve the rezoning and creation of a PAD overlay
district without a public hearing if there is no objection, request for a
public hearing, or other protest. If an objection, request for a public hearing
or other protest is received, the Council shall hold a public hearing. The
Council may adopt the recommendations of the Planning Commission or it may
approve with modifications or deny the requested change in zoning and pad
overlay district.
H.   Amendments to the PAD overlay zoning district. Amendments to a PAD overlay
zoning district are changes in zoning and shall be treated as such for all
purposes including but not limited to submission of applications, fees, public
notice requirements, citizen review, public hearings, Planning Commission
recommendation and approval by the Town Council.
I.   Modifications to the approved development plan.
1.   Notwithstanding subsection H., above, the following modifications to the
approved development plan are not considered to be amendments to the PAD and
may be administratively approved by the Development Services Director upon
submission of a complete application and if, in the discretion of the
Development Services Director, the modifications are consistent with the
approved development plan, the purposes of the PAD, and are the minimum
required to implement the purposes of the UDO and improve the quality of
development:
a.   Less than ten (10) percent change in the number of square feet of a
building or number of units permitted to be developed; or
b.   Less than ten (10) percent change in building height or permitted number
of stories; or
c.   Rearrangement of the proposed structures as long as there is no change in
height, square feet, or number of units to be developed; or
d.   Less than 10% increase or decrease in setback or open space requirements
within the PAD.
2.   Appeals from decisions of the Development Services Director pursuant to
this section shall be heard by the Planning Commission at a public hearing
after notice, as set forth above for changes in zoning.
(Ord. 14-786, passed 7-22-2014; Ord. 2020-885, passed 9-8-2020)
1.9.5 CITIZEN REVIEW PROCESS
Prior to any public hearing, as required under this Ordinance, on any
application for any ordinance that changes any property from one zoning
district to another, a use or Conditional Use Permit application that imposes
any regulation not previously imposed, or that removes or modifies any such
regulation previously imposed, the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee,
shall require the applicant to conduct a neighborhood meeting or an acceptable
alternative prior to a public hearing to consider the proposal. A written
notice of the application shall be mailed to all landowners of property within
three hundred (300) feet of the property that is subject to a rezone, Use or
Conditional Use Permit application and to such other persons as the Zoning
Administrator, or his/her designee, reasonably determines to be other
potentially affected citizens. In determining the number of potentially
affected citizens, the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee, shall review
the density and intensity of residential development in the general vicinity,
the existing street system, and other factors that may be related to the zoning
or Use Permit’s impact on the character of the neighborhood.
The written notice shall also include a general explanation of the substance of
the proposed Rezoning, Use Permit application and shall state the date, time
and place scheduled for a neighborhood meeting, at which any adjacent landowner
(s) or those other potentially affected citizens, will be provided a reasonable
opportunity to express any issues or concerns that the landowner or citizen may
have with the proposed zoning or use permit application before any required
public hearing.
The written notice shall be given at least fifteen (15) days before the
neighborhood meeting in the following manner:
The notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation
published or circulated in the Town.
The notice shall be posted upon the sign required in this Ordinance, unless
waived by the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee.
The notice shall be mailed in accordance with the same procedures as required
in, and delivered in accordance with the provisions of the Ordinance.
The applicant, upon consultation with the Zoning Administrator, shall establish
a time, date and place for the neighborhood meeting that provides a reasonable
opportunity for the applicant to inform adjacent landowners and other
potentially affected citizens of the substance of the proposed action and
adjacent landowners and other potentially affected citizens will be provided an
opportunity to express any issues or concerns that they may have with the
proposed zoning or change of zoning or Use Permit proposed by the application
before the public hearing. The citizen review meeting shall be held not less
than five days prior to the public hearing on the application. The Zoning
Administrator, or his/her designee, may attend the meeting, but is not required
to conduct the meeting. The applicant, or his/her designee, shall submit a
written report of the outcomes of the meeting, to the Zoning Administrator, who
shall include them in reports to Commission and Town Council at such time as
they take action on the application.
At the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee, an
alternative citizen review process may be used that does not involve a
neighborhood meeting. The alternative process shall consist, at a minimum, of
the following:
Written notice as described above, except that the notice shall only indicate
the name, address and phone number of the member of the planning staff to whom
adjacent landowners within three hundred (300) feet or other potentially
affected citizen, may contact to express any issues or concerns that the
landowner or citizen may have with the proposed rezoning.
A staff report summarizing any issues or concerns expressed by adjacent
landowners shall be presented to the Commission and Mayor and Council at such
time as they take action on the application.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 16-812, passed 3-22-2016)
1.10 VIOLATION AND PENALTY
1.10.1 GENERAL
The Zoning Administrator/Designee is authorized and directed to enforce all of
the provisions of this Ordinance as set forth in this Ordinance.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
1.10.2 CIVIL INFRACTIONS
A violation of this Ordinance shall be charged, filed and prosecuted as a civil
infraction.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
1.10.3 HABITUAL OFFENDER
Any person who commits a violation of this Ordinance after previously having
been found responsible for committing two (2) or more civil infractions of this
Ordinance within any thirty-six (36) month period, whether by admission, by
payment of the fine, by default, or by judgment after hearing, shall be guilty
of a criminal misdemeanor punishable as set forth in this Ordinance. The Town
Prosecutor is authorized to file a criminal misdemeanor complaint in the Chino
Valley Municipal Court against such habitual offenders who violate this
Ordinance. For purposes of calculating the thirty-six (36) month period under
this paragraph, the dates of the Commission of the offenses are the determining
factor.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
1.10.4 VOLUNTARY COMPLIANCE
Nothing in this Ordinance shall preclude the Zoning Administrator/Designee from
seeking voluntary compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, or from
enforcing this Ordinance proactively or reactively, through warnings, notices
to comply, or other such devices designed to achieve compliance in the most
efficient and effective manner under the circumstances.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
1.10.5 RIGHT OF ENTRY
The Zoning Administrator/Designee may enter in and upon any premises within the
Town at all reasonable times to inspect premises or to perform any duty imposed
upon the Zoning Administrator/Designee regarding the enforcement of this
Ordinance, provided that if such premises be occupied or enclosed in such a
manner that there is an expectation of privacy within such enclosure, he or she
shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If entry is denied or
cannot be obtained, the Zoning Administrator/Designee shall not enter in or
upon such premises without the proper execution of an inspection warrant issued
by a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to A.R.S. § 13-3912.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
1.10.6 CIVIL INFRACTION
Any Responsible Person who violates any provision of this Ordinance is guilty
of a civil infraction punishable as set forth in this Ordinance, unless such
violation causes such person to meet the definition of a “Habitual Offender”
set forth in this Ordinance, in which case the person shall be guilty of a
criminal misdemeanor punishable as set forth in this Ordinance. Any continuing
violation of this Ordinance may be abated by the Town as set forth in this
Ordinance. Imposition of a fine or penalty assessment shall not relieve the
owner of the responsibility for abatement of the violation(s) or excuse him/her
from liability for any and all costs incurred by the Town for abatement.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
1.11 VIOLATION AND PENALTY
1.11.1 PURPOSE
The purposes of this Section are to create a procedure for Ordinance
enforcement, including specialized civil citations, and to provide a timely,
efficient means to address Ordinance violations.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007)
1.11.2 APPLICABILITY
This Chapter provides for consent orders and civil citations, which are in
addition to all other legal remedies that may be pursued by the Town of Chino
Valley to address violations of this Ordinance. The use of this Chapter neither
limits nor precludes the Town of Chino Valley from pursuing any other type of
enforcement allowed by law.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007)
1.11.3 ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
The Town Manager or Zoning Administrator shall designate those Town employees
who may issue civil citations under this Chapter.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007)
1.11.4 CIVIL CITATIONS, RULES, CONTENTS AND RECORDS
A.   Procedure. Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, the Rules of
Procedure in Civil Traffic Cases shall apply to civil citations, subject to
violations hereunder being titled as Civil UDO violations, including said title
being deemed substituted where appropriate in said rules and forms.
B.   The civil citation shall include the following to the extent applicable:
1.   State the date of the violation or, if the date of the violation is
unknown, then the date the violation was identified;
2.   State the address or a definite description of where the violation
occurred;
3.   Notify the Defendant with a written description or Ordinance designation
of the violation;
4.   State the action required to correct the violation, if applicable;
5.   Show the name and signature of the enforcement officer;
6.   List the phone number of the Chino Valley Municipal Court to contact for
questions concerning the hearing process;
7.   Direct the Defendant to correct the violation to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Administrator/Designee and/or to appear in Chino Valley Municipal Court,
at the time and date specified in the citation;
8.   Notify the Defendant that if the Defendant fails to correct the violation
to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator/Designee or appear on the date
specified in the citation, the Municipal Court shall issue a written decision
of default against the Defendant, enforce prior orders and sanctions against
Defendant and/or impose a civil penalty as set forth in this Ordinance;
9.   The Defendant shall provide all information as required in accordance to
the Office of Court Administrator's policies and procedures;
10.   If applicable and available, the signature of the cited Defendant
reflecting that party's receipt of a copy of the citation.
C.   Record of Citations. All citations shall bear sequential “serial number
and/or codes” (including letters as a citation issuing department may determine
to include) to provide for tracking the citation. The issuing department shall
maintain a record of civil citations issued for a period of not to exceed three
(3) years unless a longer period is required by law.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007)
1.11.5 CITATIONS - SERVICE
The Zoning Administrator/Designee issuing the citation may serve it on the
Defendant by hand delivering the civil citation to the person accused of
violating this Ordinance. The citation may also be served in the same manner as
a summons in a civil action by any means allowed by the Arizona Rules of Civil
Procedure. In addition a citation may be served by certified or registered
mail, return receipt requested.
The citation is deemed served on the date it is hand delivered or, if mailed,
on the date it is deposited in the United States mail.
Failure to receive any notice specified in this Ordinance does not affect the
validity of the proceedings conducted under this Ordinance.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007)
1.11.6 CITATIONS: DISPOSITION WITHOUT HEARING
If the Defendant corrects the violation to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Administrator/Designee on or before the court appearance date, no hearing shall
be held.
If the Defendant fails to correct the violation to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Administrator/Designee on or before the court appearance date, and fails
to appear in Municipal Court on the date and time set, the Defendant has failed
to exhaust administrative remedies. The Municipal Court may issue a written
decision of default against the Defendant (thus, finding the person
responsible), impose a civil penalty as set forth in this Ordinance and may
include, if applicable, an order of abatement pursuant to Section 1.11.10. The
Municipal Court shall mail a copy of the default decision and notice of the
right to set aside the default decision to the Defendant. If a bond or civil
penalty for non-appearance and admission of responsibility has been provided in
the citation, the civil penalty will be that amount.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007)
1.11.7 CIVIL CITATIONS: HEARINGS
A Municipal Court judge or hearing officer shall hear and dispose of civil
violations, and make such orders as may be necessary and proper to dispose of
such cases. Cases shall be heard without a jury.
The Municipal Court may not grant variances nor modify the provisions of this
Ordinance, the Town Code, or the Unified Development Ordinance.
The Municipal Court may continue the date set for the hearing and may continue
any hearing, for cause.
If the Defendant appears before the Municipal Court and admits the allegations,
the Municipal Court shall issue a decision, finding against the Defendant, may
impose a civil penalty and may issue an abatement order.
If the Defendant appears and denies the allegation, the Municipal Court shall
set the matter for hearing as soon as possible as the interests of justice will
allow, but not more than thirty (30) days.
The Arizona Rules of Procedure in Civil Traffic Violation Cases shall be
followed by the Municipal Court for civil citations issued pursuant to this
Ordinance except where inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance or as
modified or established for use by the Chino Valley Municipal Court or the
Arizona Supreme Court.
The Zoning Administrator/Designee who issued the citation may appear in
Municipal Court and be the Town’s representative. No person may be examined
except by the Court, an attorney for a party, or the Defendant.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007; Ord. 07-694,
passed 9-13-2007)
1.11.8 MUNICIPAL COURT DECISION
The Municipal Court shall find the Defendant responsible, not responsible or
may dismiss the civil citation. If the Defendant is found responsible, the
order shall include:
A.   The amount of any civil penalty imposed;
B.   The date by when the Defendant shall correct the violation (if
applicable), which date shall not be less than thirty (30) days after the order
and, the Court, in its discretion, may reduce/suspend all or part of the civil
penalty upon timely proof of correction of the violation, which shall include
an inspection letter/report from a person responsible for Code enforcement for
the Town;
C.   Notice that if the Defendant does not pay the civil penalty or correct the
violation within the time ordered, the Town may take any lawful action to
collect the civil penalty, including representatives for the Town taking action
to impose a lien on the Defendant's land; and
D.   Notice that if the Defendant fails to correct the violation within the
time period ordered by the Court, the Defendant may be cited for the same
violation again after the corrective period has expired.
A party aggrieved by the Municipal Court's decision with regards to any civil
penalty may appeal to Superior Court pursuant to A.R.S. § 12-124. An appeal
shall be taken within time set forth in the Rules of Procedure for Civil
Traffic Cases.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007)
1.11.9 COLLECTION OF CIVIL PENALTIES
Civil penalties may be collected in any manner provided by law and, if
determined appropriate by the Municipal Court, to include the manner applicable
to civil traffic citations.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007)
1.11.10 RESERVED.
1.11.11 CIVIL PENALTIES
Any person who violates any section of this Ordinance is subject to a civil
sanction or penalty and shall be punished by imposition of a civil sanction not
to exceed a base of five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus all applicable
surcharges and fees, unless another penalty is specified.
Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense/violation.
Any person who commits a violation of any section of this Ordinance generally
punishable as a civil infraction, having previously been found responsible for
committing two (2) or more civil infractions of this Ordinance within any
thirty-six (36) month period, whether by admission, by payment of the fine, by
default, or by judgment after hearing, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor
punishable as set forth in A. R. S. §§ 13-707, 13-802, and 13-902.
A bond schedule/civil penalty schedule may be recommended from time to time by
the Zoning Administrator and may be adopted by the Town Council in such amounts
and form as it determines.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007; Ord. 07-694,
passed 9-13-2007)
1.12 SEVERABILITY 
If any part of the “The Unified Development Ordinance of the Town” is found to
be invalid or unconstitutional by any Court, such action shall not apply to the
Ordinance as a whole, but to that specific part, and it is intended and
declared that all parts of the “Unified Development Ordinance of the Town” not
expressly declared to be invalid or unconstitutional shall continue in full
force and effect notwithstanding so much thereof as may be declared to be
invalid or unconstitutional.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
2 DEFINITIONS
2.1 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
For this Ordinance, certain terms and words are herein defined.
Present tense shall include future tense; singular number shall include plural,
and plural shall include singular; “shall” is mandatory and “may” is
permissive; “persons” include individuals, partnerships, corporations, clubs or
associations; reference to one gender shall include the other.
The following terms may be used interchangeably: used, arranged, occupied or
maintained; building or structure; sold or dispensed; zone or district.
Defined words appear in bold throughout the text.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007; Ord. 08-707,
passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729, passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 11-738, passed 1-11-
2011; Ord. 13-779, passed 12-10-2013; Ord. 14-785, passed 7-8-2014; Ord. 15-
798, passed 6-23-2015; Ord. 17-819, passed 3-14-2017; Ord. 2020-878, passed 1-
28-2020; Ord. 2020-885, passed 9-8-2020; Ord. 2021-899, passed 3-23-2021; Ord.
2022-923, passed 10-11-2022)
2.2 MEANINGS OF WORDS AND TERMS
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ABUTTING (See also adjacent/adjoining). The condition of two adjoining
properties having a common property line or boundary, including cases where two
or more lots adjoin only a corner of corners.
ACCESS. The place, means, or way by which pedestrians and standard passenger
vehicles shall have safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress to a property
or use as required by the Ordinance.
ACCESS DRIVE. Any vehicular access—by easement , deed, public dedication less
than fifty (50) feet in width, or any means other than right-of-way or public
street to one or more parcels or lots of land—which exists at the date of the
adoption of this Ordinance.
ACCESS, DIRECT. A deeded right-of-way providing ingress and egress to a
dedicated public street.
ACCESS STREET OR SERVICE ROAD. This definition is the same as that for frontage
street.
ACRE. An area of land containing 43,560 square feet.
ADJACENT. Directly abutting or in the absence of public right-of-way would be
directly abutting.
ADJACENT, ADJOINING. Nearby, but not necessarily touching.
AGRICULTURE. The tilling of the soil, raising of crops, horticulture,
viticulture, silviculture; including uses customarily incidental thereto
including the raising of animals.
AGRICULTURE BUSINESS. Any business use allowed within the Town limits of Chino
Valley, providing the operation of such use has a Chino Valley business
license, and/or proof of filing IRS Form “F.”
AIRPORT. Any area which is used or is intended to be used primarily for the
taking off and landing of aircraft, and any appurtenant areas which are used or
intended to be used for airport buildings or facilities including open spaces,
taxiways and tie-down areas, hangars, transition and clear zones, and other
accessory buildings.
ALLEY. A right-of-way dedicated to public use affording a secondary means of
access to abutting property and intended for general traffic circulation.
AMENDMENT. A change in the wording, context, or substance of this Ordinance, or
an addition or deletion or a change in the zone district boundaries or
classification of the zoning map.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL. A place where animals are given medical or surgical treatment
and are cared for during the time of such treatment. Use of the facility for
boarding shall be a permitted accessory use and limited to indoor care only.
Animal hospital shall mean the same as veterinary clinic.
ANIMATION. As pertains to signs, the presentation of pictorials and graphics on
signs displayed in a progression of frames which give the illusion of movement
of any part of the sign structure, design or pictorial segment, including but
not limited to the illusion of moving objects, moving patterns or bands of
light, or expanding or contracting shapes.
APPEAL. An action which permits anyone to arrange for a hearing from other than
the individual or group from whose decision the appellant seeks redress.
ARENA, PRIVATE. An indoor or outdoor facility for activities relating to
livestock including, but not limited to, equestrian, cattle, etc. for the sole
use of the property owner and guests.
ARENA, PUBLIC. An indoor or outdoor facility for activities relating to
livestock including, but not limited to, equestrian, cattle etc. and for the
general use by the public.
ARTERIAL STREET. A street with the principal function to serve as a part of a
major network for the through traffic flow separate from local traffic, to and
from areas of principal traffic generation, of adequate design, capacity and
construction to provide for the safe and rapid distribution and collection of
through traffic and to provide limited ingress and egress to and from collector
and local streets. (See Section
4.28 for a list of arterial streets.)
ASSISTANT ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The Zoning Administrator may appoint an
Assistant Zoning Administrator with the approval of Town Council. The Assistant
Zoning Administrator shall have the same duties and powers of the Zoning
Administrator.
ASSISTED LIVING CENTER. A residential care institution that provides or
contracts to provide supervisory care services, personal care services, or
directed care services on a continuous basis for eleven (11) or more people.
ASSISTED LIVING HOME. A residential care institution that provides or contracts
to provide supervisory care services, personal care services, or directed care
services on a continuous basis for up to ten (10) people.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR. All aspects of the repair of motor vehicles including, but
not limited to, lubrication, tune-up and preventive.
AUTOMOBILE SALES, NEW. A franchised agency selling new motor vehicles and
providing services commonly associated with motor vehicle sales. A new
automobile dealership may include the sale of used motor vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE SALES, USED. An agency selling used motor vehicles not in
conjunction with and on the same site as a new motor vehicle franchise and
providing services commonly associated with motor vehicle sales.
AWNING. A sheet of canvas or other material stretched on a frame and used to
keep the sun or rain off a storefront, window, doorway, or deck.
BAR. An establishment whose primary business is the serving of alcoholic
beverages to the public for consumption on the premises.
BATTERY ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEM (BESS). An electrochemical device that charges or
collects energy from the electrical grid or an electricity generating facility,
such as a utility-scale photovoltaic facility, and then discharges that energy
at a later time to provide electricity when needed.
BLOCK. An area of land that is entirely bound on all sides by streets or the
exterior boundaries of a subdivision.
BOARD OR BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. The Town’s Board of Adjustment.
BUILDING. A structure having one or more stories and a roof, designed primarily
for the shelter, support, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any
kind. This shall not include doghouses, play houses, or similar structures.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY. A building or structure which is subordinate to, and the
use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main building, structure,
or use on the same lot or parcel. The accessory building shall not be permitted
prior to the issuance of a building permit for the primary residences or
commercial building.
BUILDING, ATTACHED. A building which has at least part of a wall in common with
another building, or which is connected to another building by a roof.
BUILDING, DETACHED. A building, which is separated from another building or
buildings on the same lot.
BUILDING, FACTORY-BUILT. Has the meaning set forth in A.R.S. § 41-4001(17), as
amended.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance measured from the average grade
level to the highest level of the roof surface of flat roofs, to the deck line
of mansard roofs, or to the mean height between eaves and ridges for gable,
gambrel, shed or hip roofs. In the event that terrain problems prevent an
accurate determination of height, the Zoning Administrator shall rule as to
height and appeal from that decision shall be to the Board of Adjustment.
BUILDING PERMIT. A permit required for the erection, construction,
modification, addition to or moving of any building, structure or use in the
incorporated area of the Town.
BUILDING, PRIMARY. A building or buildings in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential district, any
dwelling shall be deemed to be the primary building of the lot on which the
same is situated.
BUILDING SETBACK. The minimum distance as prescribed by this Ordinance between
any property line and the closest point of the foundation or any supporting
post or pillar of any building or structure related thereto. (see Yard,
Required Front, Required Side and Required Rear)
CAMPGROUND. Any lot, parcel, or tract of land used, designed, maintained, and
intended for rent of plots or sites to accommodate temporary camping by the
traveling public whether or not a charge is made for the use of the park and
its facilities.
CANOPY. A structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor
service area.
CEMETERY. Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead, and
dedicated for such purposes, including columbaria, crematoriums, mausoleums and
mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of such
premises.
CHURCH OR PLACE OF WORSHIP. Institutions that people regularly attend to
participate in or hold religious services, meetings, and other activities. The
term “church” shall not carry a secular connotation and shall include buildings
in which the religious services of any denomination are held.
CLINIC. A place for the provision of health services, not involving overnight
housing of patients.
COLLECTOR STREET. A street, which carries traffic from local streets to
arterial streets, including the principal entrance streets of a residential
development and streets for circulation within such a development. (See Section
4.28 for a list of collector streets.)
COMMERCIAL. Any activity, which is conducted primarily for compensation or
profit.
COMMISSION or PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. The Town’s Planning and Zoning
Commission.
COMMITTEE. The Town’s Site Plan Review Committee.
CONCEPTUAL LAND USE PLAN. A generalized/conceptual plan often referred to as a
bubble plan indicating the boundaries of a tract or tracts under common
ownership, and identifying proposed land uses, land-use intensities, and
thoroughfare alignment.
CONTIGUOUS. In actual contact.
CONVALESCENT HOME. (see Nursing home)
COUNCIL. Chino Valley Town Council.
COUNTY. Yavapai County.
COVENANTS. A privately prepared recorded document designed to govern the use of
parcels within subdivisions.
CUL-DE-SAC. A street having a traffic outlet on one end only and having at the
other end facilities for the turning around of vehicular traffic.
DAY CARE. (See School, Nursery)
DEAD END STREET. A street having a traffic outlet on one end only.
DECOMMISSIONING. A plan that specifies how a utility-scale solar photovoltaic
facility will be dismantled, removed, and disposed of after the end of its
useful life or upon deactivation and how its site will be restored to its pre-
construction condition.
DEDICATION. A process whereby private land is transferred for public use.
DENSITY TRANSFER, ONSITE. A portion of the density for areas having natural
resource lands that remain undeveloped may be transferred to other areas of the
development site if clustering concepts are used and the project retains
acceptable open space.
DESIGN, SUBDIVISION.  Street alignment, grades and widths, alignment and widths
of easements and right-of-way for drainage and sanitary sewers and the
arrangement and orientation of lots.
DEVELOPMENT MASTER PLAN (DMP). A land-use plan focused on one or more sites
within an area that identifies site access and general improvements and is
intended to guide a specific development over a number of years, and/or in
several phases.    
DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DEPARTMENT. The Development Services Department and
Planning Department of the Town are synonymous and all such terms shall mean
the Development Services Department.
DRIVE-IN THEATER. An open-air theater where the performance is viewed by all,
or part of the audience from motor vehicles.
DUPLEX. A building designed exclusively for occupancy by or occupied by two (2)
families living independently of each other.
DWELLING UNIT. A room or group of rooms within a dwelling containing one (1)
cooking accommodation occupied exclusively by one or more persons living as a
single non-profit family housekeeping unit.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building designed exclusively for occupancy by or
occupied by three (3) or more families living independently of each other.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building designed exclusively for occupancy by or
occupied by one (1) family for residential purposes.
EASEMENT. A space on a lot or parcel of land reserved or used for location and/
or access to utilities, drainage or other physical access purposes.
EGRESS. The movement of traffic from abutting properties to streets and the
movement from residential streets to collector streets or arterial streets.
ERECT. The word “erect” includes built, built upon, added to, altered,
constructed, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the land
required for a building.
FAMILY. An individual, or two or more persons related by blood or marriage, or
a group of persons not related by blood or marriage living together as single
housekeeping group in a dwelling unit.
FARMING. (See Agriculture)
FEED LOT. A structure or parcel of land in which livestock, including cattle,
horses, goats, swine, sheep, fowl, or any other animals kept for the purpose of
feeding or fattening for subsequent sale at market.
FENCE. Any device built to enclose a parcel of land, to separate two parcels of
land, or to separate a parcel of land into different areas.
FINAL PLAT. A map of all or part of a subdivision essentially conforming to an
approved preliminary plat, prepared in accordance with the provisions of these
regulations.
FLOOR AREA, NET USEABLE. That portion of a building or structure directly used
for the purpose of the building. Useable floor area does not include; halls,
kitchens, bathrooms, etc.
FRONT YARD SETBACK. The minimum allowable distance from the ultimate street
right-of-way line to the closest point of the foundation of a building or
projection thereof, parking lot, or any accessory structure. In commercial,
industrial, and multi-family zones, the front yard setback must be landscaped.
FRONTAGE, CUL-DE-SAC AND KNUCKLE LOTS. The minimum lot frontage for cul-de-sac
and knuckle lots. Such frontage is determined as follows: beginning from the
points where the side property lines intersect the road, measure 30 feet back
along the side property lines, then measure the distance between these two
points.
FRONTAGE STREET. A street which is nearby and parallel to a major arterial or
collector street and provides a means of direct ingress and egress to abutting
property and protection from through traffic on such major arterial or
collector street.
FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY. The right-of-way needed for the establishment of a planned
roadway as designated by Ordinance No. 08-707, specifically in Subsection
4.28 of the UDO.
GARAGE, PRIVATE. A building, or portion thereof, used for the shelter or
storage of self-propelled vehicles, and owned and operated by the occupants of
a main building wherein there is no service or storage for compensation.
GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any building, except one herein defined as a private garage,
used for the storage, care, or repair of self-propelled vehicles or where any
such vehicles are equipped for operation or kept for hire.
GENERAL PLAN. A statement of land development policies, which may include maps,
charts, graphs and texts which set forth the objectives, principles and
standards for growth and redevelopment of the Town enacted by the Council
pursuant to the provisions of A.R.S. Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 6.
GREENHOUSE. A greenhouse structure, in which temperature and humidity can be
controlled for the cultivation or protection of plants.
GREENHOUSE, COMMERCIAL. A commercial greenhouse is a commercial enterprise that
grows plants or parts of plants by the application of water to plants that
reside within movable containers, raised beds or lined beds that are
disconnected from the lands and are not deemed to be “irrigated lands” as set
forth in Arizona Revised Statutes.
GROUP HOME. A residential facility for six (6) or more unrelated persons
providing living facilities, sleeping rooms, and meals, and which shall have a
permit issued by the Yavapai County Health Department as a boarding home.
GUESTHOUSE. Living or sleeping quarters for the sole use of occupants of the
premises, guests of such occupants or persons employed on the premises. Such
quarters shall not be rented and/or otherwise listed for income purposes.
“Guesthouse” does not include recreational vehicles as defined in this article.
HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation, profession, activity, or use which is clearly a
customary, incidental, and secondary use of a residential dwelling unit and
which does not alter the exterior of the property or affect the residential
character of the neighborhood.
HOSPITAL. A facility for the reception, care and medical treatment for the sick
or injured.
HOTEL. A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for
compensation and which is open to transient guests.
HOUSEHOLD PET. The keeping of “pets” such as dogs and cats are allowed in all
zoning districts. This provision also allows for the keeping of indoor birds
(such as parrots, parakeets and canaries), fish and other indoor pets which
must be at all times kept within a fully enclosed dwelling or accessory
building provided there are not odors, noise, insects, or other nuisances
caused by the keeping of such animals which would affect the health and welfare
of the occupants of surrounding properties.
ILLUMINATED. As to signs, artificially lighted by an electrical source, either
internally or externally, except where the light source is specifically and
clearly operated for the purpose of lighting the general area in which the sign
is located rather than the sign itself.
IMPROVEMENTS. Required installations, pursuant to these regulations, including
but not limited to, sewer and water facilities, including fire hydrants and
manholes, streets, grading, base, paving, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street
name signs, street lights and street trees, bridges, courts, public utilities,
drainage, storm water system, survey monuments and markers, lot grading,
easements, and traffic control devices, as a condition to approvals under
Section
1.9 and Section
5.
INDUSTRIAL. The production and/or manufacture of goods.
INGRESS. The movement of traffic from streets to abutting properties and the
movement from arterial streets or collector streets to residential streets.
INTERSECTION. The point of crossing or meeting of two (2) or more streets.
KENNEL, INDOOR. A facility for the commercial boarding, breeding and training
of dogs and/or cats in which all animals are confined indoors.
KENNEL, INDOOR/OUTDOOR. A facility for the commercial boarding, breeding, and
training of dogs and/or cats in which all animals are confined indoors with the
exception of the use of daytime exercise runs.
KENNEL, OUTDOOR. A facility for the commercial boarding, breeding and training
of dogs and/or cats in which the animals may be worked or housed in outdoor
runs.
KNUCKLE. The outermost edge of a rounded or curved area of roadway or land that
connects other sections of road, often used in subdivisions where roads bend.
See frontage, cul-de-sac and knuckle.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b6f5d098a7b871b095504dfa79f111b7d1d8fa7c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-486.png]
 
LAND SPLIT. The division of improved or unimproved land whose area is 2 ½ acres
or less, whether immediate or future, into two or three tracts of parcels of
land for the purpose of sale or lease.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING. Fabrication and assembly of finished products, or
subassemblies thereof, so long as the primary use of the property is not the
basic processing or compounding of raw materials or food products.
LIGHTING, CLASS I. All outdoor lighting used for but not limited to outdoor
sales or eating areas, assembly or repair areas, advertising and other signs,
recreational facilities and other similar applications where color rendition is
important.
LIGHTING, CLASS II. All outdoor lighting used for but not limited to
illumination for walkways, roadways, equipment yards, parking lots and outdoor
security where general illumination of the grounds is the primary concern.
LIGHTING, CLASS III. Any outdoor lighting used for decorative effects,
including but not limited to architectural illumination, flag monument
lighting, and illumination of trees, bushes, etc.
LIGHTING, MULTI-CLASS. Any outdoor lighting used for more than one purpose,
such as security and decoration, when those purposes fall under the definitions
for two (2) or more lighting classes as defined for Class 1, 2 and 3 Lighting
above.
LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENT shall be construed to mean the department, board or
agency furnishing health services within the incorporated area of the Town.
LOCAL STREET. A street, with or without parking facilities used primarily for
direct access to and from residential, commercial and industrial areas having
major service functions of loading and unloading, and direct access to and from
abutting property, controlled in such manner as to discourage through traffic
and to maintain relatively slow speed.
LOT. A piece or parcel of land, excluding tracts, legally created, whether by
subdivision plat, land split or otherwise, to be used or occupied in
conformance with this Ordinance.
LOT AREA. The horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot.
LOT COVERAGE. That portion of a lot or building site, which is occupied by any
building or
structure, excepting paved areas, walks, and swimming pools.
LOT DEPTH. The horizontal length of a straight line connecting the front and
rear lot lines along the greatest length.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having street frontage on both the front and rear
property lines.
LOT, FLAG. A lot as defined and depicted in this Code and created in a land
split.
LOT FRONTAGE. The length at the front line of a lot which borders upon a street
measured at the wider of said front lot line in accordance with the definition
of average lot width, but which shall not be less than 25 feet at the front lot
line/border with said street.
LOT LINE. The line bounding a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT. In the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from
the street, and in the case of a corner lot, the line separating the narrowest
street frontage of the lot from the street. In the case of a lot served by a
private driveway, the side of the lot nearest to the street which abuts the
driveway.
LOT LINE, REAR. A lot line, which is opposite and most distant from the front
lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE. Those lot lines connecting the front and rear lines.
LOT WIDTH, AVERAGE. The distance between side lot lines measured thirty (30)
feet behind the required minimum front yard line parallel to the street or
street chord.
MANUFACTURED HOME. Has the meaning set forth in A.R.S. § 41-4001(25), as
amended, pursuant to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards Act of 1974 and Title VI of the Housing and Community Development Act
of 1974 (P.L. 93-383, as amended by P.L. 95-128, 95-557, 96-153 and 96-339).
“Manufactured home” does not include recreational vehicles as defined in this
article. The removal of the wheels and running gear shall not change the
meaning of this term. When constructed to conform with the Town’s building
ordinances, modular homes and factory-built buildings are considered single-
family or permanent multi-family dwellings and are not manufactured homes.
MARQUEE. A canopy constructed of rigid materials which projects over a window
or entrance to a building.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA. All parts of the genus cannabis whether growing or not, and
the seed of such plants that may be administered and used by a registered
qualifying patient, as that term is defined in A.R.S. § 36-2801, solely to
treat or alleviate the patient’s debilitating medical condition or symptoms
associated with the patient’s debilitating medical condition.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION. The process by which a person grows a marijuana
plant for use as medical marijuana.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITY, OFF-SITE. A building, structure, or
other enclosed, locked facility used for the cultivation or storage of medical
marijuana that is physically separate and not located on the same real property
as the medical marijuana dispensary with which it is affiliated pursuant to
A.R.S. § 36-2806(e).
MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITY, ON-SITE. A medical marijuana facility
that is located on the same property as the medical marijuana dispensary with
which it is affiliated pursuant to A.R.S. § 36-2806(e), whether attached or
not.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY. A not-for-profit facility that, pursuant to
A.R.S. § 36-2801(11), is registerred with and certified by the Arizona
Department of Health Services to acquire, posses, cultivate, manufacture or
infuse, deliver, transfer, transport, supply, sell, or dispense medical
marijuana to qualifying patients and cardholders, as that term is defined in
A.R.S. § 36-2801.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA FACILITIES. Medical marijuana dispensaries, medical marijuana
cultivation facilities (on or off-site), and medical marijuana infusion
facilities.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA INFUSION FACILITY. A facility that incorporates medical
marijuana by the means of cooking, blending, infusing, or otherwise combining
medical marijuana into consumable, ingestible, or edible goods.
METAL STORAGE CONTAINER. A steel or other metal storage container, sometimes
referred to as a cargo container, “CONEX box,” or intermodal shipping
container, which is independent of any trailer or axles and is commercially
produced and designed for the purposes of storage of personal or commercial
belongings or products and is generally unmodified except for passive
ventilation. This does not include tractor-trailers, boxcars, or vehicle cargo
boxes or bodies.
MOBILE HOMES. (See Manufactured homes)
MODULAR HOME. A type of factory-built building built for human occupancy as a
residence. “Modular home” does not include a manufactured home or recreational
vehicle as defined in this section.
MOTOR HOME. A recreational vehicle as defined in A.R.S. § 41-4001(33)(b), as
amended.
MOTEL. A building or group of buildings containing guest rooms or apartments,
each of which maintains a separate outside entrance, used primarily for the
accommodation of motorists and providing automobile parking space on the
premises.
NON-CONFORMING SIGN. A sign that was lawfully established prior to the
effective date of this chapter or amendments thereto; or was lawfully
established in another political jurisdiction prior to annexation to the Town;
and that does not conform to the regulations for signs for the district in
which it is located.
NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE. A structure which was lawfully erected prior to the
adoption of this Ordinance, or any amendment there to or any annexation to the
Town, which does not conform with the standards of lot coverage, yard spaces,
height structures, distance between structures or other standards prescribed in
the regulations for the district in which the structure is located.
NON-CONFORMING USE. A structure or land which was lawfully established and
maintained prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, or any amendment thereto or
any annexation to the Town, which does not conform to the use regulations for
the district in which it is located.
NON-HOUSEHOLD ANIMALS. The keeping of non-household animals such as horses,
cattle, sheep, goats, swine, or any breed, strain, or crossbreed thereof, bees,
poultry and other non-household birds shall be prohibited except in those
zoning districts in which they are specifically allowed. A minimum lot size of
one acre is required except as approved for project animals.
NOTICES, PUBLIC. As required for public notice of zoning change, or proposed
subdivision change.
NUISANCE. Any thing, condition, or use of property that endangers life or
health, gives offense to the senses, and/or obstructs the reasonable and
comfortable use of other property.
NURSERY. A commercial operation for the growth and sale of plants, storage of
equipment for landscaping, and the wholesale or retail sale of commercial
gardening supplies.
NURSING HOME. A health care institution other than a hospital or personal care
home that is licensed by the State Department of Health Services as a skilled
nursing facility for two (2) or more unrelated persons.
OFFICE. A room or rooms and accessory facilities for the managing or conducting
of a business.
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES. A site or a portion of a site
devoted to the off-street parking of motor vehicles including parking spaces,
aisles, and access drives.
OPEN HOUSE DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A sign used to advertise the sale of a house and
direct traffic to the house for sale.
ORDINANCE. The Town’s Unified Development Ordinance, unless the context or
commonly understood usage implies otherwise, and shall include “the Ordinance”
or “this Ordinance” or “UDO”.
OUTDOOR STORAGE. The location of any goods, services, wares, merchandise,
commodities, junk, debris, vehicles, or any other item outside of a completely
enclosed building for a continuous period longer than seventy-two (72) hours.
PARCEL. Any legally described piece of land designated by the owner or
developer as land to be used or developed as a unit.
PARENT PARCEL. All of the property from which a lot, parcel or tract was
divided, whether by subdivision or land split. For the purposes of determining
the number of lots, parcels or tracts created from a parent parcel, the parent
parcel shall be any lot, parcel or tract existing pursuant to applicable law
and recorded in the Yavapai County Recorder’s Office on or before October 15,
2020.
PARK. A public or private parcel of land developed and used for passive or
active recreation.
PARK MODEL TRAILERS; PARK TRAILERS. A recreational vehicle as defined in A.R.S.
§ 41-4001(33)(c), as amended. A park model or a park trailer shall not be
considered a single-family or multifamily permanent dwelling, shall not be used
as a guesthouse, and shall be restricted to mobile home parks, RV parks, and
trailer parks.
PARKING AREA. An area designed and constructed and used exclusively for the
parking, storage, and maneuvering of vehicles.
PERMIT. A document issued by the Town granting permission to perform an act or
service which is regulated by the Town.
PHOTOVOLTAIC. Arrays of cells containing a solar voltaic material that converts
solar radiation into direct current electricity.
PETITION. All forms, applications, documents, and papers required by this
Ordinance when requesting action by the Commission, Council or any other public
body.
PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT. “Planned Area Development” is a development approach
allowed under the Ordinance and the General Plan in which dwelling units are
clustered in order to maximize economy, infrastructure, and open space. For the
purposes of this title, “Cluster Zoning” or “Clustering” shall mean the same as
a “Planned Area Development.”
PLAT. A map of a subdivision and associated required information which provides
for changes in land use or ownership or which describes existing uses.
PORTABLE CAMPING TRAILER. A recreational vehicle as defined in A.R.S. § 41-4001
(33)(a), as amended.
PRELIMINARY PLAT. A preliminary map including supporting data, indicating a
proposed subdivision design and prepared in accordance with these regulations.
PRIVATE DRIVEWAY. A deeded portion of a lot or parcel, which is not less than
twenty-five (25) feet in width providing access to the public street system.
PRIVATE STREET. A street within a subdivision that has not been dedicated for
public use and is reserved for the use of lot owners within the subdivision and
their guests and invitees.
PRIVATE UTILITY. A corporation or entity that provides essential services such
as electricity, water, sewer, natural gas, or telecommunications directly to
the general public and is not owned by a public service corporation subject to
the jurisdiction of the Arizona Corporation Commission, a governmental entity,
or a political subdivision of the State of Arizona, or otherwise operating
within the corporate limits of the Town pursuant to a franchise or license
agreement permitted by State law and granted by the Town. These do not include
utility generation facilities.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. Any building, structure, or portion thereof used or
intended to be used as an office for a lawyer, architect, engineer, surveyor,
planner, optometrist, accountant, doctor, dentist, or other similar
professions.
PROPERTY LINE(S). Those lines defining the boundaries of lots.
PUBLIC. Ownership is held by the Town.
PUBLIC BUILDING. Facilities for conducting public business by various public
agencies, including all federal, state, County, and Town offices and buildings.
PUBLIC HEARING. Hearings held as required by law.
PUBLIC NUISANCE. Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of
the inhabitants of the Town; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a
hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or
to the community.
PUBLIC STREET. A right-of-way containing a roadway accepted for maintenance by
the Town and part of the public street system.
PUBLIC STREET SYSTEM. The system of public streets designated by the Town.
PUBLIC USE does NOT imply ownership by the Town, but has been used by the
public for an undetermined amount of time.
PUBLIC USE ACCESS SYSTEM. A system being part of the future right-of-way map
designating rights-of-way and access ways being used for vehicular access by
local residents and which exist as such at the date of the adoption of this
amendment.
PUBLIC UTILITY. A corporation or entity that provides essential services such
as electricity, water, sewer, natural gas, or telecommunications directly to
the general public and is owned by a public service corporation subject to the
jurisdiction of the Arizona Corporation Commission, a governmental entity, or a
political subdivision of the State of Arizona, or otherwise operating within
the corporate limits of the Town pursuant to a franchise or license agreement
permitted by State law and granted by the Town. These do not include utility
generation facilities.
QUORUM. A majority of the members of a Committee, Board, Commission, Council or
other authorized elected or appointed entity of the Town.
RADIAL. A line forming right angles with the tangent of any given arc.
RECORDED PLAT. A final plat bearing all of the certificates of approval
required by these regulations and any other applicable statutes.
RECOVERY RESIDENCE. A dwelling unit or building used to provide a stable, clean
and sober environment for individuals recovering from substance abuse.
Individual residents do not live together as a single housekeeping unit and
every person residing in the residence (excluding the house manager) is an
“individual with a disability”, as that term is used in the federal and state
fair housing laws.
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES. Includes buildings, structures or areas built or
developed for purposes of entertaining, exercising, or observing various
activities participated in either actively or passively by individuals or
organized groups other than the immediate families of the owners or proprietors
and their personal guests; or any such facility which involves twenty-five (25)
or more attendees and participants, more often than twice in any one calendar
month. This excludes churches and schools.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV). Has the meaning set forth in A.R.S. § 41-4001(33),
as amended.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. Facilities for the temporary storage, parking and
maneuvering of recreational vehicles (motor homes, travel trailers, campers,
etc.) with adequate roads and stall sites, including sanitary and water
facilities. Does not constitute a mobile home park.
RESTAURANT. An establishment that serves food or beverages. This includes
cafes, tearooms, drive-ins and similar establishments.
RETAIL STORE. A commercial business for selling goods, services, wares, or
merchandise directly to the customer.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any public or private right-of-way including any area required
for public use pursuant to any general or specific plan enacted by the Council
pursuant to Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 6, Arizona Revised Statutes.
ROADWAY. The actual surface area of any public street, right-of-way, or access
way utilized for vehicular travel on any street.
SALE, PROPERTY. Any transfer or conveyance of a lot or parcel of real estate,
or an interest therein which is or may become a fee interest.
SALVAGE YARD. Any land or building used for the abandonment, storage, keeping,
collecting, or bailing of paper, rags, scrap metals, other scrap or discarded
materials, or for the abandonment, demolition, dismantling, storage, or
salvaging of automobiles or other vehicles not in running condition, or
machinery, or parts thereof for commercial purposes.
SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY, JUNIOR HIGH, HIGH SCHOOL. Public and other nonprofit
institutions, conducting regular academic instruction at kindergarten,
elementary, and secondary levels.
SCHOOL, NURSERY. A school or the use of a site or a portion of a site for an
organized program devoted to the education or day care of five (5) or more
children of elementary school age or younger, other than those residents on the
site. Includes day care  center.
SCHOOL, TRADE. Schools offering instruction in the technical, commercial, or
trade skills, such as real estate schools, business colleges, electronics
schools, automotive and aircraft technicians’ schools, and similar commercial
establishments.
SCREENING FENCE. A wooden, masonry or slatted chain-link fence, which is at
least ninety (90) percent opaque or is otherwise approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
SERVICE STATION. An occupancy engaged in the retail sales of gasoline, oil,
tires, batteries, and new accessories and which provides for the servicing of
motor vehicles and operations incidental thereto, including: automobile
washing, washing, waxing and polishing, tire changing and repairing, but not
including recapping. May also include battery service, radiator cleaning,
flushing and repair, installation of minor accessories, lubrication of motor
vehicles, rental of utility trailers, testing, adjustment and replacement of
motor parts and accessories.
SHOPPING CENTER. A group of three (3) or more commercial establishments
associated by common agreement or under common ownership, which comprises
contiguous land parcel unit with common parking facilities.
SIDEWALK. That paved portion of a right-of-way between the curb lines or
lateral lines of the street bed and the boundary line of such right-of-way
designed and intended for the movement and use of pedestrian traffic.
SIGN. Any name, identification, description, illustration, display, symbol or
device which is affixed to, painted, or represented directly or indirectly upon
the exterior of a building, or other outdoor surface which directs attention to
or is designed or intended to direct attention to the sign face or to an
object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or
business. Signs do not include such items when located within an enclosed
structure or an enclosed patio.
SIGN, A-FRAME. A portable, stand-alone sign comprised of two separate panels or
faces joined at the top and spread apart at the bottom to form a base upon
which the sign stands.
SIGN, AUXILIARY. An A-frame sign, banner, pennant, or feather sign used to
supplement a use’s permanent signage.
SIGN, AWNING. A sign painted, installed, mounted, attached or otherwise applied
to or located directly on an awning, canopy, marquee, or other covering
structure attached to a building storefront, window, doorway, or deck.
SIGN, BANNER.  A temporary sign or auxiliary sign of fabric, plastic, paper, or
other light pliable material that is not enclosed in a rigid frame.
SIGN, BILLBOARD.  Same as sign, off-site or off-premise.
SIGN COPY.  Any words, letters, numbers, figures, designs, or other symbolic
representations incorporated onto the face of a sign.
SIGN, ELECTRONIC.  A sign that is static and changes messages by any electronic
process or remote control.
SIGN FACE.  The area or display surface used for the message.
SIGN, FEATHER. A portable, stand-alone sign consisting of vertical pole onto
which is attached a sign made of fabric, plastic or other light, pliable
material.
SIGN, FIGURATIVE. A sign using graphics, crafted symbols, or sculpted materials
to present the message of the sign. Figurative signs may be incorporated into
any of the allowable sign types identified in this Ordinance.
SIGN, FREESTANDING. A sign erected and maintained on a frame, mast, pole, or
other structure which is not attached to any building.
SIGN, MONUMENT. A freestanding ground-mounted sign with an aggregate width of
at least fifty percent (50%) of the width of the sign and with supports that
complement the materials and colors used in the architecture on-site.
SIGN, OFF-SITE OR OFF-PREMISE. A sign that directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, entertainment, product or attraction sold, offered, or
existing elsewhere than upon the property where the sign is located.
SIGN, PARAPET.  A sign attached to that portion of a building's exterior wall
that projects above the plane line of the building.
SIGN, PENNANT OR STREAMER. Any piece of lightweight plastic, fabric or other
material suspended from a pole, wire, or string, displayed in series and
capable of movement in the wind.
SIGN, PORTABLE.  A temporary sign not affixed to a structure or ground-mounted
on a site.
SIGN, PROJECTING.  A sign attached to a building or other structure and
extending in whole or in part not more than twelve inches (12") beyond the
building or other structure to which it is attached.
SIGN, READER PANEL. A sign which is designed to permit immediate change of
copy.
SIGN, ROOF. A sign erected on, above, or over the roof so that it projects
above the highest point of the roofline, parapet, or fascia.
SIGN, SHINGLE. A sign suspended from, and located entirely under a covered
porch, covered walkway, or an awning and is anchored or rigidly hung to prevent
the sign from swinging due to wind movement.
SIGN, SPECIAL EVENT (PROMOTIONAL). Any signs used for temporary, auxiliary or
promotional purposes for uses that have already installed permanent signs.
Temporary signs installed prior to permanent signage shall not be considered
special event signs.
SIGN, TEMPORARY. Any sign, banner, pennant or streamer, valance, or advertising
display constructed of light fabric, cloth, canvas, wall board, or other light
materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a limited
period of time until a business’ permanent signage is installed.
SIGN, VEHICLE.  A sign mounted, painted or otherwise placed on a truck, bus,
car, boat, trailer or other vehicle or equipment and used in such a manner that
the sign is visible from a public street or right-of-way where the primary
purpose of the vehicle or equipment is to display the signage. The primary
purpose of the vehicle or equipment shall be presumed to be to display such
signage if (a) the vehicle or equipment is not in operating condition,
currently registered or licensed to operate on public streets or actively used
in the daily function of the business to which the signs relate; or (b) is used
primarily as a static display for the display of the signage. Vehicles and
equipment engaged in active construction projects and on-premise storage of
equipment and vehicles offered to the general public for rent or lease shall
not be considered to be vehicle signs.
SIGN, WALL.  A sign fastened to or painted on the exterior wall of a building
or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure
for, or forms the background surface of the sign.
SIGN, WINDOW.  Any poster, cut-out letters, painted text or graphic, or other
text or visual presentation affixed to the interior or exterior of a window, or
placed within six (6) feet behind a window pane that is placed to be read from
the exterior of a building. This does not include any item of merchandise
normally displayed within a store window of a merchant.
SIGHT VISIBILITY TRIANGLE. The area of a corner lot bounded by the right-of-way
lines and a line connecting the two points on the property lines twenty-five
(25) feet from the intersection of the property lines.
SINGLE HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. An interactive group of persons occupying a
residential unit where all of the following are true:
   a.   The residents share use of and responsibility for common areas,
household activities, and responsibilities such as meals, chores, household
maintenance, and expenses; and
   b.   If the residents are renters, all adult residents have chosen to occupy
the entire premises of the dwelling unit together under a single written lease
with joint use and responsibility for the premises; and
   c.   The makeup of the household occupying the unit is determined by the
residents of the unit rather than the landlord or property manager.
SITE PLAN. A plan prepared to scale showing the boundaries of a site and the
proposed location of all buildings and structures, circulation, landscaping,
improvements and open space areas, all in compliance with the provisions of
this code.
SLAUGHTERHOUSE. A structure or parcel of land in which livestock, including
cattle, horses, goats, swine, sheep, fowl, or any other animals are killed,
skinned, gutted, or otherwise prepared for subsequent sale as food. This shall
not include retail butcher shops when operated within a completely enclosed
building in which no livestock is killed, skinned, or gutted.
SOLAR ARRAY. A large number of solar panels, or an interconnected system of
solar panels, or an integrated system of solar panels, that deliver the on-site
generated electricity to a single connection point and at a desired voltage.
SOLAR FACILITY. A facility or site where sunlight is converted into electricity
using photovoltaics or other sunlight conversion technology, along with the
necessary equipment for generating electricity. A solar facility may also
include electrical substations, transformers, transmission lines, and Battery
Energy Storage Systems.
SOLAR FACILITY USE PERMIT. A permit signifying that the developer has
completed, or agreed to complete through a development agreement, all project
conditions and requirements. A solar facility use permit is required before the
Town can approve a project.
SOLAR PANEL. Multiple photovoltaic cells interconnected in an electrical
circuit, which may be connected to an exterior circuit at a single point.
SOLAR PROJECT AREA. The total acreage encompassed by a solar facility,
including buffers, wildlife corridors, and other areas that remain unfenced and
undisturbed.
SPECIFIC PLAN. A detailed element of the General Plan enacted under the
provisions of Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 6, Arizona Revised Statutes.
STABLE, COMMERCIAL. A structure including, but not limited to a corral or
paddock for the keeping of horses for remuneration, hire, or sale.
STABLE, PRIVATE. A detached accessory structure including, but not limited to,
a corral or paddock for the keeping of one or more horses owned or leased by
the occupants of the premises and which are not kept for remuneration or hire.
STORM SEWER. A channel or conduit, open or closed, necessary, useful or
convenient for the collection and carrying of surface waters to a drainage
course.
STREET. Any existing or proposed parkway, avenue, boulevard, road, lane,
parkway, place, bridge, viaduct or easement for public vehicular access or
areas identified on a plat, whether public or private, heretofore approved
pursuant to law or a street in a plat duly filed and recorded in the Yavapai
County Recorder’s office, that provides legal vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle
access to every lot in the Subdivision. A street includes all land within the
street right-of-way whether improved or unimproved, and includes such
improvements as pavement, shoulders, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, parking space
and bridges.
STREET LINES. The boundary line between street right-of-way and abutting
property.
STREET, NEW. Any addition or extension of the public use access system.
STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected which requires a fixed location on
the ground, including building but not including a fence or wall used as a
fence.
STUB STREET. A short dead end street no more than one lot deep in length formed
at the boundaries of a subdivision to provide access to abutting property.
SUBDIVIDER. A person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, syndicate,
trust or other legal entity that files application and initiates proceedings
for the subdivision of land in accordance with the provisions of these
regulations or any other applicable ordinance or state statute, except that an
individual serving as an agent for such legal entity is not a subdivider.
SUBDIVISION. Improved or unimproved land or lands divided for the purpose of
financing, sale, or lease, whether immediate or future, into four or more lots,
tracts, or parcels of land, or, if a new street is involved, any such property
which is divided into two or more lots, tracts, or parcels of land, or any such
property, the boundaries of which have been fixed by a recorded plat, which is
divided into more than two parts. “Subdivision” also includes any condominium,
cooperative, community apartment, Townhouse or similar project containing four
or more parcels, in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the
right of exclusive occupancy of any unit located thereon, but plats of such
projects need not show the buildings or the manner in which the buildings or
airspace above the property shown on the plat are to be divided.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR. Improved or unimproved land or lands divided for the
purpose of financing, sale or lease, whether immediate or future, into more
than ten (10) lots, tracts, or parcels of land, or, if a new street is
involved, any such property which is divided into two (2) or more lots, tracts
or parcels of land, or any such property, the boundaries of which have been
fixed by a recorded plat, which is divided into more than two (2) parts.
Subdivision also includes any condominium, cooperative, community apartment,
Townhouse or similar project containing four or more parcels, in which an
undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy
of any unit located thereon, but plats of such projects need not show the
buildings or the manner in which the buildings or airspace above the property
shown on the plat are to be divided.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR. Improved or unimproved land or lands divided for the
purpose of financing, sale or lease, whether immediate or future, into between
four (4) and ten (10) lots, tracts, or parcels of land, or, if a new street is
involved, any such property which is divided into two (2) or more lots, tracts
or parcels of land, or any such property, the boundaries of which have been
fixed by a recorded plat, which is divided into more than two (2) parts.
Subdivision also includes any condominium, cooperative, community apartment,
townhouse or similar project containing four (4) or more parcels, in which an
undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy
of any unit located thereon, but plats of such projects need not show the
buildings or the manner in which the buildings or airspace above the property
shown on the plat are to be divided.
SWIMMING POOL. Any structure, containing or intended to contain water for
recreational uses.
TOWN. The Town of Chino Valley, Arizona, including the departments and
employees of the Town authorized to enforce the regulations set forth in this
Ordinance.
TOWN ENGINEER. The individual designated by the Town Manager, pursuant to the
provisions of A.R.S. § 9-238, to serve as Town Engineer.
TRACT. A piece of land identified for a specific purpose within a subdivision.
Land with this identification is not intended to be a lot.
TRADITIONAL DEVELOPMENT. A residential development approach where lots are
relatively uniform in size and dispersed consistently throughout the
development and streets are generally laid out in a standard grid pattern.
TRAVEL TRAILER. A recreational vehicle as defined in A.R.S. § 41-4001(33)(d),
as amended.
TRUCK CAMPER. A recreational vehicle as defined in A.R.S. § 41-4001(33)(e), as
amended.
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE means that Ordinance enacted by the Council
regulating the use of land or structures or both.
USE. The purpose for which a site or structure is arranged, designed, intended,
constructed, moved, erected, altered, or enlarged, or for which either a site
or structure is or may be occupied and maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY. A subordinate use of a building, other structure, or use of
land:
   1.   Accessory uses shall not be established prior to the issuance of a
building permit for the primary residence or commercial building.
   2.   Which is clearly incidental to the use of the main building, other
structure, or use of land, and
   3.   Which is customarily in connection with the main building, other
structure, or use of land, and
   4.   Which is located on the same zoned lot with the main building, other
structure, or use of land.
USE, CONDITIONAL. A use, which is listed as a “conditional use” in any given
zone district. Such use shall require a “Conditional Use Permit” in order to
establish within that zone district, and shall be subject to all conditions and
requirements imposed by the Commission in connection with the “Conditional Use
Permit.”
USE, PERMITTED. A use, which is listed as a “Permitted use” in any given zone
district. Such use shall be allowed to establish within that zone district,
subject to the specific requirements of this Ordinance.
USE, TEMPORARY. Unless otherwise previously approved by Council, a use that
does not exceed fifteen (15) consecutive days.
UTILITY AREA. An area located external to the primary building or use
including, but not limited to, refuse containers/dumpsters; storage; display of
materials or merchandise; loading or unloading goods, production assembly, and
processing or demolition of goods.
UTILITY GENERATION FACILITIES. A facility or installation that generates
electricity for distribution to the public through a utility grid. These
facilities can utilize various energy sources, including fossil fuels (such as
coal or natural gas), nuclear power, or renewable resources (such as solar,
wind, hydroelectric, or geothermal). The primary purpose of a utility
generation facility is to produce electrical power on a large scale, typically
for sale to public or private utilities which then distribute the electricity
to consumers.
VARIANCE. A dispensation permitted on individual parcels of property as a
method of alleviating unnecessary hardship by allowing a reasonable use of the
building, structure, or property, which, because of unusual or unique
circumstances, is denied by the terms of the Unified Development Ordinance.
WAREHOUSE. A building or buildings used for the storage of goods.
WEED. An unwanted, useless, troublesome, invasive, or injurious herbaceous or
woody plant, excluding flowers and vegetable gardens, grain plots, and pastures
used for feed.
WHOLESALE. The sale of goods or materials for the purposes of resale.
WILDLIFE LINKAGE. The areas of land used by wildlife to move between or within
habitat areas to complete activities necessary for survival, reproduction, and
maintenance of the population. Such areas are identified by the Arizona Game
and Fish Department and consist of interconnecting wildlife corridors and
undisturbed lands that provide contiguous connections between habitat areas.
WIND FARM. A group of wind turbines in the same location used to produce
electricity.
WIND TURBINE. A device that converts the kinetic energy of wind into electrical
energy.
YARD. An open space on a lot required by this Ordinance, which is unoccupied
and unobstructed with buildings, structures or portions thereof from the ground
upward. Trees, shrubbery, fences, and non-commercial stables as allowed in this
Ordinance shall not be considered obstructions.
YARD, REQUIRED FRONT. A yard, the width of which is the minimum horizontal
distance, between the front lot line and the setback line that is parallel to
the front lot line and extends the full width of the lot. Any portion of a
private drive which is between the street and the front setback line shall also
be considered a required yard for building and storage purposes, but is not
used in calculating distances for average lot width or required yards.
YARD, REQUIRED REAR. A yard the width of which is the minimum horizontal
distance between the rear lot line and the setback line that is parallel to the
rear lot line and extends the full width of the lot.
YARD, REQUIRED SIDE. A yard the width of which is the minimum horizontal
distance between the side lot line and the setback line that is parallel to the
side lot line and extends the full length of the lot.
ZONE. A district classification established by this Ordinance, which limits or
permits various and specific uses.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The individual hired by the Town or appointed by the
Town Council to enforce this Ordinance, and perform the functions described in
Subsection 1.6.2 Powers and Duties.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007; Ord. 08-707,
passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729, passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 11-738, passed 1-11-
2011; Ord. 13-779, passed 12-10-2013; Ord. 14-785, passed 7-8-2014; Ord. 15-
798, passed 6-23-2015; Ord. 17-819, passed 3-14-2017; Ord. 2020-878, passed 1-
28-2020; Ord. 2020-885, passed 9-8-2020; Ord. 2021-899, passed 3-23-2021; Ord.
2022-923, passed 10-11-2022; Ord. 2024-943, passed 9-10-2024; Ord. 2024-941,
passed 10-22-2024)
3 ZONING DISTRICTS
3.1 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
In order to carry out the purpose of this Ordinance, the Town is hereby divided
into the following zoning districts:
“OS”       Open Space/Resource Conservation
“AR-36”      Agricultural/Residential - 36 Acre Minimum
“AR-5”      Agricultural/Residential - 5 Acre Minimum
“AR-4”      Agricultural/Residential - 4 Acre Minimum
“SR-2.5”    Single Family Residential - 2.5 Acre Minimum
“SR-2”      Single Family Residential - 2 Acre Minimum
“SR-1.6”   Single Family Residential - 1.6 Acre Minimum
“SR-1”      Single Family Residential - 1 Acre Minimum
“SR-0.16”   Single Family Residential - 7,000 Square Foot Minimum Lot area 
         (Provided that all lots less than 1 acre in size must be served by a
water and sewage disposal system approved by the Town.)
“MR-1”   Multiple Family Residential - 1 acre Minimum
“MHP-4”    Mobile Home Parks - Residential - 4 acre Minimum
“CL”       Light Commercial 
“CH”       Heavy Commercial 
“I”       Industrial 
“PL”      Public Land.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-742, passed 11-9-2010)
3.2 LOCATION AND BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS 
A.   The locations and boundaries of the zoning districts are established as
they are shown on the map entitled “The Zoning map of the Town of Chino Valley”
which is hereby incorporated by reference into this Ordinance.
B.   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any zoning
districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
1.   Where district boundaries are shown as approximately following streets,
alleys, or right-of-way lines, such streets, alleys, or right-of-way lines
shall be deemed to be such boundaries.
2.   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow
the lot lines, such lot lines shall be deemed to be the boundaries.
3.   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately
parallel to the streets, alleys, or right-of-way lines, such district’s
boundaries shall be deemed as being parallel hereto and at such distance there
from as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimensions
shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the zoning map.
4.   Where the application of the above rules does not clarify the zone
boundary location, then the Board of Adjustment shall determine the location.
C.   Within newly annexed areas, the Town shall initially adopt zoning
classifications that permit densities and uses no greater than those permitted
by Yavapai County immediately before annexation. Areas, when annexed to the
Town, shall, until officially zoned by Council, be considered to be zoned to
Town classification closest to that shown on the official zoning map of Yavapai
County at the time of annexation. Such County Zoning shall apply for not more
than six (6) months. Subsequent changes in zoning of the annexed territory
shall be made according to procedures established by this Ordinance.
After annexation, and before expiration of six months from the date of
annexation, the Town shall adopt zoning classifications, which permit densities
and uses no greater than those permitted by the County immediately before
annexation. Subsequent changes in zoning of the annexed territory shall be made
according to existing procedures established by the Town for the rezoning of
the land.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
3.3 ZONING DESCRIPTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 
This subsection will describe each of the individual Zoning districts and will
contain the following information on each respective Zoning district:
A.   Purpose
B.   Permitted uses
C.   Conditional uses (if applicable)
D.   Property Development Standards
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
3.4 “OS”- OPEN SPACE RESOURCE CONSERVATION
A.   PURPOSE
The purpose of the (OS) Open Space/Resource Conservation designation is to
preserve lands as open space and to promote resource conservation. Lands so
designated shall be limited to exclusive use as trail and path systems and
other strictly prescribed recreational uses and for the preservation of
historical sites, historic agricultural uses and natural plant and animal
habitats.
B. APPLICABILITY
The (OS) Open Space/Resource Conservation Designation may be applied where the
Town wishes to strictly limit the uses of the land for the preservation of open
space and resource conservation.
C.   PERMITTED USES
Permitted uses in the OS zone shall be limited strictly to open space uses such
as public parks and play areas, trails and paths for non-motorized use, and
other recreational or commercial uses which do not adversely impact the
preservation of open space and resource conservation, such as:
1.   Agriculture, cultivation and ranching.
2.   Historical sites.
3.   Public parks and play areas.
4.   Horse trails, bike paths, walking trails and other similar non-motorized
recreational trails or paths.
D.   DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
No structures, either permanent or temporary, shall be permitted except for
accessory buildings that relate directly to the designated open space/resource
conservation use (such as restrooms, ramadas, historical buildings). Such
accessory buildings are permitted only subject to plan review by Commission and
approval by Council.
Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may be
allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted use
shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-729, passed 7-22-2010)
3.5 “AR-36” - AGRICULTURAL RESIDENTIAL
A.   PURPOSE
This district is intended to allow for agricultural activities, residences, and
customary accessory uses and buildings, and for other uses that occupy large
acreage land.
B.   PERMITTED USES
1.   One (1) single-family dwelling as the principal residence.
2.   One (1) guesthouse, with a livable square footage that does not exceed one
thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet or seventy-five (75) percent of the
total square footage under roof of the primary residence, whichever is greater,
in addition to the principal residence.
3.   Farming and agriculture, including the keeping of cattle, horses, swine,
sheep, goats, and fowl, but not feedlots, slaughterhouses, fertilizer yards, or
plants for the reduction of animal matter.
4.   Customary accessory structures, such as barns, corrals, arenas, training
tracks, coops, storage sheds, and metal storage containers (See Section 4.32)
for the care and keeping of non-household animals, fowl, produce, farm
machinery, and equipment.
5.   Home occupations.
6.   Stands for the sale of farm produce.
7.   Equestrian recreational facilities.
8.   Libraries and museums.
9.   Bed and breakfast inns.
10.   Dude ranches.
11.   Commercial ranches.
12.   Commercial stables.
C.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit Required)
1.   Privately owned and operated parks and recreation facilities.
2.   Colleges, universities, and trade schools.
3.   Golf, rod and gun, tennis, and country clubs.
4.   Rodeos, fairgrounds, and riding academies.
5.   Airports, aircraft landing fields, and ancillary buildings.
6.   Cemeteries.
7.   Livestock auctions.
8.   Public utility buildings, structures, or appurtenances thereto for public
service use. Extension of public lines in public or private right-of-way is
exempt from this requirement.
9.   Indoor and outdoor kennels.
10.   Worker housing for persons working primarily on-site.
Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may be
allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, as a permitted
use, shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.
D.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
1.   Minimum Lot Area:                  36 acres
2.   Minimum Lot Frontage:                  300 feet
3.   Minimum Front Yard Setback:            100 feet
4.   Minimum Side Yard Setback:            50 feet
5.   Minimum Street Side Yard Setback:      50 feet
6.   Minimum Rear Yard Setback:            100 feet
7.   Maximum Building Height:               50 feet
8.   Maximum Lot Coverage:               15%
(Ord. 2025-953, passed 6-225-2025)
3.6 “AR-5” - AGRICULTURAL/RESIDENTIAL 
A.   PURPOSE
This district is intended to promote and preserve low-density single-family
residential and agricultural development. Regulations and property development
standards are designed to protect the single-family residential and
agricultural character of the district and to prohibit all incompatible
activities.
B.   PERMITTED USES 
1.   One (1) single-family dwelling.
2.   One (1) guesthouse, with a livable square footage that does not exceed one
thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet or seventy-five (75) percent of the
total square footage under roof of the primary residence, whichever is greater,
in addition to the principal residence.
3.   Farming and agriculture including the keeping of cattle, horses, swine
(limited to one (1) per acre), sheep, goats, fowl, but not feed lots,
slaughterhouses, fertilizer yards or plants for the reduction of animal matter.
4.   Customary accessory structures such as barns, corrals, private arenas,
training tracks, coops, non-commercial greenhouses up to six hundred (600)
square feet, storage sheds, and metal storage containers (See UDO Section
4.32) for the care and keeping of non-household animals, fowl, produce, farm
machinery and equipment. Accessory structures shall not be permitted prior to
the issuance of a building permit for the primary residence.
5.   Home occupations.
6.   Stands for the sale of farm produce when primarily grown on site.
7.   Churches or similar places of worship.
8.   Schools and public/governmental facilities.
9.   Commercial greenhouses with a minimum of ten (10) contiguous  acres. See
Subsection
4.30 Commercial Greenhouse Development Standards.
C.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit Required)
1.   Privately owned and operated parks and recreation facilities.
2.   Colleges and universities.
3.   Golf, rod and gun, tennis and country clubs.
4.   Rodeos, livestock auctions, fairgrounds, riding academies.
5.   Cemeteries.
6.   Public utility buildings, structures, or appurtenances thereto for public
service use. Extension of public lines in public or private right-of-way is
exempt from this requirement.
7.   Indoor and outdoor kennels.
8.   Outdoor sales and storage of firewood for sale provided a residence has
been established.
9.   Feed Stores.
10.   Commercial stables.
11.    Bed and Breakfast operations with the limitation that no guest may stay
for more than seven (7) days during any consecutive thirty (30) day period.
12.   Stands for the sale of farm produce when not primarily grown on site.
13.    Workers quarters and worker housing.
14.   Residential facilities for the developmentally disabled as described in
A.R.S. §§ 36-581 and 36-582, which are licensed by the Department of Economic
Security.
15.   Recovery residences.
16.   Assisted living homes.
Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may be
allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted use
shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.
D.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   
1.   Minimum Lot Area:                   5 acres
2.   Minimum Lot Frontage:                200 feet
3.   Minimum Front Yard Set Back:             See Section
4.28 
4.   Minimum Interior Side Yard set Back:       20 feet
5.   Minimum Street Side Yard Set Back:       See Section
4.28
6.   Minimum Rear Yard Set Back:             20 feet
7.   Maximum Building Height:                35 feet
8.   Accessory Building shall be setback 10 feet from side and rear property
lines and must conform to the front yard and street side yard setback.
9.   Maximum Lot Coverage:                50%
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729,
passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 11-738, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 13-779, passed 12-10-
2013; Ord. 14-785, passed 7-8-2014; Ord. 16-811, passed 1-26-2016; Ord. 2020-
881, passed 6-23-2020; Ord. 2024-943, passed 9-10-2024)
3.7 “AR-4” - AGRICULTURAL/RESIDENTIAL 
A.   PURPOSE
This district is intended to promote and preserve low-density single-family
residential and agricultural development. Regulations and property development
standards are designed to protect the single-family residential and
agricultural character of the district and to prohibit all incompatible
activities.
B.   PERMITTED USES 
1.   One (1) single-family dwelling.
2.   One (1) guesthouse, with a livable square footage that does not exceed one
thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet or seventy-five (75) percent of the
total square footage under roof of the primary residence, whichever is greater,
in addition to the principal residence.
3.   Farming and agriculture including the keeping of cattle, horses, swine
(limited to one (1) per acre), sheep, goats, fowl, but not feed lots,
slaughterhouses, fertilizer yards or plants for the reduction of animal matter.
4.   Customary accessory structures such as barns, corrals, private arenas,
training tracks, coops, non-commercial greenhouses up to six hundred (600)
square feet,storage sheds, and metal storage containers (See UDO Section
4.32) for the care and keeping of non-household animals, fowl, produce, farm
machinery and equipment. Accessory structures shall not be permitted prior to
the issuance of a building permit for the primary residence.
5.   Home occupations.
6.   Stands for the sale of farm produce when primarily grown on site.
7.   Churches or similar places of worship.
8.   Schools and public/governmental facilities.
9.   Commercial greenhouses with a minimum of ten (10) contiguous  acres. See
Section
4.30 Commercial Greenhouse Development Standards.
C.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit Required)
1.   Privately owned and operated parks and recreation facilities.
2.   Colleges and universities.
3.   Golf, rod and gun, tennis and country clubs.
4.   Rodeos, livestock auctions, fairgrounds, riding academies.
5.   Cemeteries.
6.   Public utility buildings, structures, or appurtenances thereto for public
service use. Extension of public lines in public or private right-of-way is
exempt from this requirement.
7.   Indoor and outdoor kennels.
8.   Outdoor sales and storage of firewood for sale provided a residence has
been established.
9.   Feed Stores.
10.   Commercial stables.
11.    Bed and Breakfast operations with the limitation that no guest may stay
for more than seven (7) days during any consecutive thirty (30) day period.
12.   Stands for the sale of farm produce when not primarily grown on site.
13.   Workers quarters and worker housing.
14.   Residential facilities for the developmentally disabled as described in
A.R.S. §§ 36-581 and 36-582, which are licensed by the Department of Economic
Security.
15.   Recovery residences.
16.   Assisted living homes.
Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may be
allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted use
shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.
D.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
1.   Minimum Lot area:             4 acres
2.   Minimum lot frontage:          200 feet
3.   Minimum Front yard Set Back:       See Section
4.28
4.   Minimum Interior Side yard Set Back:    20 feet
5.   Minimum Street Side yard Set Back:    See Section
4.28
6.   Minimum Rear yard Set Back:       20 feet
7.   Maximum building height:       35 feet
8.   Accessory building shall be setback 10 feet from side and rear property
lines and must conform to the front yard and street side yard setback.
9.   Maximum Lot coverage:          50%
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729,
passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 11-738, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 13-779, passed 12-10-
2013; Ord. 14-785, passed 7-8-2014; Ord. 16-811, passed 1-26-2016; Ord. 2020-
881, passed 6-23-2020; Ord. 2024-943, passed 9-10-2024)
3.8 “SR-2.5” - SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
A.   PURPOSE
This district is intended to promote and preserve low-density single-family
residential development and to serve as a transition to the agricultural (AR)
districts. Regulations and property development standards are designed to
protect the single-family residential character of the district and to prohibit
all incompatible activities.
B.   PERMITTED USES 
1.   One (1) single-family dwelling.
2.   One (1) guesthouse, with a livable square footage that does not exceed one
thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet or fifty (50) percent of the total
square footage under roof of the primary residence, whichever is greater, in
addition to the principal residence.
3.   Home occupations.
4.   Churches or other similar places of worship.
5.   Customary accessory structures such as barns, corrals, private arenas,
training tracks, coops, non-commercial greenhouses up to six hundred (600)
square feet, storage sheds, and metal storage containers (See UDO Section
4.32) for the care and keeping of non-household animals, fowl, produce, farm
machinery and equipment. Accessory structures shall not be permitted prior to
the issuance of a building permit for the primary residence.
6.   Farming and agriculture including, if primarily non-commercial, the
keeping of cattle, horses, swine (limited to one (1) per acre), sheep, goats,
fowl, but not feed lots, slaughterhouses, fertilizer yards or plants for the
reduction of animal matter.
7.   Schools and public/governmental facilities.
C.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit Required)
1.   Privately owned and operated parks and recreation facilities.
2.   Temporary home and land sale offices, provided they are located within the
same subdivision as that land and homes which are offered for sale.
3.   Public utility buildings, structures, or appurtenances thereto for public
service use. Extension of public service lines in public or private right-of-
way is ex-empt from this requirement.
4.   Mixed use subdivisions when public water and wastewater is available and
when developing under the PAD process guidelines.
5.   Bed and Breakfast operations with the limitation that no guest may stay
for more than seven (7) days during any consecutive thirty (30) day period.
6.   Residential facilities for the developmentally disabled as described in
A.R.S. §§ 36-581 and 36-582, which are licensed by the Department of Economic
Security.
7.   Recovery residences.
8.   Assisted living homes.
Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may be
allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted use
shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.
D.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
1.   Minimum Lot Area:                   2.5 Acres
2.   Minimum Lot Frontage:                100 Feet
3.   Minimum Front Yard Set Back:             See Section
4.28
4.   Minimum Side Yard Set Back:             10 Feet
5.   Minimum Street Side Yard Set Back:       See Section
4.28
6.   Minimum Rear Yard Set Back:             20 Feet
7.   Maximum Building Height:                35 Feet
8.   Accessory Building shall be setback 10 feet from side and rear property
lines and must conform to the front yard and street side yard setback.
9.   Maximum Lot Coverage:                40%
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729,
passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 11-738, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 14-785, passed 7-8-2014;
Ord. 2020-881, passed 6-23-2020; Ord. 2024-943, passed 9-10-2024)
3.9 “SR-2” - SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
A.   PURPOSE
This district is intended to promote and preserve low-density single-family
residential development and to serve as a transition to the agricultural (AR)
districts. Regulations and property development standards are designed to
protect the single-family residential character of the district and to prohibit
all incompatible activities.
B.   PERMITTED USES 
1.   One (1) single-family dwelling.
2.   One (1) guesthouse, with a livable square footage that does not exceed one
thousand two hundred (1,200) square foot or fifty (50) percent of the total
square footage under roof of the primary residence, whichever is greater, in
addition to the principal residence.
3.   Home occupations.
4.   Churches or other similar places of worship.
5.   Customary accessory structures such as barns, corrals, private arenas,
training tracks, coops, non-commercial greenhouses up to six hundred (600)
square feet, storage sheds, and metal storage containers (See UDO Section
4.32) for the care and keeping of non-household animals, fowl, produce, farm
machinery and equipment. Accessory structures shall not be permitted prior to
the issuance of a building permit for the primary residence.
6.   Farming and agriculture including, if primarily non-commercial, the
keeping of cattle, horses, swine (limited to one (1) per acre), sheep, goats,
fowl, but not feed lots, slaughterhouses, fertilizer yards or plants for the
reduction of animal matter.
7.   Schools and public/governmental facilities.
C.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit Required)
1.   Privately owned and operated parks and recreation facilities.
2.   Temporary home and land sale offices, provided they are located within the
same subdivision as that land and homes which are offered for sale.
3.   Public utility buildings, structures, or appurtenances thereto for public
service use. Extension of public service lines in public or private right-of-
way is exempt from this requirement.
4.   Mixed use subdivisions when public water and wastewater is available and
when developing under the PAD process guidelines.
5.   Bed and Breakfast operations with the limitation that no guest may stay
for more than seven (7) days during any consecutive thirty (30) day period.
6.   Residential facilities for the developmentally disabled as described in
A.R.S. §§ 36-581 and 36-582, which are licensed by the Department of Economic
Security.
7.   Recovery residences.
8.   Assisted living homes.
Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may be
allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted use
shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.
D.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
1.   Minimum Lot Area:                   2 acres
2.   Minimum Lot Frontage:                100 feet
3.   Minimum Front Yard Set Back:             See Section
4.28
4.   Minimum Side Yard Set Back:             10 feet
5.   Minimum Street Side Yard Set Back:       See Section
4.28
6.   Minimum Rear Yard Set Back:             20 feet
7.   Maximum Building Height:                35 feet
8.   Accessory Building Shall Be Setback 10 Feet from Side and Rear Property
Lines and must Conform to the Front Yard and Street Side Yard Setback.
9.   Maximum Lot Coverage:                40%
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729,
passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 11-738, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 14-785, passed 7-8-2014;
Ord. 2020-881, passed 6-23-2020; Ord. 2024-943, passed 9-10-2024)
3.10 “SR-1.6” - SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
A.   PURPOSE
This district is intended to promote and preserve medium-density single-family
residential development. Regulations and property development standards are
designed to protect the single-family residential character of the district and
to prohibit all incompatible activities.
B.   PERMITTED USES 
1.   One (1) single-family dwelling.
2.   One (1) guesthouse, with a livable square footage that does not exceed one
thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet or fifty (50) percent of the total
square footage under roof of the primary residence, whichever is greater, in
addition to the principal residence.
3.   Churches or other similar places of worship.
4.   Home occupations.
5.   Schools and public/governmental facilities.
6.   Customary accessory structures such as barns, corrals, private arenas,
training tracks, coops, non-commercial greenhouses up to six hundred (600)
square feet, storage sheds, and metal storage containers (See UDO Section
4.32) for the care and keeping of non-household animals, fowl, produce, farm
machinery and equipment. Accessory structures shall not be permitted prior to
the issuance of a building permit for the primary residence.
7.   Farming and agriculture including, if primarily non-commercial, the
keeping of cattle, horses, swine (limited to one (1) per acre), sheep, goats,
fowl, but not feed lots, slaughterhouses, fertilizer yards or plants for the
reduction of animal matter.
C.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit Required)
1.   Privately owned and operated parks and recreation facilities.
2.   Temporary home and land sale offices, provided they are located within the
same subdivision as that land and homes which are offered for sale.
3.   Public utility buildings, structures, or appurtenances thereto for public
service use. Extension of public service lines in public or private right-of-
way is ex-empt from this requirement.
4.   Mixed Use subdivisions when public water and wastewater is available and
when developing under the PAD process guidelines.
5.   Residential facilities for the developmentally disabled as described in
A.R.S. §§ 36-581 and 36-582, which are licensed by the Department of Economic
Security.
6.   Bed and Breakfast operations with the limitation that no guest may stay
for more than seven (7) days during any consecutive thirty (30) day period.
7.   Recovery residences.
8.   Assisted living homes.
Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may be
allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted use
shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.
D.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
1.   Minimum Lot Area:                    1.6 acres
2.   Minimum Lot Frontage:                100 feet
3.   Minimum Front Yard Set Back:             See Section
4.28
4.   Minimum Side Yard Set Back:             10 feet
5.   Minimum Street Side Yard Set Back:       See Section
4.28
6.   Minimum Rear Yard Set Back:             20 feet
7.   Maximum Building Height:                35 feet
8.   Accessory Building shall be setback 10 feet from side and rear property
lines and must conform to the front yard and street side yard setback.
9.   Maximum Lot Coverage:                50%
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729,
passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 11-738, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 14-785, passed 7-8-2014;
Ord. 2020-881, passed 6-23-2020; Ord. 2024-943, passed 9-10-2024)
3.11 “SR-1” - SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
A.   PURPOSE
This district is intended to promote and preserve medium-density single-family
residential development. Regulations and property development standards are
designed to protect the single-family residential character of the district and
to prohibit all incompatible activities.
B.   PERMITTED USES 
1.   One (1) single-family dwelling.
2.   One (1) guest house, with a livable square footage that does not exceed
one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet or fifty (50) percent of the total
square footage under roof of the primary residence, whichever is greater, in
addition to the principal residence.
3.   Churches or other similar places of worship.
4.   Home occupations.
5.   Schools and public/governmental facilities.
6.   Customary accessory structures such as barns, corrals, private arenas,
training tracks, coops, non-commercial greenhouses up to six hundred (600)
square feet, storage sheds, and metal storage containers (See UDO Section
4.32) for the care and keeping of non-household animals, fowl, produce, farm
machinery and equipment. Accessory structures shall not be permitted prior to
the issuance of a building permit for the primary residence.
7.   Farming and agriculture including, if primarily non-commercial, the
keeping of cattle, horses, swine (limited to one (1) per acre), sheep, goats,
fowl, but not feed lots, slaughterhouses, fertilizer yards or plants for the
reduction of animal matter.
C.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit Required)
1.   Privately owned and operated parks and recreation facilities.
2.   Temporary home and land sale offices, provided they are located within the
same subdivision as that land and homes which are offered for sale.
3.   Public utility buildings, structures, or appurtenances thereto for public
service use. Extension of public service lines in public or private right-of-
way is exempt from this requirement.
4.   Mixed Use subdivisions when public water and wastewater is available and
when developing under the PAD process guidelines.
5.   Residential facilities for the developmentally disabled as described in
A.R.S. §§ 36-581 and 36-582, which are licensed by the Department of Economic
Security.
6.   Bed and Breakfast operations with the limitation that no guest may stay
for more than seven (7) days during any consecutive thirty (30) day period.
7.   Recovery residences.
8.   Assisted living homes.
Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may be
allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted use
shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.
D.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
1.   Minimum Lot Area:                    1 acre 
2.   Minimum Lot Frontage:                100 feet
3.   Minimum Front Yard Set Back:             See Section
4.28
4.   Minimum Side Yard Set Back:             10 feet
5.   Minimum Street Side Yard set Back:      See Section
4.28
6.   Minimum Rear Yard Set Back:            20 feet
7.   Maximum Building Height:                35 feet
8.   Accessory Building shall be setback 10 feet from side and rear property
lines and must conform to the front yard and street side yard setback.
9.   Maximum Lot Coverage:                50%
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729,
passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 11-738, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 14-785, passed 7-8-2014;
Ord. 2020-881, passed 6-23-2020; Ord. 2024-934, passed 9-10-2024)
3.12 [RESERVED] 
3.12.1 “SF-24,000” - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
A.   PURPOSE
This district is intended to promote and preserve medium-density single-family
residential development. Regulations and property development standards are
designed to protect the single-family residential character of the district and
to prohibit all incompatible activities.
B.   PERMITTED USES
1.   One (1) single-family dwelling.
2.   Churches or other similar places of worship.
3.   Home occupations.
4.   Schools and public/governmental facilities.
5.   Customary accessory buildings, provided such uses are incidental to the
principal use. Accessory structures shall not be permitted prior to the
issuance of a building permit for the primary residence.
C.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit Required)
1.   Temporary home and land sale offices, provided they are located within the
same subdivision as that land and homes that are offered for sale.
2.   Public utility buildings, structures, or appurtenances thereto for public
service use. Extension of public service lines in public or private right-of-
way is exempt from this requirement.
3.   Residential facilities for the developmentally disabled as described in
A.R.S. §§ 36-581 and 36-582, which are licensed by the Department of Economic
Security.
4.   Recovery residences.
5.   Assisted living homes.
6.   Farming/Agriculture for non-commercial purposes and the keeping of animals
limited to sheep, goats, and fowl.
Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may be
allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted use
shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.
D.    PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
1.   Minimum Lot Area:               24,000 square feet (excluding access
easement)
2.   Minimum Lot Frontage:            100 feet
3.   Minimum Front Yard Setback:         See Section 4.28
4.   Minimum Side Yard Setback:         10 feet
5.   Minimum Street Side Yard Setback:      See Section 4.28
6.   Minimum Rear Yard Setback:         20 feet
7.   Maximum Building Height:         35 feet
8.   Accessory Building Setback:         10 feet from side and rear property
lines, and must conform to the front yard and street side yard setback.
9.   Maximum Lot Coverage:            40%
(Ord. 2022-916, passed 4-12-2022)
3.12.2 “SF-12,000” - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
A.   PURPOSE
This district is intended to promote and preserve medium-density single-family
residential development. Regulations and property development standards are
designed to protect the single-family residential character of the district and
to prohibit all incompatible activities.
B.   PERMITTED USES
1.   One (1) single-family dwelling.
2.   Churches or other similar places of worship.
3.   Home occupations.
4.   Schools and public/governmental facilities.
5.   Customary accessory buildings provided such uses are incidental to the
principal use. Accessory structures shall not be permitted prior to the
issuance of a building permit for the primary residence.
C.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit Required)
1.   Temporary home and land sale offices, provided they are located within the
same subdivision as that land and homes which are offered for sale.
2.   Public utility buildings, structures, or appurtenances thereto for public
service use. Extension of public service lines in public or private right-of-
way is exempt from this requirement.
3.   Residential facilities for the developmentally disabled as described in
A.R.S. §§ 36-581 and 36-582, which are licensed by the Department of Economic
Security.
4.   Recovery residences.
5.   Assisted living homes.
6.   Farming/Agriculture for non-commercial purposes and the keeping of animals
limited to sheep, goats, and fowl.
Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may be
allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted use
shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.
D.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
1.   Minimum Lot Area:               12,000 square feet (excluding access
easement)
2.   Minimum Lot Frontage:               80 feet
3.   Minimum Front Yard Setback:         See Section 4.28
4.   Minimum Side Yard Setback:         10 feet
5.   Minimum Street Side Yard Setback:   See Section 4.28
6.   Minimum Rear Yard Setback:         20 feet
7.   Maximum Building Height:            35 feet
8.   Accessory Building Setback:         10 feet from side and rear property
lines, and must conform to the front yard and street side yard setback.
9.   Maximum Lot Coverage:            35%
(Ord. 2022-916, passed 4-12-2022)
3.13 “MR” - MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
A.   PURPOSE
This district is intended to fulfill the need for high density multiple family
residential development. Regulations and property development standards are
designed to allow maximum flexibility and variety in residential development
while prohibiting all incompatible activities.
B.   PERMITTED USES
1.   Multiple family dwellings. Each unit shall have minimum of 3,000 sq. ft.
of land area.
2.   Customary accessory buildings, provided such uses are incidental to the
principal use.
3.   Churches or similar places of worship.
4.   Recovery residences.
5.   Assisted living homes.
C.   CONDITIONAL USES
1.   Privately owned and operated parks and recreation areas and centers.
2.   Group homes.
3.   Nursing homes and convalescent homes.
4.   Temporary home and land sale offices, provided they are located within the
same subdivision as that land and homes which are offered for sale.
5.   Public utility buildings, structures, or appurtenances thereto for public
or private right-of-way is exempt from this requirement.
6.   Schools.
7.   Residential facilities for the developmentally disabled as described in
A.R.S. §§ 36-581 and 36-582, which are licensed by the Department of Economic
Security.
Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may be
allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted use
shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.
D.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
1.   Minimum Lot area:                   N/A
   All lots less than one (1) acre in size must be served by a water and/or
sewage disposal system approved by the Town of Chino Valley.
2.   Minimum Lot Frontage:                   75 feet
3.   Minimum Front yard Set Back:             See Section
4.28
4.   Minimum Side Yard Set Back:             10 feet
5.   Minimum Street Side Yard Set Back       See Section
4.28
6.   Minimum Rear Yard Set Back:             20 feet
7.   Maximum Building Height:                35 feet
8.   Maximum Lot Coverage:                40%
9.   Accessory Building shall be setback 10 feet from side and rear property
lines and must conform to the front yard and street side yard setback.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729,
passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 14-785, passed 7-8-2014)
3.14 “MHP-4” - MOBILE HOME PARK
A.   PURPOSE
This district is intended to fulfill the need for mobile home parks.
Regulations and property development standards are designed to allow maximum
flexibility and variety in residential development while prohibiting all
incompatible activities.
B.   PERMITTED USES
1.   Mobile home parks. Maximum density, six (6) sites per acre.
2.   Customary accessory buildings provided such uses are incidental to the
principal use. Accessory structures shall not be permitted prior to the
issuance of a building permit for the primary residence.
3.   Churches or similar places of worship.
C.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit Required)
1.   Privately owned and operated parks and recreation areas and centers.
2.   Group homes.
3.   Nursing homes and convalescent homes.
4.   Temporary home and land sale offices and model homes, provided they are
located within the same subdivision as that land and homes which are offered
for sale.
5.   Public utility buildings, structures, or appurtenances thereto for public
or private right-of-way is exempt from this requirement.
6.   Schools.
7.   Residential facilities for the developmentally disabled as described in
A.R.S. §§ 36-581 and 36-582, which are licensed by the Department of Economic
Security.
Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may be
allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted use
shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.
D.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
1.   Minimum Mobile Home Park Size:             N/A
2.   Minimum Gross Site Area per Mobile Home:    7260 sq. ft.
3.   Minimum Park Frontage:                   100 feet
4.   Minimum Setback of any Building or Mobile/Manufactured Home from any
public street property line:             See Section
4.28
Between a side and an opposing end:             25 feet
5.   Minimum Setback of any Building or Mobile
Home from Mobile Home Park Boundary:          15 feet
6.   Placement of Mobile Home or Building on
Individual Building Site:
a.   Minimum Setback from Private Access Street:    10 feet
b.   Minimum Distance Between Mobile Homes:      25 feet
7.   Minimum Mobile Home Size:                12 feet in Width
                              40 ft. in Length
8.   Maximum Building Height:                   25 feet
9.   Accessory Building shall be setback 3 feet from side and rear property
lines and must conform to the front yard and street side yard setback.
10.   Driveways and Vehicular Access:
a.   Mobile home parks shall be located on or have two (2) direct accesses to
public street, of which no more than one (1) may be onto Highway 89. No
individual mobile home space within the mobile home park may have direct access
to a public street.
b.   Any driveway shall have a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet, except
when a driveway is located between parking spaces, it shall have a minimum
width of thirty (30) feet.
c.   All driveways and interior streets shall be surfaced in a manner
acceptable to Planning and Zoning.
d.   All plans and traffic engineering shall be subject to approval of Planning
and Zoning and shall be based upon the spacing and maneuverability requirements
for seventy (70) foot long trailers.
11.   Utilities. Each mobile home shall include cooking facilities, toilet
facilities, and bathing or shower facilities, and shall be permanently
connected to electric power, water supply and sewage disposal. All utility
distribution and service lines shall be installed underground.
12.   Skirting. All mobile homes shall be skirted with fire resistant material
that is not susceptible to rapid weathering.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729,
passed 7-22-2010)
3.15 “CL” - LIGHT COMMERCIAL
A.   PURPOSE
This district is intended to provide for neighborhood amenity and some general
commercial uses. Land use is composed chiefly of retail and service businesses,
offices, and apartments, together with necessary accessory uses.
B.   PERMITTED USES
1.   Retail sales establishments.
2.   Laundries limited to machines not exceeding twenty-five (25) pound
capacity according to manufacturers rating.
3.   Pet shops within a closed building.
4.   Repair services such as, but no more objectionable or intensive in
character than watches, jewelry, shoes, locksmith, and household appliances.
5.   Personal services such as barbers, beauty shops, health clubs, laundries
and cleaners.
6.   Restaurants, cafes and coffee shops.
7.   Second-hand stores, pawnshops and used furniture stores.
8.   Governmental services, public utility offices and exchanges, excluding
storage or repair services, provided all antennas that extend above the
building height shall be by Conditional Use Permit.
9.   Business and professional offices, banks and similar.
10.   Establishments primarily supplemental in character to other permitted
principal uses, such as pharmacy, apothecary shop, sales of corrective
garments, prosthetic devices and optical goods, and medical and dental
laboratories.
11.   Business, trade, dancing, art, music, and other educational facilities.
12.   Gasoline service stations. (Body shops and paint shops are not included.)
13.   Small engine repair and similar shops where all work is done inside
enclosed walls of a building.
14.   Indoor and outdoor sales of nursery stock.
15.   Public utility buildings, structures, or appurtenances thereto for public
service use.
16.   Hotels and motels.
17.   Hospitals and other medical and dental offices and clinics.
18.   Churches and similar places of worship.
19.   Radio and television studios and all attached commercial broadcasting and
receiving antennas which have a finished height of less than the height of the
highest building on the property.
20.   Indoor commercial recreation establishments, such as bowling alleys,
billiard parlors, shooting ranges and skating rinks.
21.   Indoor theaters, assembly halls, ballrooms and lodges.
22.   Headquarters buildings or charitable, philanthropic and welfare
organizations provided that their primary activities are administrative and
clerical rather than residential in nature.
23.   Customary accessory buildings, structures, and metal storage containers
(See UDO Section
4.32) provided they are incidental to a permitted use. This shall include a
single caretaker residence in conjunction with or in the same buildings as a
commercial use. Accessory structures shall not be permitted prior to the
issuance of a building permit for a commercial building.
24.   Mortuaries.
25.   Veterinary clinic and animal hospitals, when in a closed building.
26.   Lumber yards and building supplies where all material is stored indoors,
or outside storage is less than six (6) feet in height and the outside storage
area is surrounded by a six (6) foot high sight-obscuring fence.
27.   Outdoor commercial recreation establishments such as miniature golf,
ranges, batting cages, and similar uses.
28.   Printing and publishing.
29.   Farming and agriculture including, if primarily non-commercial, the
keeping of cattle, horses, swine (limited to one (1) per acre), sheep, goats,
fowl, but not feed lots, slaughterhouses, fertilizer yards or plants for the
reduction of animal matter. A minimum lot size of one (1) acre is required.
30.   Commercial greenhouses and accessory uses.
31.   Recovery residences.
32.   Assisted living homes.
C.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit Required)
1.   Single-family residences.
2.   New and used automobile sales including light truck, and recreational
vehicle sales.
3.   Commercial broadcasting and receiving antennas that have a finished height
higher than the height of the highest building on the parcel.
4.   Taxi stands, bus stops, and public parking lots and garages.
5.   New and used heavy truck and agricultural equipment sales.
6.   Contractor yards and building supplies with outside storage over six (6)
feet in height. (See Subsection
3.15 E. 7.)
7.   Campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks with twenty-five (25) units or
less.
8.   Drive-in theaters.
9.   Small engine repair and similar shops where any work is done outside of an
enclosed building.
10.   Retail Liquefied Petroleum Gas Dispensing Stations on the premises and as
an accessory use to an allowed retail commercial use subject to the design
requirements of the Arizona State Fire Marshall and the local Fire Marshall
having jurisdiction.
11.   Apartments. Dwelling unit must be at least eight hundred (800) square
feet.
12.   Mini-storage buildings and storage facilities, including the storage of
recreational vehicles, boats and other operable vehicles.
13.   Manufactured and Modular Home Sales.
Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may be
allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted use
shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.
D.   TEMPORARY USES (Temporary Use Permit Required)
1.   Temporary carnivals, circuses, revivals, rodeo, swap meets, outdoor retail
sales, transient merchants, and similar activities as defined and regulated in
Article 8-3 of the Town Code.
Applicability. The provisions of this subsection do not apply to garage sales
or rummage sales.
2.   Temporary Use Permit. A Temporary Use Permit shall be obtained from the
Zoning Administrator in accordance with the following:
a.   The Zoning Administrator shall ensure that health and safety are
considered, and shall obtain the approval of the Yavapai County Health
Department, the Fire District, and the Police Department prior to issuing the
Temporary Use Permit.
b.   The Zoning Administrator shall ensure that land area is adequate for the
proposed use and consequent parking, and shall ensure that traffic safety is
considered.
c.   The Zoning Administrator shall require any measures necessary to protect
surrounding property.
d.   A time limit shall be established for each use conducted under the
Temporary Use Permit. Unless otherwise previously approved by Council, the time
limit shall not exceed fifteen (15) consecutive days.
e.   Permanent structures shall not be permitted under a Temporary Use Permit.
f.   A Temporary Use Permit must include a comprehensive sign package, prepared
by the applicant and approved by the Zoning Administrator, that documents (1)
the total number of signs to be displayed within the corporate limits of the
Town, not to exceed ten (10) individual double-sided signs, (2) the days and
times of display of such signs, (3) the approximate locations of such signs,
(4) the total aggregate sign area of all signs proposed, not to exceed two
hundred (200) square feet size for all signs, taken together and (5) the
applicant’s plan for removal of the signs after the event is finished.
E.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
1.   Minimum Lot area:                         7,500 square feet
   All lots less than one (1) acre in size must be served by a water and/or
sewage disposal system approved by the Town of Chino Valley.
2.   Minimum Lot Frontage:                      50 feet
3.   Minimum Rear and Side-Yard Building Setback:
   Side-Yard Setbacks that front a street:            See Section
4.28
4.   Minimum Front Yard Building Setbacks:          See Section
4.28
5.   Maximum Building Height:                      50 feet
6.   Maximum Lot Coverage:                      None
7.   Outdoor Storage: All outdoor storage shall be screened with a six (6) foot
screening fence.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729,
passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 11-738, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 13-779, passed 12-10-
2013; Ord. 14-785, passed 7-8-2014; Ord. 16-811, passed 1-26-2016; Ord. 2020-
878, passed 1-28-2020; Ord. 2024-943, passed 9-10-2024)
3.16 “CH” - COMMERCIAL HEAVY
A.   PURPOSE
This district is intended to provide for and encourage commercial and light
manufacturing facilities that are not appropriately located next to residential
zoning.
B.   PERMITTED USES
1.   All “Permitted” and “Conditional uses” allowed in the “CL” Zone, with the
exception of single- family residences and apartments.
2.   Wholesale establishments.
3.   Manufacturing.
4.   Bottling and packaging companies.
5.   Warehouses, minimum-storage, transfer and storage facilities including the
storage of RV's, boats, and other operable vehicles.
6.   The sale and storage of products such as firewood, stone products, and
agricultural commodities.
7.   Welding shops.
8.   Underground liquid petroleum retail and wholesale distribution facilities
subject to the design requirements of the Arizona State Fire Marshall and the
local Fire Marshall having jurisdiction.
9.   Commercial outdoor kennels.
10.   Antennas and wireless communication towers.
11.   Farming and agriculture including, if primarily non-commercial, the
keeping of cattle, horses, swine (limited to one (1) per acre), sheep, goats,
fowl, but not feed lots, slaughterhouses, fertilizer yards or plants for the
reduction of animal matter. A minimum lot size of one (1) acre is required.
12.   Contractors yards, subject to screening as set forth in Subsection
3.16 D. 9.
13.   Campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks with twenty-six (26) or more
units.
14.   Customary accessory buildings, structures, and metal storage containers
(See UDO Section
4.32) provided they are incidental to a permitted use. This shall include a
single caretaker residence in conjunction with or in the same buildings as a
commercial use.
15.   Commercial greenhouses and accessory uses.
The above uses shall not be permitted prior to the issuance of a building
permit for the primary commercial building, with the exception of Subsection
3.16 B. 12. contractors yards.
C.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit Required)
Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may be
allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted use
shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.
D.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
1.   Minimum Lot area:                   7,500 square feet
    All lots less than one (1) acre in size must be served by a water and/or
sewage disposal system approved by the Town of Chino Valley.
2.   Minimum lot Width:                   50 feet
3.   Minimum lot frontage:                   50 feet
4.   Minimum Rear and Side yard building setbacks:
   Side yard setbacks that front a street:      See Section
4.28
Exception: commercial subdivisions-During a commercial subdivision plat
process, Council may approve lot lines without rear and side yard setback
requirements. Each lot line approved in this manner shall be noted so on the
final subdivision plat.
5.   Minimum Front Yard Building Setbacks:    See Section
4.28
6.   Minimum Building Size:                None
7.   Maximum Building Height:                50 Feet
8.   Maximum Lot Coverage:                None
Providing the parking and loading, landscaping, buffering and screening, and
setback requirements are met.
9.   Outdoor Storage: All outdoor storage shall be screened with a six (6) foot
screening fence.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729,
passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 11-738, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 13-779, passed 12-10-
2013; Ord. 16-811, passed 1-26-2016; Ord. 2024-943, passed 9-10-2024)
3.17 “I” - INDUSTRIAL
A.   PURPOSE
This district is intended to provide for and encourage industrial development
within the Town, while insuring that such activities will have minimal impacts
on the surrounding districts. Residential dwellings are prohibited in the “I”
Zoning District.
B.   PERMITTED USES 
1.   Manufacturing.
2.   Quarries.
3.   Mines and associated batch plants, concrete plants and similar uses.
4.   Feed lots.
5.   Automobile salvage yards.
6.   Commercial outdoor kennels.
7.   Customary accessory buildings, structures, and metal storage containers
(See UDO Section
4.32) provided they are incidental to a permitted use.
8.   Commercial greenhouses and accessory uses.
9.   Medical marijuana dispensary, subject to the regulations set forth in
Section
4.31.
10.   Medical marijuana off-site cultivation and infusion facilities, subject
to the regulations set forth in Section
4.31.
The above uses shall not be permitted prior to the issuance of a building
permit for the primary commercial building.
C.   CONDITIONAL USES
1.   Hot mix.
2.   Heavy manufacturing such as automobile manufacturing plants.
3.   Slaughterhouses.
4.   Refineries.
5.   Outdoor storage yards and junkyards.
6.   Batch plants, concrete plants, and similar uses when not associated with
an on-site mining operation.
7.   Vehicle Motor Sports Facilities.
8.   Airports.
The above uses shall not be permitted prior to the issuance of a building
permit for the primary commercial building.
Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may be
allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted use
shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.
D.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
1.   Minimum Lot Area:                1 acre
2.   Minimum Average Lot Width:          100 feet
3.   Minimum Lot Frontage:             100 feet
4.   Minimum Setbacks:
   From any Lot Lines               50 feet
5.   Minimum Building Setback
   from any street:   A minimum setback of 50 feet or the requirements in
Section
4.28, whichever is greater
6.   Minimum Building Size:             None
7.   Maximum Building Height:          35 Feet
8.   Maximum Lot Coverage:             None
9.   All Outdoor Storage shall be screened with a six (6) foot screening fence.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729,
passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 11-738, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 13-779, passed 12-10-
2013; Ord. 2024-943, passed 9-10-2024)
3.18 “PL” - PUBLIC LAND DESIGNATION 
A.   PURPOSE
The principal purpose of the (PL) Public Land designation is to allow those
government uses which are necessary to serve the public in particular locations
of the Town and to distinguish them from private uses.
B.   PERMITTED USES
1.   Public safety and law enforcement facilities.
2.   Public facilities such as hospitals, libraries, museums and similar public
facilities.
3.   Public schools and playgrounds.
4.   Governmental office buildings and grounds, including service and
maintenance facilities.
5.   Public recreational facilities and convention center.
6.   Community parks, recreational facilities, open space and fine arts center.
7.   Colleges and universities.
8.   Other uses approved by the Town Council.
C.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit required)
Public water production and storage facilities, public sewage treatment plants,
public facilities for the collection, transfer and disposal of solid wastes.
D.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
1.   Minimum Lot Area:                     None
2.   Minimum Lot Frontage:                   None
3.   Minimum Average Lot Width:                None
4.   Minimum Setbacks:
   from Any Lot Zoned Residential:            50 Feet
   Minimum Building Setback from Any street:    See Section
4.28
5.   Minimum Building Size:                  None
6.   Maximum Building Height:                  35 Feet
7.   Maximum Lot Coverage:                  None
8.   Outdoor Storage: all outdoor storage shall be screened with a six (6) foot
screening fence.
(Ord. 10-742, passed 11-9-2010)
3.19 “BP” - BUSINESS PARK 
A.   PURPOSE
This district is intended to provide for high-quality business parks primarily
for office, administrative, medical, research industries and light
manufacturing in an attractive setting. The regulations and development
standards contained within this district include generous screening, quality-
landscaping buffering and architecture performance standards to ensure use
compatibility with surrounding zoning districts.
B.   PERMITTED USES
1.   Business and professional offices, banks and similar.
2.   Professional services including call centers, research and development,
high tech businesses.
3.   Medical and dental laboratories.
4.   Business, trade, dancing, art, music, and other similar educational
facilities.
5.   Radio and television studios and all attached commercial broadcasting and
receiving antennas.
6.   Indoor commercial recreation establishments.
7.   Indoor theaters, assembly halls, ballrooms and lodges.
8.   Headquarters buildings or charitable, philanthropic and welfare
organizations provided that their primary activities are administrative and
clerical rather than residential in nature.
9.   Veterinary clinic and animal hospitals, when in a closed building.
10.   Printing and publishing.
11.   Wholesale establishments.
12.   Light manufacturing.
13.   Packaging companies .
14.   Warehouses.
15.   Welding and machine shops.
16.   Business incubators.
17.   Digital Production.
18.   Commercial/Industrial Laboratories.
19.   Research and Development.
20.   Small Scale Food Preparation.
21.   Mechanical Services.
22.   Public, Government uses.
C.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit Required)
1.   Convention center.
2.   Colleges and universities.
3.   Hospitals and other medical/dental offices and clinics.
4.   Bottling operations.
5.   Microbrewery or micro-distillery.
6.   Restaurant and eateries.
7.   Hotels and Motels.
8.   Outdoor storage of any kind
Customary accessory buildings and structures are permitted, provided they are
incidental to a permitted use.
Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may be
allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted use
shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.
D.   PROHIBITED USES
1.   Quarries and mines.
2.   Feed lots.
3.   Automobile salvage yards/junkyards/storage yards.
4.   Commercial outdoor kennels.
5.   Medical marijuana dispensary.
6.   Medical marijuana off-site cultivation and infusion facilities.
7.   Heavy manufacturing such as automobile manufacturing plants.
8.   Slaughterhouses.
9.   Refineries.
10.   Hot mix, batch plants, concrete plants, and similar uses.
11.   Vehicle Motor Sports Facilities.
12.   Airports.
13.   Any industry with excessive water usage and no recharge to the aquifer.
14.   "Dirty" industries that emit excessive particulates or other pollution
according to the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) air
quality standards.
15.   Extremely noisy industries.
16.   Underground liquid petroleum retail and wholesale distribution
facilities, including fueling stations.
17.   Agricultural and farming uses.
18.   Drive-through uses.
19.   Residential uses.
20.   Commercial greenhouses and accessory uses, including onsite sales.
E.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
1.   Minimum Development area: 20 acres total area per business park. May be
comprised of one lot or multiple lots, planned in a coordinated, cohesive
manner. All lots must be served by a water and sewage disposal system approved
by the Town of Chino Valley.
2.   Perimeter of overall development must maintain a 50 foot setback from all
other districts.
3.   Internal Minimum Lot Frontage (must be Right of Way): None.
4.   Internal Minimum Rear and Side-Yard Building Setback: None.
5.   Internal Minimum Front Yard Building Setbacks: 50 feet.
6.   Maximum Building Height: 35 feet maximum permitted, taller than 35 feet
may be approved as a conditional use permit.
7.   Maximum Lot Coverage: None.
8.   Outdoor Storage: All outdoor storage shall be screened with a six (6) foot
screening fence, as permitted.
9.   Fencing/screening of uses shall include CMU block / stucco walls, or other
similar material. It shall not include chain-link fencing.
10.   Architectural Design Standards: Each Business Park, as part of the design
shall include the addition of a façade on each structure on each side facing a
street that is visually similar to other buildings within the development.
Metal siding shall not be a permitted façade material unless the developer can
demonstrate that such a material can be visually and aesthetically pleasing.
Part of these standards may include a common color palette or theme.
F.   PARKING STANDARDS
1.   Uses in the BP District shall use Subsection
4.22.5.E (JOINT USE PARKING FOR PAD) in determining required number of parking
spaces.
2.   All other appropriate regulations of Subsection
4.22 (OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING) will apply to uses in the BP District.
G.   PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The sum total of the effects of concurrent operations on two or more lots
should not be greater or more offensive to the senses than the standards
contained herein. Compliance with the provision of these performance standards
by single or mutual changes in operational levels, scheduling of operations,
and other adjustments is permitted.
1.   BUILDING ENCLOSURES: Every use permitted in the BP district shall be
operated in its entirety within a completely enclosed building or within an
area enclosed on all sides by a solid noncombustible fence or wall, as
regulated by this ordinance, provided further, that no goods, material, or
objects shall be stacked higher than the fence or wall. All fences and walls
shall be built in accordance with Section
4.8.
2.   LANDSCAPING: In the BP district, all required yards shall be landscaped in
compliance with UDO Section
4.26 (LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS). The perimeter shall be landscaped and maintained
by the business park developer/HOA and shall include one (1) 2" caliper tree
spaced every 30-feet on center, and three shrubs per tree spaced aesthetically
along each street frontage.
3.   ODOROUS MATTER: No emission of odorous matter shall be allowed in excess
of ambient air quality standards, as set forth by regulations adopted by the
Arizona Department of Environmental Quality.
4.   HUMIDITY, HEAT OR GLARE: In the BP district, any activity producing
humidity, in the form of steam or moist air, or producing heat or glare, shall
be carried on in such a manner that the steam, humidity, heat, or glare is not
perceptible at or beyond any residential or commercial district boundary.
Detailed plans for the elimination of humidity, heat, or glare may be required
before the issuance of a building permit.
5.   VIBRATION: Vibrations shall be measured at the lot line. No vibration is
permitted which is discernible to the human sense of feeling for three (3)
minutes or more duration in any one (1) hour.
6.   EMISSIONS AND OPEN BURNING: No emission of particulate matter, sulfur,
compound, carbon monoxide, hydrocarbon, nitrogen oxide, and open burning shall
be allowed in the BP District.
7.   STORAGE: In the BP Zone, the storage of materials, supplies, and products
on the property outside the building, constructed thereon is permitted at the
rear of the property providing that the storage of materials, supplies, and
products are within an area enclosed on all sides by a solid noncombustible
fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height, provided further that no goods,
materials, or objects shall be stacked higher than the fence or wall.
8.   WASTE: No waste material or refuse shall be dumped upon, or permitted to
remain upon, any part of the part of the property outside of the buildings
constructed thereon. All sewage and industrial waste shall be treated and
disposed of in such a manner so as to comply with the standards of the
appropriate authority. All plans for waste disposal facilities shall be
required before the issuance of any building permit.
9.   FIRE AND EXPLOSIVE HAZARDS: Storage, utilization, or manufacture of solid
materials which requires free burning and intense burning may be allowed,
provided that said materials or products shall be stored, utilized, or
manufactured within completely enclosed buildings having incombustible walls
and protected throughout by an automatic fire extinguishing system and in
accordance with Standards of American Insurance Association for Storage,
Handling, and Use of Flammable Liquids, "American Insurance Association,"
Pamphlet No. 30, June 1959, or any subsequent revision or amendment thereto.
10.   AQUIFER RECHARGE: All uses shall connect to municipal water and sewer and
shall discharge at least 65% of water to the sewer.
(Ord. 2019-867, passed 7-23-2019)
3.20 OBSOLETE ZONING DISTRICTS
A.   PURPOSES
Zoning districts found within this subsection are considered obsolete. An
obsolete zoning district shall not be applied to any property, with or without
a PAD, provided that the subject property’s zoning shall carry forward as if it
were still active. Properties zoned under an obsolete zoning district prior to
it becoming obsolete are not considered non-conforming for zoning purposes.
B.   OBSOLETE ZONING DISTRICT LIST
1   SR-0.16 – Single Family Residential – Active dates of this district:
November 9, 2006, to November 2, 2021. The SR-0.16 district is an obsolete
district effective February 10, 2022.
a.   PURPOSE
The purpose of this district is to allow for the regulation and development of
existing 7,000 square foot residential lots and other developments using the
SR-0.16 zoning district. It is not the intention of the Town to allow for the
creation of any new SR-0.16 zoned property, with or without a PAD.
b.   PERMITTED USES
1.   One (1) single-family dwelling.
2.   Customary accessory building provided such uses are incidental to the
principal use. Accessory structures shall not be permitted prior to the
issuance of a building permit for the primary residence.
3.   Home occupations.
4.   Churches or similar places of worship.
c.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit Required)
1.   Public/governmental facilities.
2.   Privately owned and operated parks and recreation areas and centers.
3.   Temporary home and land sale offices, provided they are located within the
same subdivision as that land and homes which are offered for sale.
4.   Public utility buildings, structures or appurtenances thereto for public
service use. The extension of public service lines in public or private right-
of-way is exempt from this requirement.
5.   Residential facilities for the developmentally disabled as described in
A.R.S. §§ 36-581 and 36-582, which are licensed by the Department of Economic
Security.
6.   Bed and breakfast operations with the limitation that no guest may stay
for more than seven (7) days during any consecutive thirty (30) day period.
7.   Recovery residences.
8.   Assisted living homes.
Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may be
allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted use
shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.
d.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
1.   Minimum Lot Area:                  7,000 sq. ft.
All lots less than one (1) acre in size must be served by a water and/or sewage
disposal system approved by the Town of Chino Valley.
2.   Minimum Lot Frontage:                  50 feet
3.   Minimum Front Yard Set Back:            See section 4.28
4.   Minimum Side Yard Set Back:            10 feet
5.   Minimum Street Yard Set Back:            See section 4.28
6.   Minimum Rear Yard Set Back:            10 feet
7.   Maximum Building Height:               25 feet
8.   Accessory Building shall be setback 5 feet from side and rear property
lines and must conform to the front yard and street side yard setback.
9.   Maximum Lot Coverage:               50%
(Ord. 2022-909, passed 1-11-2022)
4 GENERAL REGULATIONS
4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4.2 PERMITTED USES 
1.   Those uses listed as “permitted uses” shall be allowed to establish within
any zone district in which they are listed, subject to the specific
requirements of this Ordinance. All other uses shall be prohibited except as
otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
2.   Conditional uses. Those uses listed as “conditional uses” shall require a
“Conditional Use Permit” in order to establish within the zone district in
which they are listed, and shall be subject to all conditions and requirements
imposed by the Commission or Council in connection with the “Conditional Use
Permit.”
3.   Accessory uses. A use defined in Section
2.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
4.3   NON-CONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD 
1.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, a building may be
constructed on any legal lot of record existing before the adoption of this
amendment in any zone in which such buildings are permitted even though such
lot fails to meet the area, width, and public street abutment requirements
within the zone, providing:
a.   Such construction conforms to any lot coverage and yard requirements of
the zone; and
b.   Any existing frontage on an access way which is part of the public use
access system is dedicated to the public according to Section
4.23.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
4.4 RE-DIVIDING OF LOTS 
1.   No lot or parcel shall be divided to create a lot or parcel not in
conformance with these regulations. No lot shall be divided or combined in any
manner other than through subdivision procedures as specified by the
subdivision and Land split Regulations of the Town.
2.   All proposed subdivisions of land and land splits shall be submitted for
review and approval, prior to transfer, sale, lease, or subdivision
recordation, to the Development Services Director. Any parcel subdivision and/
or land split, recorded or unrecorded with the Town, which is reviewed and
considered by the Zoning Administrator to be in violation of the Town Code,
subdivision and land split definitions and/or related Unified Development
Ordinance regulations and/or Arizona Revised Statutes shall be submitted in
written notice of evidence to the Town Attorney and/or the Arizona Department
of Real Estate Commissioner for legal inquiry and determinations as provided by
Section
1.6 and Section
1.8 of this Ordinance and Arizona Revised Statutes.
3.   Land surveys of land parcels and lots within the Town boundaries shall
comply with Arizona Revised Statutes governing the filing and recording of land
surveys establishing points and property lines.
4.   Owner(s) of land who desire to subdivide land, the whole or part of which
is in an area within three (3) miles of the Town corporate limits, for the
purpose of selling, shall first give written notice to the Town of his
intention to subdivide the land. Notice shall name and describe the land so
that it may be identified upon the ground, and shall submit to the Town a
tentative plat of the land showing the manner in which he/she desires to
subdivide the land. Such submittal shall conform to all requirements of A.R.S.
§ 9-474.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
4.5 YARD, LOT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS 
1.   Application. No building shall be erected, nor shall any existing building
be altered, enlarged, moved, or rebuilt, nor shall any open space surrounding
any building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity
with the yard, lot, area, and building location regulations hereinafter
designated for the zone in which such building or open space is located, except
as otherwise specifically provided.
2.   Yards. Except as provided herein, every part of a required yard shall be
open to the sky and unobstructed. Trees, shrubbery, etc., and accessory
structures as allowed in this Ordinance shall not be considered obstructions.
No yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of
complying with the provisions of these regulations shall be considered as a
yard or open space for any other building; and no yard or other open space on
one lot shall be considered as a yard or open space, for a building on any
other lot.
3.   Projections over and into required yards.
a.   Awnings, open fire escape balconies, fire escape stairs, window-type
refrigeration units, suspended or roof evaporative coolers, and similar
features, may project not more than five (5) feet over any required yard,
provided that they shall be no closer than ten (10) feet from any lot line.
b.   Architectural details such as canopies, cornices, and eaves may project
not more than two (2) feet over any required yard, provided that they shall be
no closer than ten (10) feet from any lot line.
c.   Sills, leaders, belt courses and similar ornamental features may project
not more than six (6) inches over or into any required yard.
d.   Awnings and canopies which are part of the gas station pump island may
project into the required front yard but no closer than ten (10) feet from the
property line.
4.   Patios and steps. Unroofed terraces, patios, steps or similar features not
over three (3) feet in height above grade, may project into any required yard,
provided that they shall be no closer than ten (10) feet from any lot line.
5.   Accessory buildings (attached). A private automobile garage, carport or
accessory building having any part of a wall in common with a dwelling shall be
considered an integral part of the main building in determining yard, lot, and
area requirements.
6.   Accessory buildings (detached) and swimming pools. Any detached accessory
building or swimming pool in any zone shall not be located in the required
front yard, shall be at least eight (8) feet from the main structure, shall be
at least ten (10) feet from the rear and interior side lot lines, and shall
maintain side yard setbacks from the street side lot lines as required for the
main structure in that zone.
7.   Solar unit and dish antennas. Solar heating, solar cooling units,
satellite dish antennas, and associated apparatus notwithstanding any other
provisions of this Ordinance shall not be located in any required front yard,
but may be located in a required rear or side yard provided that such apparatus
does not cover more than thirty (30) percent of that side yard and shall be no
closer than ten (10) feet to any lot line.
8.   Service station pumps. No automobile service station pump shall be located
closer than twelve (12) feet to a street property line.
9.   Domestic liquid petroleum gas tanks shall not be placed in required front
yards or street side yards.
10.   Notwithstanding other provisions of this code to the contrary, flag-
shaped or panhandle lots ("flag lots") may be created by land split in any zone
with a minimum required acreage of one (1) or more acres if all the following
requirements are met:
a.   The lot must have at least fifty (50) feet of frontage on a dedicated
public street or a private street established in a final plat; and
b.   The entire flagpole or panhandle ("flagpole") portion of the lot must be
at least fifty (50) feet wide or, if a maximum of two (2) adjacent flagpoles
share access, each flagpole must have at least twenty-five (25) feet of
frontage, for a combined frontage of at least fifty (50) feet, and the lots
sharing access must have a shared access agreement recorded and reflected on
the land split's record of survey; and
c.   Except as permitted in b. above, the minimum separation between the edges
of flagpoles must equal or exceed the minimum lot width for the respective zone
in which the property is located; and
d.   The length of the flagpole must not exceed three hundred thirty (330) feet
as measured from the right-of-way line or street chord upon which the flagpole
fronts on a public street or final platted private street to the front line of
the body of the lot; and
e.   The flagpole portion of a flag lot must be included in calculating the
gross square footage of a lot where the flagpole is contiguous to the lot in
question and is or was owned by the owner of the lot in question when the Town
accepted ownership of the flagpole, or a portion thereof, pursuant to a
dedication the owner made to create a public street, using all or part of the
flagpole and, if applicable, other property; and
f.   Existing lots that would otherwise meet the definition of a flag lot but
for the width or length of the flagpole used to access the lot must be
considered non-conforming flag lots.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007; Ord. 11-738,
passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 2020-885, passed 9-8-2020; Ord. 2022-923, passed 10-11-
2022; Ord. 2023-932, passed 4-25-2023)
4.6 BUILDING AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS 
1.   Application. No building shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally
altered to exceed in height the limit hereinafter designated for the zone in
which such building is located, except as otherwise specifically provided.
2.   Exceptions. Height regulations established elsewhere in this Ordinance
shall not apply:
a.   In any district. To church spires, belfries, cupolas, windmills, wind
chargers, and domes not for human occupancy, monuments, water towers,
flagpoles, and light poles, provided, however, that any structure exempted in
this subsection shall be set back a minimum of one hundred (100) percent of its
height from all property lines.
b.   In industrial districts. To chimneys, smokestacks, derricks, conveyors,
grain elevators, or similar structures wherein the industrial process involved
customarily requires a height greater than otherwise permitted, provided
however, that any structure exempted in this subsection shall be set back a
minimum of one hundred percent (100%) of its height from all property lines.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
4.7 HEIGHT LIMITATIONS ON CORNER LOTS
Within a sight visibility triangle formed by the street front and side lot
lines and a line connecting these lot lines at points measured along these lot
lines a distance of twenty-five (25) feet from their intersection, no fixtures,
construction, hedges, shrubbery and other planting shall obstruct the view of
intersecting streets to a degree greater than fifty (50) percent visibility. In
no event shall an obstruction exist which creates a hazard to passing
motorists.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
4.8 WALLS AND FENCES
1.   Height.
a.   In a Residential or Agricultural Zoning District no wall or fence shall
exceed six (6) feet in height, except that fences in required front yards shall
not exceed five (5) feet in height.
b.   In a commercial or industrial Zoning District no wall or fence shall
exceed eight (8) feet in height. When a fence in a commercial or industrial
zoning district abuts a residential zoning district, the wall or fence in the
commercial or industrial zoning district shall be set back ten (10) feet from
the property boundary and landscaped in accordance with the requirements set
forth in Section
4.26 Landscape Requirements. The finished side of the fence and the required
landscaping shall face the residentially zoned property.
2.   Visibility. In no case shall a fence or wall be designed or constructed so
as to interfere with visibility for traffic safety.
3.   Materials and design. Fences and walls in all Zoning districts shall be
constructed of wood, woven wire, masonry, iron, steel, or other materials of
conventional design.
4.   Electrical fences. Electrical fences shall be allowed only in those zoning
districts where the keeping of livestock is allowed and shall be clearly posted
on all property corners and no more than 200 feet apart on all lot lines where
such fences are erected.
5.   Swimming pools. Any swimming pool that is eighteen (18) inches or more in
depth and eight (8) feet or more in width or diameter at any point and is
intended for swimming shall be fenced or enclosed as required by and in
compliance with A.R.S. § 36-1681 and the most recently adopted International
Residential Code (IRC) that regulates fencing for pools, spas, and similar
facilities or structures.
6.   Non-conforming fences and walls. Any fence built and approved by the Town
prior to December 12, 2013 and not in conformance with this section shall be
considered a legal non-conforming fence and shall be subject to the regulations
set forth in Section
4.2 Non-conforming Uses and structures.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 13-776, passed 11-12-2013)
4.9 OUTDOOR STORAGE
1.   No travel trailer, motor home, recreational vehicle or boat stored on
residentially zoned parcels or lots shall be made suitable for on-site
occupancy unless permitted in the specific zoning regulation. Evidence of an
on-site residency shall consist of at least three (3) of the following
conditions:
a.   Connection to a source of power.
b.   Connection to a source of water.
c.   Connection to sewer or septic system.
d.   Raising or leveling by means of jacks, stands or blocks.
e.   Having a mailbox.
f.   Having any attached or adjacent structure or improvement, which enhances
on-site livability and/or decreases the mobility of the vehicle.
g.   Removal of wheels, axles or hitches on a vehicle normally fitted with
wheels, axles and/or hitches. All vehicles shall be kept in reasonable repair
and neatly arranged to resemble a parked position.
2.   Commercial, manufacturing and industrial zone. Outdoor storage of objects
and materials shall be permitted as accessory use when a primary use has been
established in commercial, manufacturing and industrial zones, providing the
following conditions are met:
a.   All outdoor storage must be stored at least thirty-five (35) feet from the
edge of the pavement or other prepared street subject to:
i.   Storage may not occur within ten (10) feet from any street or property
line.
ii.   Any material or objects stored within the required front or street side
yard shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height.
b.   Flammables stored outdoors must be a minimum of ten (10) feet from any
property line or such storage must be previously approved by the local fire
department.
c.   No travel trailer, motor home, recreational vehicle or boat stored on
commercial, manufacturing or industrial zoned parcels or lots shall be made
suitable for on-site occupancy unless permitted in the specific zoning
regulation. Evidence of an on-site residency shall consist of at least three of
the following conditions:
i.   Connection to a source of power.
ii.   Connection to a source of water.
iii.   Connection to sewer or septic or sewer system.
iv.   Raising or leveling by means of jacks, stands or blocks.
v.   Having a mailbox.
vi.   Having any attached or adjacent structure or improvement, which enhances
on-site livability and/or decreases the mobility of the vehicle.
vii.   Removal of wheels, axles or hitches on a vehicle normally fitted with
wheels, axles and/or hitches.
d.   All outdoor storage shall be arranged in a neat and orderly manner or
screened from the view of neighboring properties.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
4.10 SPECIAL PURPOSE AND TEMPORARY HOUSING 
1.   Temporary construction office or security personnel housing. A temporary
structure, mobile home, or trailer may be allowed in any zone to conduct
business or provide housing for security personnel during the construction of a
permanent building when a valid building permit is in effect; however, such
temporary structures, mobile homes, or trailers shall also require an
additional permit. Such structure, mobile home, or trailer shall be removed
immediately after completion and occupancy of the building, but in no event
longer than one year.
2.   Temporary housing in cases of medical hardship. A trailer/RV may be
allowed in a residential zone for a temporary specific duration when
application for a special permit is obtained through the Zoning Administrator,
provided:
a.   Property owner or representative shall provide a letter of request, a
physician’s statement verifying the existence of a medical condition which
requires temporary full-time care, proof of property ownership, relationship
and names of persons to occupy the temporary dwelling and a sketch plan of
property showing existing home with proposed structure, access, parking and
distances from property lines and other structures.
b.   Permit shall be issued for a 90-day term.
c.   At no time shall a permit exceed 180 days.
d.   Property shall be posted for five (5) days prior to issuance of a permit
to allow neighbors the opportunity to object or, in lieu of posting, applicant
shall submit approvals signed by all residents within (300) three hundred feet
of subject property.
e.   All connections and hook-ups shall meet the health department and building
ordinance requirements. A plan for septic disposal shall be submitted.
f.   Trailer/RV shall be removed within 14 days after the intended purpose no
longer exists or after the permit has expired.
g.   Occupancy of trailer/RV shall consist of caregivers only, with no more
than two (2) occupants.
h.   All property setback requirements for each residential zoning district
shall be complied with.
i.   The Public Works Department or the Planning and Zoning Department may
require additional conditions as deemed necessary to protect surrounding
properties from adverse effects.
j.   In the event a written protest is submitted, the applicant may appeal to
the Board of Adjustment for a hearing.
3.   Recovery residences.
a.   Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to permit persons recovering
from substance abuse to reside in a group setting in residential neighborhoods
in order to facilitate integration and stabilization and to provide reasonable
regulations to maintain the residential character of neighborhoods and prevent
a concentration of such facilities in any particular area so as to
institutionalize that area.
b.   Registration required. Prior to beginning operations, the owner or
operator of a recovery residence shall submit a completed registration form to
the Development Services Department on a form established by the Planning and
Development Services Manager. The registration shall become effective upon
verification by the Zoning Administrator that the registration complies with
the requirements of the zoning code and that the recovery residence operator
has obtained a Valid Town of Chino Valley business license for the recovery
residence. A registration shall terminate when the recovery residence use
ceases.
c.   Zoning confirmation. Prior to registration, a request for zoning
confirmation may be submitted to the Development Services Department to confirm
that the proposed location of the recovery residence is permitted under this
section.
d.   Procedures. In addition to the registration form, the applicant shall
submit an operations and management plan (“O&MP”) to ensure compliance with
state and local laws. O&MP shall include:
(1)   Name and address of the business owner;
(2)   Name, address and telephone number of the property owner and person in
control of the property;
(3)   If the business owner and property owner are not the same person or
entity, applicant shall provide a notarized letter of authorization from the
property owner;
(4)   Emergency contact telephone number;
(5)   The number of persons occupying each bedroom;
(6)   Maximum number of occupants;
(7)   A floor plan;
(8)   Resident screening process; and
(9)   Guest and resident rules of conduct.
e.   Standards. Recovery residences shall be located, developed, and operated
in compliance with the following standards:
(1)   O&MP compliance. The recovery residence shall be operated and managed in
compliance with the O&MP submitted with registration, a copy of which shall
remain on file with the Development Services Department .
(2)   Separation. The minimum separation between recovery residences shall be
5,280 feet as measured from the closest property lines.
(3)   Occupancy. The number of residents, including the house manager, shall
not exceed two (2) residents per bedroom with up to three (3) residents in the
largest bedroom in the home and a maximum of eleven (11) residents in the home.
(4)   Exterior appearance. There shall be no sign or other exterior indication
of a recovery residence visible from the street.
(5)   Parking. Parking for the recovery residence shall be on-site and comply
with Chino Valley Unified Development Ordinance Section
4.22 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations.
(6)   Tenancy. No recovery residence shall house any person whose tenancy would
constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other persons or would
result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.
f.   Request for accommodation. If a recovery residence owner believes any
requirement of the zoning code prevents the establishment of a recovery
residence in an economically viable manner, the owner shall submit to the
Zoning Administrator a written request for accommodation and the reasons why
the accommodation is required. The written request shall contain sufficient
facts to allow the Zoning Administrator to make an individualized determination
of the recovery residence’s needs, to address the Town’s safety and welfare
concerns, and to assure compliance with this section. The Zoning Administrator
shall review the written request and determine:
(1)   Whether an accommodation should be made pursuant to the requirements of
the federal and state fair housing laws; and
(2)   If so, the nature of the accommodation taking into consideration the
requirements of the federal and state fair housing laws, public safety and
welfare concerns, and the residential character of the neighborhood.
The accommodation shall be made only to the extent necessary to comply with
federal and state fair housing laws.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 14-785, passed 7-8-2014)
4.11 HOME OCCUPATIONS
Home occupations shall be permitted in all residential zones and shall not
alter the residential character of the property and buildings thereon. A home
occupation is that accessory use of the dwelling or outbuilding on a
residential lot that shall constitute either entirely or partly the livelihood
of a person living in the dwelling. A home occupation shall be subject to the
following provisions:
1.   There shall be no employees of the home occupation other than members of
the household working on-site; however, there shall be no restriction on the
number of employees working off-site.
2.   Traffic that is related to the home occupation may be permitted from 7:00
a.m. to 10:00 p.m. and shall be what is reasonable and customary to the
neighborhood. The home occupation business owner shall provide adequate off-
street parking.
3.   Signs, displays or any other exterior indications of the home occupation
shall be subject to the applicable provisions of Section
4.21 Signs.
4.   The maximum percentage of the gross floor area of the dwelling that shall
be used for all home occupation activities on any one property, excluding
parking of vehicles, shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent.
5.   Outdoor storage shall not display or create any external evidence of the
operation of the home occupation.
6.   No home occupation shall emit noticeable odor, dust, gas, noise,
vibration, smoke, toxic material or fumes, heat, or glare beyond any boundary
of the lot on which the home occupation is conducted.
7.   A home occupation shall not include, but exclusion shall not be limited
to, the following uses: Barber shops and beauty parlors, commercial stables,
veterinary clinic, on-site dog grooming, real estate offices, restaurants,
animal hospitals and commercial kennels, retail shops, auto repair shops,
wholesale and storage of building material. A home occupation may include, but
is not limited, to the following uses, provided the uses are not otherwise in
violation of the home occupation regulations: catalog/mail order sales,
contractor office, bookkeeping, off-site yard service, handy-man or similar
services, video productions, consulting, off-site dog grooming. Retail sales
incidental to the home occupation are permitted on site.
8.   Other similar home occupations may be permitted by the Zoning
Administrator providing such home occupations meet all the requirements of this
subsection and providing a determination is made by the Zoning Administrator
that: (a) the proposed use in no way diminishes the use and enjoyment of
adjacent conforming properties (b) the proposed use will not alter the
residential character of the subject property; and (c) the proposed use will
not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare.
9.   Prior to issuance of a Town Business License, the applicant for a Business
License must complete and sign a home occupation form acknowledging receipt of
a copy of Section
4.11 of the Unified Development Ordinance and compliance therewith as well as
proof of compliance with all State and local business license and transaction
privilege tax requirements.
10.   Failure to comply fully with the above conditions of the home occupation
regulations shall cause revocation of the home occupation privilege and the
Town Business License. Any appeal shall be pursuant to the Town Code.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
4.12 GARAGE SALES, SWAP MEETS AND OUTDOOR SALES 
1.   All swap meets and outdoor sales shall be permitted only in commercial and
industrial zoned districts subject to business licensing as outlined in the
Business License provisions of the Town Code.
2.   Garage sales shall require a business license as required by the Business
License provisions of the Town Code; however, all other requirements of this
subsection and any business license fee shall be waived provided such sales
occur no more often than two weekends in a 90-day period.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
4.13 TEMPORARY FESTIVALS, CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS, CELEBRATIONS, FIESTAS, RALLIES,
DANCES, REVIVAL MEETINGS AND SIMILAR ACTIVITIES
All temporary festivals, circuses, carnivals, celebrations, fiestas, rallies,
dances, revival meetings, and other similar activities shall be permitted only
in commercial and industrial zones subject to the restrictions and license
procedures as outlined in the Town Code.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
4.14 PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITIES 
A Conditional Use Permit shall be required by all public service companies in
order to establish or substantially expand utility buildings, structures, or
appurtenances thereto, in any zoning district. Extension of public service
lines in public or private right-of-way is exempt from these requirements.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
4.15 STRUCTURE NEAR AIRPLANE RUNWAYS OR LANDING STRIPS
No building or structure, or any portion thereof, which exceeds a height of
twenty (20) feet shall be erected or structurally altered within five hundred
(500) feet of the projected center line of an existing or proposed runway or
landing strip for a distance of one thousand (1,000) feet from the end of the
existing or proposed runway or landing strip. No building or structure, or any
portion thereof, shall be erected to exceed a height that would interfere with
the takeoff or landing of a plane with a glide angle of one (1) foot vertical
for every forty (40) feet horizontal, such glide angle to be computed as
beginning at a point on the extended center line of the runway two hundred
(200) feet beyond and at the same elevation as the end of the runway pavement,
or, if runway pavement is not provided, one hundred (100) feet beyond and at
the same elevation as the end of the landing strip.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
4.16 SCHOOLS
Public and parochial schools and institutions of higher education and private
educational institutions, excluding business, technical and trade schools, are
permitted in each district subject to the following standards:
1.   A lot of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet shall be required for the
first twenty (20) students. An additional ten thousand (10,000) square feet
shall be required for each additional twenty (20) students.
2.   The lot shall have at least one hundred (100) feet of frontage on a major
street or, with Use Permit approval, on a collector street.
3.   A Use Permit shall be required if periods of instruction are prior to 6:00
a.m. or after the hour of 10:00 p.m.
4.   A Site Plan in conformance with Section
1.9 shall be required of any school located in a residential district. Fund
raising events located on the same lot or contiguous  lots shall be permitted
subject to the requirements of the Town Code and ordinances.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
4.17 PROHIBITED USES 
In all zoned districts, chemicals manufacturing, incineration, and/or reduction
of garbage, sewage and nuclear waste dumping is prohibited.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
4.18 FEES
Fees required by this Ordinance shall be established by a schedule adopted by
resolution of the Council and filed in the offices of the Town Clerk.
1.   Return of any portion of a fee, or any waiver of fees must be approved by
the Council unless the change or amendment is initiated by the Council or the
Commission or when the petitioner is the Town, County , State or Federal
Government.
In no case shall any error by the Clerk in computing or collecting the amount
of fee(s) specified under this Ordinance prevent the Town from collecting the
correct amount from any person required to pay the fee(s).
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
4.19 CAMPGROUNDS
A.   Campgrounds shall only be permitted within a Commercial Zoning district,
and shall require a Conditional Use Permit in the Commercial Light Zoning
District in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
B.   All campgrounds shall comply with the following guidelines:
1.   Site specifications.
a.   Sites must be clearly defined, well drained, and reasonably level.
b.   Each tent site must be no less than nine hundred (900) square feet in
area.
c.   Each recreational vehicle site must be no less than one thousand two
hundred (1,200) square feet in area, and shall be designated to allow a minimum
of fifteen (15) feet between adjoining recreational vehicles.
2.   Office and registration facilities. Each campground must provide an
adequate and easily identifiable office or registration area. Registration
facilities must be located so as not to interfere with the normal flow of
traffic in and out of the campground.
3.   Restroom facilities. Each campground must conform to State and Federal
Guidelines and must have the following facilities as a minimum:
a.   One (1) toilet for each ten (10) camping sites, or fraction thereof,
excluding sites with sewer hookups used for self-contained recreational
vehicles. There shall be a minimum of one (1) toilet provided for each men's
and women's restroom regardless of number of campsites. Urinals may be provided
for fifty percent (50%) of the toilet requirement of the men's restroom.
Toilets shall be partitioned for occupant privacy.
b.   One (1) hot water shower shall be provided for each ten (10) camping sites
or fraction thereof. There shall be a minimum of one (1) shower for each men's
and women's restroom regardless of the number of campsites. Showers shall be
partitioned for occupant privacy.
c.   One (1) sink with hot water shall be provided for each ten (10) camping
sites or fraction thereof. There shall be a minimum of one (1) sink for each
men's and women's restroom regardless of the number of campsites.
d.   Each restroom shall contain shelf space and/or hooks adequate for toilet
articles and towels, a good, well lighted mirror directly above each sink, an
electric outlet convenient to the sink, ample general illumination,
wastebaskets, and windows and doors designed for complete privacy.
e. Maintenance. Campgrounds must be well maintained in all areas. This includes
the grounds, restroom facilities, buildings and any recreational areas and
equipment.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-742, passed 11-9-2010)
4.20 NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
A.   Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to regulate the use,
maintenance, alteration, repair, extension and restoration of buildings and
land which lawfully existed at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, but
which do not conform to the regulations for the district in which they are
located.
B.   Continued use.
1.   The lawful use of land, building or structure existing at the time of the
passage of this Ordinance, although such does not conform to the provisions
hereof for the land, may be continued, but if such non-conforming use is
discontinued or inactive for a period of six (6) months it shall be considered
abandoned, and future use of the land or structure shall be in conformity with
the provisions of this Ordinance. An applicant whose use has been discontinued
or inactive for a period of six (6) months may request one (1) additional six
(6) month extension. The Zoning Administrator may approve/disapprove the
extension administratively or refer the request to Council for their
consideration. Any decision of the Zoning Administrator regarding an extension
may be appealed to Council.
2.   Nothing in this article shall prevent the reconstruction, repairing, or
rebuilding of a non-conforming structure or part thereof rendered necessary by
normal wear and tear, deterioration, or depreciation.
3.   Nothing in this Ordinance shall be interpreted as authorization for
approval of the continuance of the use of a building or premises in violation
of regulations in effect at the time of the effective date of this Ordinance.
4.   Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent requiring the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any portion of a structure declared unsafe by
a proper authority.
5.   Nothing in this Ordinance shall require any change in plans, construction,
or designated use of a building or lot for which a building permit or other
official permit has been issued prior to the enactment or amendment of this
Ordinance, provided the construction or use shall be diligently pursued within
six (6) months of the date of this Ordinance, and the building or use is
completed and used according to such plans as filed within one (1) year from
the date of adoption or subsequent amendment of this Ordinance.
6.   A non-conforming building or portion thereof which was specifically
designed or, beyond a reasonable doubt, intended by the nature of its
arrangement and construction to be used in any way which would be non-
conforming under this Ordinance, but was not so used at the time this Ordinance
became effective, may, if not altered or repaired as prohibited elsewhere in
this Ordinance, be occupied or used for the purpose for which it was designed,
arranged, or intended provided such building is so used within six (6) months
after the effective date of this Ordinance. Otherwise the use of such building
shall conform to the provisions of this Ordinance.
7.   Once a non-conforming use has been voluntarily discontinued or promised to
be discontinued and filed in writing with the Zoning Administrator in order to
secure a rezoning, Conditional Use Permit, or other approval, such non-
conforming use, upon receipt of the requested approval, shall not be allowed to
continue and shall conform to all provisions of this Ordinance except as
specified in the approval.
C.   Reconstruction.
1.   Where any non-conforming use or structure in existence at the effective
date of this Ordinance, which does not conform to the district in which
located, that shall be destroyed to extent of fifty (50) percent of its value,
then, without further action by Council, the building or land shall, from date
of destruction, be subject to this Ordinance.
2.   Nothing in this Ordinance shall be interpreted as authorization for
continuance of the use of a building or land in violation of zoning regulations
in effect prior to adoption of this Ordinance.
3.   Nothing in this Ordinance shall be interpreted to require any changes in:
a.   An existing building;
b.   A building for which a building permit has been issued and construction
has been diligently pursued within three (3) months of the date of permit, and
ground story framework (including second tier of beams) has been completed
within six (6) months of date of the permit, and the entire building was
completed within one year from date of this Ordinance.
D.   Expansion of a Non-Conforming Use. No non-conforming building, use of
building or use of land shall be expanded on in any way that enlarges or
reinforces the non-conformity.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
4.21 SIGN REGULATIONS
4.21.1 PURPOSE
The purposes of this Sign Code are to establish reasonable regulations that:
A.   Promote the public welfare and safety through the safe placement and
installation of signs; and
B.   Promote economic vitality for local businesses and services; and
C.   Protect and enhance the Town's aesthetic interests by preventing over-
proliferation of signs and maintaining a high quality of signs throughout the
Town.
(Ord. 17-819, passed 3-14-2017)
4.21.2 PERMITS REQUIRED
A.   Permit Required. Except as provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any
person to construct, install, attach, place, paint, alter, relocate, or
otherwise maintain any non-exempt sign in the Town without first obtaining a
sign permit in conformance with this Sign Code.
B.   Conflicts with other requirements. If provisions of this Sign Code are
conflict with any other Town Code or Ordinance, the more restrictive
requirement(s) shall apply. Signs maintained contrary to the provisions of this
Sign Code are declared to be nuisances and may be abated as provided by law.
C.   Fees. Sign permit fees shall be as adopted by the Council by resolution.
D.   Sign Permit Application. No sign permit application shall be accepted if
not submitted with full payment of all fees required. Application for a
sign permit shall be made to the Development Services Department on forms
provided by the Town and shall include at a minimum the following information:
1.   Yavapai County Assessor's parcel number identifying the property where the
sign will be located;
2.   Street address, if any, legal description of the property, and dimensions
thereof. If the parcel is not within a recorded subdivision, a metes and bounds
legal description shall be submitted with the application;
3.   Name, address and telephone number of the property owner and agent, if
any;
4.   Signature of applicant or agent;
5.   Inventory of all existing signs on the property showing the type,
dimensions, and location of each sign;
6.   Fully dimensioned plans and elevations showing the dimensions, placement
of copy, and location of each proposed sign in relation to the property line(s)
and public right(s)-of-way;
7.   Plans indicating the scope and structural detail of the work to be done,
including all connections, supports, footings, and materials to be used;
8.   Type, placement, and strength of illumination, if any and required
information for an electrical permit for signage illumination;
9.   Such other information as the Zoning Administrator may require for the
purpose of determining whether the application complies with the Sign Code
requirements;
E.   Sign Permit Review; Timeframes.
1.   Within ten business days of submission of an application for a
sign permit, staff shall review the application for completeness. If the
application is not complete, the applicant will be notified of the deficiency
via email, telephone, or first class mail.
2.   Within thirty business days of receipt of a complete application, Town
staff shall review the application for compliance with the regulations set
forth in this Code and in the Town Code, as applicable, and shall issue the
permit or notify the applicant of deficiencies and the need for corrections.
F.   Temporary Sign Permits. Signs with a limited duration of use, such as
those provided in Section
4.21.6 shall obtain a temporary sign permit. The requirements and criteria for
such signs are as follows:
1.   Temporary sign permits shall be issued for no more than six months. The
temporary sign shall be removed as soon as the business’ permanent sign is
installed or six months, whichever occurs first.
2.   The temporary sign permit shall not be renewable.
3.   Temporary signs shall conform to all other requirements of this Code.
4.   Special event (promotional) signs and auxiliary signs do not require
temporary sign permits.
G.   Exempt Signs. The following types of signs are exempt from the permitting
requirements but shall comply with all other requirements and standards set
forth in this Sign Code. No business shall have more than two (2) exempt signs
and no more than two (2) exempt signs may be located on any residential lot,
except as provided in the following table:
Description Type Number Permitted Maximum Area and Height
                                                                                        Maximum
Description                                                      Type         Number    Area
                                                                              Permitted and
                                                                                        Height
Official notices authorized by a court, public body or public                         No
safety official                                                                         limit
                                                                 Wall or
Government Signs                                                ground-      No limit  No
                                                                 mounted                limit
                                                                 standard
Posters                                                                               No
                                                                                        limit
                                                                                        12
Temporary non-commercial directional signage                     A-frame      Three (3) square
                                                                                        feet
                                                                                        total
                                                                 Banner,                200
Temporary use permit signage (see Section 3.15(D)(2)(f))         pennant,     Ten (10)  square
                                                                 flags                  feet
                                                                                        maximum
Sign for temporary event held by non-profit charitable           Banner,                48
organization (as designated under Section 501(c)(3) of the       pennant,     Two (2)   square
Internal Revenue Code) with a permanent location inside Town’s flags                  feet
incorporated limits                                                                     maximum
Signs located within structures in Commercial zoning districts   Window Signs         No
                                                                                        limit
                                                                 Wall,
Signs on residentially zoned property                            window, or             
                                                                 ground-
                                                                 mounted
Signs required to be relocated by the Town or other governmental                       
agency
 
H.   Special event (promotional) signs and auxiliary signs shall be subject to
the following:
1.   No special event (promotional) or auxiliary signage shall be allowed for
any business until such time as the business obtains and installs, at a
minimum, a wall-mounted permanent sign.
2.   An aggregate of up to two (2) special event (promotional) signs or
auxiliary signs are permitted in addition to the permanent signs allowed for a
business. The number and size of the special event (promotional) signs or
auxiliary signs are determined by the zoning of the property as shown in the
table in section
4.21.6, Temporary Signs and Auxiliary Signs. If the business wants to display a
new special event (promotional) sign or auxiliary sign, then one or more of the
existing signs on display must be taken down to ensure the total square footage
requirements are maintained.
3.   Special event signs, auxiliary signs, and A-frames may be displayed year-
round, so long as the signs remain in good repair.
(Ord. 17-819, passed 3-14-2017; Ord. 2020-878, passed 1-28-2020)
4.21.3 GENERAL SIGN REGULATIONS
A.   The regulations, requirements, and provisions set forth in this Chapter
shall apply to all signs erected, placed, or constructed within the Town.
B.   All signs shall be structurally designed, constructed, erected, and
maintained in conformance with all applicable Technical Codes and regulations.
C.   Signs shall not be constructed or located in a manner that interferes with
pedestrian or vehicular travel, obstructs free and clear vision of traffic,
poses a hazard to either pedestrians or vehicles, or in such a manner to
confuse, distract, or interfere with traffic and/or pedestrians.
D.   Signs shall be located a minimum of six feet (6') from property lines.
E.   All signs and sign structures, conforming and non-conforming, shall be
maintained in good order, repair, and appearance at all times so as not to
constitute a danger or hazard to the public safety or create visual blight as
determined by the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee.
F.   All illuminated signs shall comply with Section
4.24 Outdoor Lighting including, but not limited to, Subsection
4.24.4 General Requirements, Subsection (P).
G.   A non-commercial sign may be located in any location that a
commercial sign is permitted and shall comply with the regulations set forth in
this Chapter for that location.
H.   Off-Site Signage is prohibited, except as specifically set forth in this
Section. In order to be permitted to have off-site signage, the following
conditions must be met:
1.   The property on which the business requesting the off-site signage is
located shall be no further than 1/4 mile from SR 89.
2.   The business owner shall obtain permission pursuant to a non-revocable
license, in a form provided by the Town, from an owner of commercial property
fronting on SR 89, granting the off-site business the right to construct a new
freestanding sign on the commercial property or to add the off- site business
nameplate to an existing freestanding or monument sign. If no existing
freestanding or monument sign exists, a new sign may be constructed to provide
signage for the onsite businesses with additional nameplates for off-site
signage opportunities; provided, that any signage on such new freestanding or
monument sign shall be calculated as part of the total allowable signage for
each business.
3.   The non-revocable license granted by the owner of the commercial property
fronting SR 89 shall include a specific depiction of the location of the sign
and a specific time limit or expiration date for the license. If the license
has not been extended at the conclusion of the time period, the sign must be
removed. The license shall be valid for the time period stated and shall not be
terminated if the underlying property or the related business is sold during
that time period.
4.   Off-site signage shall require a sign permit. The signature of the owner
of the commercial property fronting on SR 89 on which the sign is proposed
shall be required on the application. A copy of the signed license shall be
submitted as part of the application.
5.   Off-site signage shall conform to all other aspects of permanent signage
as defined in Section
4.21 of this Chapter (i.e., freestanding, monument, etc.).
6.   Off-site signage shall not be allowed on vacant property.
7.   The business requesting off-site signage shall be required to have a
permanent sign on-site prior to approval of any off-site signage. The square
footage of the off-site signage shall be deducted from the total allowable
signage of that type on the site the business is located.
8.   No temporary or auxiliary off-site signage shall be permitted; such
signage shall only be allowed on the property on which the business is located.
9.   All off-site signage shall comply with the Outdoor Lighting ordinance
found in Section
4.24 of this Chapter.
10.   Signage shall meet minimum required setbacks. Signage is prohibited from
being located in the public rights-of-way.
11.   The Town shall not provide advice or direction to either part in
discussions or negotiations regarding the license, other than to provide the
form.
(Ord. 17-819, passed 3-14-2017; Ord. 2020-883, passed 7-28-2020)
4.21.4 MEASUREMENT OF SIGNS
A.   Sign Area shall be measured as follows:
1.   Sign copy mounted or painted on a background panel or area distinctively
painted, textured or constructed as a background for the sign copy shall be
measured as that area within the outside dimensions of the background panel or
surface.
2.   Sign copy mounted as individual letters and/or graphics against a wall or
parapet of a building or other structure that has not been painted, textured,
or otherwise altered to provide a distinctive background for the sign copy
shall be measured as a sum of the smallest rectangles that will enclose each
word and each graphic in the total sign copy.
3.   Multi-face signs shall be measured as follows:
a.   A two (2) faced sign shall be considered as one sign when determining the
sign area, provided both faces are parallel or the interior angle between the
two (2) sign faces is sixty degrees (60º) or less. If the interior angle is
greater than sixty degrees (60º), the sign area shall be the sum of the area of
the two (2) faces.
b.   Where a sign has three (3) or more faces: the area of the sign shall be
calculated as fifty percent (50%) of the sum of the area of all faces.
         Multi-F ace Signs                            Non-Planar Signs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b6f5d098a7b871b095504dfa79f111b7d1d8fa7c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-452.png]               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
b6f5d098a7b871b095504dfa79f111b7d1d8fa7c/IMAGES/0-0-0-454.png]
c.   Where a sign is a spherical, free form, sculptural, figurative or other
non-planar sign, the sign area shall be fifty (50%) percent of the sum of the
area of the sides of the smallest polyhedron that will encompass the
sign structure.
B.   Sign Height.
1.   Sign height shall be measured as follows.
a.   Freestanding sign height shall be the vertical distance from the top of
the highest element of the sign or sign structure to ground level. The monument
base or other structure erected to support or ornament the sign shall be
included as part of the sign height.
b.   When a freestanding sign is located below the average grade of an
adjacent roadway "ground level" shall be measured from the average grade of the
adjacent roadway.
c.   Wall or parapet-mounted sign height shall be the vertical distance to the
top of the sign or sign structure from the base of the wall on which the sign
is located.
(Ord. 17-819, passed 3-14-2017)
4.21.5 SIGN STANDARDS
A.   Wall Signs.
 
Zoning      Maximum   Maximum Height Standards
District    Area
SR-.16, SR- 4 sq.
1, SR-1.6,  feet                    No back light illumination
SR-2.5
AR-36, AR-  8 sq.                   No back light illumination
5, AR-4*    feet
MR-1, MHP-  3 sq.     6 feet above
4 Uses by   feet      story floor    May be illuminated.
Right*                level
MR-1, MHP-  As
4           approved  As approved in As permitted in Use Permit
Conditional in Use    Use Permit
Uses*       Permit
SR-.16, SR-
1, SR-1.6,
SR-2, SR-   16 sq.                   Institutional facility uses allowed by right within residential zoning
2.5, AR-4,  feet                    districts.
AR-5, AR-
36, MR-1,
MHP-4
             
             
            See Speed                Horizontal distance no greater than 80% of the width of the building
           Limit                    Wall signs pertaining to any one (1) business within a complex, on a separate
           Table                    parcel or lot, or on a freestanding PAD shall be permitted on the exterior
           4.21.5.A-               walls of the space occupied by the business.
CL, CH, I,  1                        Where a building is situated on a corner of two roadways, the signage shall
PL and OS   Aggregate                be calculated where the wall fronts each roadway.
            sq.                      Where a wall does not face an adjacent roadway, 1 sq. ft. per linear foot of
            footage =                shall be permitted.
            200 sq.
            feet
 
*Not applicable to institutional facility uses allowed by right within
residential zoning districts.
 
Speed Limit Table A-1
Speed Limit of Adjacent Roadway
< 35 MPH                35 MPH                      > 35 MPH
1.25 sq. ft. per linear 1.5 sq. ft. per linear foot 2 sq. ft. per linear foot
foot
 
B.   Freestanding Signs.
   
Use Zoning District Maximum Area Maximum Height Standards
Use                             Zoning   Maximum     Maximum     Standards
                                District Area        Height
                                                             Maximum of 2 freestanding monument signs may be permitted.
Allowed by Right                OS, MR-  32 sq. feet 6 feet      May be illuminated.
                                1, MHP-4
Subject to Conditional          OS, MR-  Per         Per          
Use Permit                     1, MHP-4 Use Permit Use Permit Per Use Permit
                                SR-.16,
                                SR-1,
                                SR-1.6,
                                SR-2,
Institutional facility uses     SR-2.5,                         
allowed by right in:            AR-4,    32 sq. feet 6 feet      May be illuminated.
                                AR-5,
                                AR-36,
                                MR-1,
                                MHP-4
                                CL, CH,  See Speed Limit Table
Single Tenant Building          I, PL    4.21.5.B-1              May be illuminated.
                                and OS
                                CL, CH,  See Speed Limit Table
Multiple Tenant Building        I, PL    4.21.5.B-2              May be illuminated.
                                and OS
                                                                 One sign may be permitted for every 500 ft. of street
                                                               frontage;
                                                              Maximum of 2 signs per street frontage.
Shopping Centers or Commercial CL, CH,  See Speed Limit Table   Individual buildings within the development and/or the PAD
Centers                         I, PL    4.21.5.B-2              sites within the commercial center shall not be considered
                                and OS                           as separate developments for signage purposes.
                                                                 May be illuminated.
                                CL, CH,                        Sign area to be distributed between up to 3 signs, the
Drive Through Services          I, PL,   96 sq. feet 8 feet      faces of which shall not be visible from the public right-
                                and OS                           of-way.
 
 
Speed Limit Table 4.21.5.B-1
Speed Limit of Adjacent Roadway
        < 35 MPH                                                         35 MPH    > 35 MPH
                                                                         .5 sq.    .5 sq.
                                                                         ft. per   ft. per
                                                                         linear    linear
Maximum .5 sq. ft. per linear ft. of lot frontage; not to exceed 32 sq. ft. of    ft. of
Area    ft.                                                              lot       lot
                                                                         frontage; frontage;
                                                                         not to    not to
                                                                         exceed 48 exceed 48
                                                                         sq. ft.   sq. ft.
Maximum 8 ft.                                                            12 ft.    12 ft.
Height
 
 
Speed Limit Table 4.21.5.B-2
Speed Limit of Adjacent Roadway
               < 35 MPH   35 MPH     > 35 MPH
Maximum Area   64 sq. ft. 72 sq. ft. 96 sq. ft.
Maximum Height 8 ft.      12 ft.     12 ft.
 
C.   Electronic Signs.
 
Uses          Zoning      Maximum Area Maximum      Standards
              District                 Height
              SR-.16, SR-                           8 foot minimum height to
Institutional 1, SR-1.6,                            bottom of sign panel.
facility uses SR-2, SR-                             No flashing messages
allowed by    2.5, AR-4,  32 sq. ft.   14 feet      permitted.
right         AR-5, AR-                             Minimum message display
              36, OS, MR-                           time: 6 seconds
              1, MHP-4
              CL, CH, I,  Electronic   Electronic   Electronic Signs: As
             PL, and OS  Signs: Per   Signs: Per   conditioned in Use Permit.
                          Use Permit  Use Permit
              CL, CH, I,  Reader Panel Reader Panel 8 foot minimum height to
             PL, and OS  Signs: 32    Signs: 14    bottom of sign panel.
                          sq. ft.      feet
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b6f5d098a7b871b095504dfa79f111b7d1d8fa7c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-456.png]
 
D.   Awning Signs.
 
Zoning District      Maximum Area                 Standards
CL, CH, I, PL and OS 1 sq. ft. per lineal foot of Copy shall be placed on the
                     building frontage            valance of the awning.
 
E.   Shingle Signs and Projecting Signs.
 
Sign Type       Zoning   Maximum Maximum Standards
                District Area    Height
                                       8 ft. minimum clearance between bottom of sign and sidewalk.
               CL, CH,  6 sq.          One sign permitted per business.
Shingle Sign   I, PL,   ft.             Sign shall not encroach into public right-of-way, including sidewalk.
                and OS
                                       8 ft minimum clearance between bottom of sign and sidewalk.
               CL, CH,  9 sq.          One sign permitted per business.
Projecting SignI, PL,   ft.             Sign shall not encroach into public right-of-way, including sidewalk.
                and OS
 
F.   Parapet or Mansard Signs.
 
Sign Type  Zoning District Maximum Area       Maximum Height Standards
                                                              
Parapet or                50% of the front                  Shall not project
Mansard    CL, CH, I       face area of the                 above the top of
                           parapet or mansard                the parapet or
                                                             mansard.
 
G.   Aggregate Signage Limits.
1.   The total maximum aggregate signage shall not exceed two-hundred ninety-
six square feet (296 sq. feet) for a single-tenant development.
2.   The total maximum aggregate signage shall not exceed three-hundred sixty
square feet (360 sq. feet) for a multi-tenant development.
3.   Comprehensive Sign Packages may be approved by Planning and Zoning
Commission and Town Council for multi-tenant developments with up to a 50%
increase in total aggregate area.
4.   The provisions above shall apply unless such guidelines are addressed in
an approved comprehensive sign package.
5.   Signage whose manner and placement has not been listed herein may be
approved at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee.
6.   A-frame signs shall be placed a minimum of five (5) feet out of the right-
of-way on the property where the business operates provided such signs shall
not obstruct pedestrian traffic. A-frame signage size allowance is calculated
as part of the total allowable aggregate auxiliary signage square footage.
7.   All temporary signs, special event (promotional) signs and auxiliary signs
shall be placed (a) a minimum five (5) feet from the property line on which the
business is located and (b) outside the public rights-of-way.
(Ord. 17-819, passed 3-14-2017; Ord. 2020-878, passed 1-28-2020)
4.21.6 TEMPORARY SIGNS, SPECIAL EVENT SIGNS AND AUXILIARY SIGNS
 
Sign Type            Zoning        Maximum Area   Maximum Height Standards
                     District
                                                                 On-site only.
                                                                Shall not be
                    CL, CH, I,                                 located above
Banner, Pennant,     Public,       48 sq. ft.                   the roof of
Streamer, Feather    Institutional aggregate                     any building.
                     Facility                                    Shall be
                                                                 maintained in
                                                                 good repair.
                                                                 On-site only.
                                                                 Shall not be
                                                                located above
Banner, Pennant,                                              the roof of
Streamer, Feather   MR-1, MHP-4   24 sq. ft.                    any building.
                                                                 Shall be
                                                                 maintained in
                                                                 good repair.
                                                                 May be made of
                                                                 wood, vinyl,
                                                                 metal, or
                                                                 other similar
                                                                 non-pliable
                                                                 material.
                                                                 Shall be on-
                                                                 site only.
                                                                 One (1) sign,
                                  Sizes limited                 not to exceed
                     CL, CH, I,    to:                           6 sq. ft.
                    Public or     24" x 36" or 6               total per
A-Frame              Institutional sq. ft.                       business.
                     Facility      maximum.                      Shall be
                                                                 maintained in
                                                                 good repair.
                                                                 Anything
                                                                 attached to
                                                                 the A-frame
                                                                 sign shall
                                                                 count against
                                                                 the total
                                                                 square footage
                                                                 allowed.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b6f5d098a7b871b095504dfa79f111b7d1d8fa7c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-458.png]
 
(Ord. 17- 819, passe d 3- 14- 2017 ; Ord. 2020-878, passed 1-28-2020)
4.21.7 PROHIBITED SIGNS
A.   Any sign not specifically listed as permitted by this Chapter is
prohibited, including, but not limited to the following:
1.   Off-site commercial signs, except as specifically permitted in Subsection
4.21.3.H. of this Chapter.
2.   Vehicle signs or signs mounted, attached, or painted on trailers, boats,
or motor vehicles primarily or consistently parked, stored, or displayed in a
manner intended to attract the attention of the public.
3.   Signs attached to any utility pole, or structure, streetlight, traffic
signal, tree, fire hydrant, bridge, park bench or other location on public
property.
4.   Signs that are animated, inflatable, or audible, or rotate or have
intermittent or flashing illumination or emit audible sound or visible matter;
except time and/or temperature units.
5.   Signs displayed in a manner or location that prevents free ingress and
egress from a door, window or other exit.
(Ord. 17-819, passed 3-14-2017; Ord. 2020-882, passed 7-28-2020)
4.21.8 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS
A.   A non-conforming sign may continue to be utilized in perpetuity only in
the manner and to the extent that it existed prior to the effective date of the
provision of this Sign Code that first caused the sign to become non-
conforming.
B.   A non-conforming sign may not be altered in any manner not in conformance
with the sign regulations in the zoning district in which it is located that
are in effect at the time of the alteration, except for reasonable repair and
maintenance of the sign or to change the copy provided that such change does
not require structural alterations.
(Ord. 17-819, passed 3-14-2017; Ord. 2020-878, passed 1-28-2020)
4.21.9 VIOLATIONS; REMOVAL
A.   Notice of Violation: Notice of violation of this Chapter shall be provided
by a Code Compliance Officer to the property owner, person in control, or
authorized agent of the property. The time periods provided for correction of
the violation shall be:
1.   Permanent Signs. A ten calendar day written notice shall be provided.
2.   Temporary Signs. A two calendar day written notice shall be provided.
3.   Portable Signs.
a.   A two calendar day written notice shall be provided for Portable Signs
other than those placed within the right-of-way.
b.   A written notice is not required for Portable Signs placed within the
right-of-way.
B.   Authority to Remove.
1.   The Code Compliance Officer is authorized to require removal of any sign
installed in violation of this Chapter. The Code Compliance Officer may remove
or cause to be removed any Temporary Sign which is not removed by the owner.
2.   The Building Official is authorized to remove or require the immediate
removal or repair without written notice of any unsafe sign that creates an
immediate hazard to persons or property.
C.   Removal by Town. In the case of a sign code violation where the offending
sign has been removed by the Code Compliance Officer, the notice provided
pursuant to Section
4.21.9(A) shall state the reason for its removal.
D.   Recovery of Costs. The costs of removal or repair of a sign by the Town
shall be borne by the person who installed the sign, and, if unknown, the owner
or lessee of the sign and of the property on which the sign is located. If the
Town incurs costs in the removal of repair of a sign, the Town may bring an
action in Municipal Court or Superior Court to recover its costs.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 13-778, passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 14-784,
passed 6-10-2014; Ord. 15-798, passed 6-23-2015; Ord. 17-819, passed 3-14-2017)
Editor’s Note:
   The provisions of amending Ordinance 14-784 are set to expire on January 1,
2016
4.21.10 [RESERVED]
4.22 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
Parking and loading regulations are established to provide standards to
accommodate the vehicular storage and delivery access needs of the various land
uses permitted by this Ordinance. It is the intent of this Ordinance to require
the minimum number of on-site parking and loading space with maneuvering areas,
driveways and surface materials for the efficient movement of vehicular
traffic.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
4.22.1 GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS
Permitted land uses are required to provide for and maintain adequate parking
to prevent traffic congestion and unsightly vehicular storage.
Regulations pertaining to required parking spaces and access thereto in the
Town are established.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
4.22.2 OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES
Paved and drained space shall be provided.
A.   For all uses except single-family residential uses, vehicular parking for
a standard vehicle shall be in the form of a rectangle not less than ten (10)
feet by twenty (20) feet, excluding driveways or aisles, with access to a
public thoroughfare. Drive aisles/backup areas shall be a minimum of twenty-
four (24) feet.
1.   All such spaces shall be connected with a public or private street by an
improved driveway not less than twenty (20) feet in length.
2.   Off-street parking spaces for single-family detached residences may also
be connected with a public street by an alley.
B.   BOAT OR RECREATION VEHICLE SPACE. Spaces shall be provided in the form of
a rectangle not less than ten (10) feet by twenty-four (24) feet, or larger as
may be required to accommodate the unit, subject to the screening requirements
of this Ordinance, or otherwise designated through Site Plan Review or Zoning
approval.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008)
4.22.3 ACCESS
An improved private access way shall be provided between a public or private
street and parking areas, garages, carports and/or R.V. parking space.
A.   DRIVEWAYS.
Driveway spacing - No access driveway shall be located closer than one hundred
(100) feet from a collector and arterial street intersection.
No access driveway shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet from a local
street intersection.
Commercial and industrial driveways shall have a minimum separation of two
hundred (200) feet centerline to centerline (shared driveways and cross access
are encouraged).
A reduction in spacing may be granted by the Town Engineer.
B.   FRONT YARD.
Any vehicle that is not otherwise prohibited by the provisions of this
Ordinance from being parked in the front yard of a single-family or two-family
residence lot may be parked upon a driveway. (Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006;
Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008)
4.22.4 PARKING DESIGN STANDARDS
Parking areas, required herein, shall be provided, improved and maintained in
accord with the following specifications.
Parking Standards Pertaining to All Districts
A.   PERMITS.
No building permit shall be issued until the applicant has presented
satisfactory evidence to the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee, that he
owns or has otherwise available for their use, sufficient property to provide
required parking.
B.   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SPACES.
1.   All vehicular egress from parking lots to public right-of-way shall be by
forward motion only, except in the case of single-family and two-family
residences fronting on a local street or a primary or secondary collector
street.
2.   New construction and conversion of a residence to a commercial use:
subject to the provisions contained in this subsection B., all required parking
and loading spaces, maneuvering areas, driveways, and fire lanes shall be paved
with asphaltic concrete over an A.B. base, concrete or masonry to a thickness
and structure that will support the type and intensity of vehicular traffic
generated by the proposed use. As the requirements may vary the paving cross
section will require approval by the Town Engineer. The Town Engineer may also
approve alternative surfacing such as “chip seal”.
3.   Additions to existing structures: whenever an addition to an existing
structure is proposed that enlarges the existing structure by fifty (50)
percent or more then the above requirements in paragraph 2. above shall apply.
4.   Change of use in an existing commercial  building: the applicant shall
provide a site plan indicating that the parking area is of sufficient size and
adequate dimension to provide any additional parking that the new use may be
required to provide in accordance with the requirements of this code. Whenever
a change of use occurs the owner is encouraged to provide a dust free surface
such as decomposed granite over the entire area that is dedicated to the
required parking and maneuvering area and driveways.
5.   Site development: when a site is to be developed for a commercial purpose
allowed by the Unified Development Ordinance that does not include a building,
the primary traffic lanes and any required parking area shall be surfaced in a
manner and extent that is approved by the Town Engineer.
6.   All areas of the parking lot must be at least ten (10) feet from front
property lines and five (5) feet from rear and side property lines.
7.   Tandem arrangement of required parking spaces is prohibited, except for
handicapped parking spaces, and as otherwise permitted by this Ordinance.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 11-738,
passed 1-11-2011)
4.22.5 PARKING STANDARDS FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL OR MIXED USES
In case of mixed uses, the total requirements for off-street parking space
shall be the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately.
A.   MAINTENANCE.
It shall be the joint and separate responsibility of the lessee and owner of
the principal use, uses or building to maintain in a neat and adequate manner,
the parking space, access ways, striping, landscaping, and required fences or
screening.
B.   PARKING AREA IMPROVEMENTS.
For multiple-family residential, commercial , industrial and PAD districts, the
following shall apply:
1.   Parking areas shall be screened from street view and residential
development by a berm and/or wall (minimum of three (3) feet in height), with
landscaping.
2.   Except where a wall is required, a minimum six (6) inch high curb or
permanently attached or affixed bumper guard shall be constructed so that no
part of a vehicle extends beyond the property line.
C.   ACCESS.
Off-street parking space shall be connected with a public street by a paved
driveway that affords safe and reasonably convenient ingress and egress. The
minimum width of driveways shall be forty (40) feet if ingress and egress are
the same. If ingress and egress are by separate drives, then the minimum width
of each drive shall be twenty (20) feet.
D.   PARKING SPACE LOCATION.
All required parking spaces for non-residential or mixed uses shall be located
on the lot upon which the use is located or on an adjacent lot. Required
parking spaces for multiple-family, commercial or industrial use may be located
on an adjacent lot in another district (other than in a single-family
residential district).
E.   JOINT USE PARKING FOR PAD.
If an applicant for a mixed use PAD can demonstrate through a parking study
supplied by the applicant and approved by the Development Services Director, or
his/her designee, that the peak parking demand for the mixed uses will be less
than the sum of the parking spaces required for each use served, a reduction in
spaces may be allowed.
1.   The approved joint use parking plan shall specify the typical hours of
operation with anticipated periods of greatest parking demand for all uses
within the development; and shall indicate the number, location and convenience
of pedestrian access of all spaces available to serve each use.
2.   The joint use parking plan shall remain on file with the Development
Services Department  for the purpose of monitoring the continuing adequacy of
available parking.
3.   At the time of joint use parking plan approval, or at any subsequent time
when uses, intensities of use or hours of operation, may be expanded or
otherwise change, or upon findings that the parking facilities are inadequate,
the Development Services Director, or his/her designee, may require additional
site area to be provided, and as necessary improved, to supply additional
parking facilities.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
4.22.6 PARKING STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL USES
A.   PARKING SPACE LOCATION.
No part of any vehicle parked in the front yard of a single-family or two-
family residence lot shall extend over the public right-of-way or sidewalk,
pavement edge, or street curb where no sidewalk exists; nor shall any such
vehicle be parked within the area formed by a ten-foot by ten-foot (10 x 10)
triangle as measured from the point of intersection of the back of the
sidewalk, or street curb where no sidewalk exists, and a side property line
extended to the back of the sidewalk, or street curb where no sidewalk exists,
when such side property line is within five (5) feet of a driveway or an
improved parking surface located on an adjacent lot.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
4.22.7 PARKING SPACE ALLOCATION REQUIREMENTS
Requirements and directions for the allocation of parking spaces in all
Districts are described for various land uses.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
4.22.8 DETERMINATION OF REQUIRED SPACES
Calculations to determine the required number of parking spaces, and the design
of the space shall consider:
A.   Minimum standards for parking space allocation shall be subject to the
requirements of this Ordinance.
B.   The maximum number of parking spaces provided shall not exceed the minimum
number of spaces and an additional twenty (20) percent of parking spaces,
except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
C.   Parking lots shall be designed with a clear hierarchy of circulation with
major access drives providing access from the major street, major circulation
drives forming circulation through the parking area, and parking aisles whose
purpose is to provide access to parking spaces.
D.   Reciprocal access between adjacent commercial developments is required.
E.   Large parking lots shall be divided into a series of smaller lots of
approximately one hundred-fifty (150) spaces each, using raised landscape
island(s) at least ten (10) feet in width, and at least five hundred (500)
square feet in total area, located along the sides of the parking areas to
separate large parking areas. Walkways should be considered as part of these
landscape areas. Raised landscape strips at least five (5) feet wide and at
least ninety-five (95) square feet in total area, should be located on the ends
of parking rows, extending the full length of parking spaces. Additional
landscape islands should be considered in the interior of the individual
parking areas to provide shade and break up large expanses of parking area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b6f5d098a7b871b095504dfa79f111b7d1d8fa7c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-44.png]
F.   Parking areas may be combined and share the required landscape buffers.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b6f5d098a7b871b095504dfa79f111b7d1d8fa7c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-46.png]
G.   Parking lots shall be separated from the sides of buildings by a raised
walkway (with a minimum width of six (6) feet).
H.    Alternative Design Standards: To provide flexibility in design and
development of projects, alternative design standards are provided. The total
number of parking spaces may be increased by ten (10) percent, above the
maximum, however in no case may the total number of parking spaces be increased
by more than forty (40) percent above the base maximum allowed.
I.   In the case of fractional results in calculating parking requirements, the
required number shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number if the fraction
is 0.5 or greater.
J.   All uses not specifically designated, or similar to a specified use, shall
have parking space requirements determined by the Zoning Administrator.
K.   Handicapped parking spaces: in multiple-family, commercial (excluding
health care uses), and industrial districts, handicapped parking spaces shall
be provided at the ratio of one (1) space for the first twenty (20) parking
spaces provided, and one (1) space every twenty five (25) thereafter.
L.   Handicapped parking spaces ratio for health care uses shall be as
following:
 
1 - 10 Spaces  Require 1 HC Space
11 - 20 Spaces Require 2 HC Spaces
21 - 30 Spaces Require 3 HC Spaces
31 - 50 Spaces Require 4 HC Spaces
51 - 75 Spaces Require 5 HC Spaces
1 HC Space     Each 25 thereafter
 
M.   Handicapped Parking Spaces shall use the “Universal Parkin g Space”
dimensions for all new handicapped spaces within the Town.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b6f5d098a7b871b095504dfa79f111b7d1d8fa7c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-48.png]   DIMENSIONS: 11 X 20 WITH A 5-FOOT AISLE.
               THIS SIZE WILL ACCOMMODATE BOTH CARS AND VANS.
Parking Space Allocation Requirements
  USEMINIMUM STANDARDS
  USE                                 MINIMUM STANDARDS
Residential:
Single residences, duplexes, detached  2 spaces per dwelling unit
dwellings
Mobile home                            1 space per unit
Multiple residence, apartments:
Efficiencies, studios                  1 space per dwelling unit 
One-two bedroom unit                   1.5 spaces per dwelling unit 
Two + bedroom unit                     2 spaces per dwelling unit 
All apartment developments with 5 or
more units shall also provide guest    1 space per 10 dwelling unit s
parking and recreational vehicle
parking
                                       2 spaces per unit plus 1 guest space for
Condominium, Townhomes                 each additional and 1 recreational
                                       vehicle space for each 10 units
                                       2 spaces per unit plus 1 guest space for
Boarding house or similar facility     each additional and 1 recreational
                                       vehicle space for each 10 units
Public Assembly and Schools:
Churches and clubs, lodges and         1 space for each 75 sq. ft. of net
fraternal buildings, assembly halls,   useable floor area used for public
funeral homes, community centers,      assembly
libraries, auditoriums and theaters
Schools, kindergarten through ninth    1 space per 375 sq. ft. net useable
grade                                  floor area
High schools, academies, colleges,     1 space per 200 sq. ft. net useable
universities, trade or vocational      floor area
schools
Health Care:
Medical or dental offices and out-     1 space per 150 sq. ft. net useable
patient                                floor area clinics
Hospitals and nursing and convalescent 1 space per 400 sq. ft. net useable
homes                                  floor area
Day care center/nurseries              1 space per 375 sq. ft. net useable
                                       floor area, but not less than 5
Retail and Other Commercial
Developments:
Retail and other commercial            1 space per 300 sq. ft. net useable
developments                           floor area
Independent Commercial Buildings and
Uses
General offices/retail and services    1 space per 300 sq. ft. net useable
                                       floor area
General auto repair - garage, service  1 space per 300 sq. ft. net useable
station, car wash and drive-through    floor area, including service bays, wash
lubrication shops                      tunnels and retail areas
                                       1 space per room or suite or rooms plus
Hotel and motel                        1 space for each 25 rooms for truck
                                       trailers and recreational vehicles, such
                                       space of to be 10 x 75 feet
Restaurant, bar                        1 space per 50 sq. ft. net useable floor
                                       area and outdoor seating area
Outdoor sales and service areas (car   1 space per 375 sq. ft. net useable
lots, plant nurseries, building        floor area, of sales and service
supplies, and the like)                building, but not less than 4 spaces per
                                       use
Commercial greenhouses                 1 space per 900 sq. ft. net useable
                                       floor area
Recreation:
Bowling alleys                         5 spaces per lane plus ancillary use
                                       requirements
Theaters                               1 space for every 3 patron seats
                                       1 space per 2 practice tees in driving
Golf course                            range plus 4 spaces per green plus
                                       ancillary use requirements
Miniature golf, amusement parks and    1 space per 500 sq. ft. outside
water slides                           recreation area
Health spas/clubs, gyms & tennis,      1 space per 100 sq. ft. net useable
handball, racquetball courts/clubs     floor area, excluding courts, which
                                       require 2 spaces per court
                                       1 space per 75 ft. net useable floor
Skating rinks, dance halls             area used for recreational activities
                                       and ancillary use requirements
Industrial buildings and Uses:
                                       2 spaces for every 3 employees on the
Industrial buildings and uses          shift with the greatest number of
                                       employees
Independent Industrial buildings and
Uses:
Warehouses                             1 space per 900 sq. ft. net useable
                                       floor area
Manufacturing                          1 space per 600 sq. ft. net useable
                                       floor area
Mini storage buildings                 5% of the number of units
 
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-729, passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 11-738,
passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 15-798, passed 6-23-2015)
4.22.9 OFF-STREET LOADING
Commercial and industrial uses requiring delivery shall observe minimum loading
space accommodation.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
4.22.10 SPACES REQUIRED
Every hotel, restaurant, department store, freight terminal, or railroad yard,
hospital or sanitarium, industrial plant, manufacturing establishments, retail
establishment, storage warehouse or wholesale establishment, and all other
structures devoted to similar mercantile or industrial pursuits, which has an
aggregate gross floor area of 15,000 square feet or more shall provide off-
street truck loading or unloading berths in accordance with Table 4.4.4 below:
Table 4.4.4A
Loading Space Requirements
Square feet of Aggregate Gross Floor area  Required No. of Berths
Devoted to Such Use
Table 4.4.4A
Loading Space Requirements
Square feet of Aggregate Gross Floor area              Required No. of Berths
Devoted to Such Use
Building greater than 15,000 sq. ft. up to & including 1
40,000 sq. ft.
40,001 sq. ft. up to & including 100,000 sq. ft.       2
100,001 sq. ft. up to & including 160,000 sq. ft.      3
160,001 sq. ft. up to & including 240,000 sq. ft.      4
240,001 sq. ft. up to & including 320,000 sq. ft.      5
320,001 sq. ft. up to & including 400,000 sq. ft.      6
400,001 sq. ft. up to & including 499,000 sq. ft.      7
for each additional 100,000 sq. ft.                    1 additional
 
Any office building 100,000 sq. ft. or larger shall have at least one (1) off-
street loading berth.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
4.22.11 STANDARDS FOR OFF-STREET LOADING FACILITIES
All off-street loading facilities shall conform to the following standards:
A.   DIMENSIONS.
Unless otherwise specified in these zoning regulations, berths required shall
be at least forty-five (45) feet in length and all loading berths shall be at
least twelve (12) feet in width and fourteen (14) feet in height, exclusive of
aisle and maneuvering space.
B.   LOCATIONS.
Such space may occupy all or any part of any required yard space, except front
and side yards, and shall not be located closer than fifty (50) feet to any lot
in any residential zone unless separated from such zone by a screening wall
with a height of eight (8) feet, a twenty (20) foot landscape buffer with at
least fifty (50) percent of the view obscured by evergreen plant material, or a
combination of the above as ap-proved by the Zoning Administrator or the
Commission.
1.   Sufficient room for turning and maneuvering vehicles shall be provided on
the site so that vehicles shall cross a property line only by driving forward.
Driving over curbs or pavement rails is prohibited.
2.   Each loading berth shall be accessible from a street or alley or from an
aisle or drive connecting with a street or alley, without traversing a
residential district.
3.   Off-street loading facilities for a single use shall not be considered as
providing required off-street loading facilities for any other use.
a.   If more than one use is located on a site, the number of loading berths
provided shall be equal to the sum of the requirements prescribed in this
Ordinance for each use.
b.   If more than one use is located on a site and the gross floor area of each
use is less than the minimum for which loading berths are required but the
aggregate gross floor area is greater than the minimum for which loading berths
are required, off-street loading berths shall be provided as if the aggregate
gross floor area were used for the use requiring the greatest number of loading
berths.
C.   IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS.
The loading area, aisles, and access drives shall be paved and maintained so as
to provide a durable, dustless surface and shall be so graded and drained so as
to dispose of surface water without damage to private or public properties,
streets, or alleys.
1.   Bumper rails shall be provided, and maintained in a useable condition, at
locations where needed for safety or to protect property.
2.   The loading area is to be illuminated and lighting shall be deflected away
from abutting residential site so as not to cause glare.
D.   COMPLIANCE.
1.   Off-street loading facilities shall be located on the same site with the
use for which the berths are required.
2.   At the time of initial occupancy, major alterations or enlargement of a
site, or of completion of construction of a structure or of a major alteration
or enlargement of a structure, there shall be provided by the owner a report of
off-street loading berth requirements. The number of loading berths provided
for a major alteration or enlargement of a site or structure shall be in
addition to the number existing prior to the alteration or enlargement.
3.   Space allocated to any off-street loading berth shall not be used to
satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking facility.
4.   No regular repair work or servicing of vehicles shall be conducted in a
loading area.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
4.23 PUBLIC STREET SYSTEM AND PUBLIC USE ACCESS SYSTEM
A.   PURPOSE
The purpose of this subsection is to regulate the dedication and classification
of public streets, rights-of-way and access ways, and to ensure the orderly
growth of the public street system of Chino Valley.
B. STREET CLASSIFICATION
All streets within the corporate limits of the Town are designated as arterial,
collector, or residential streets.
1.   Street classifications.
a.   Arterial streets shall generally carry through traffic and, unless part of
the state highway system, shall be the responsibility of the Town to maintain.
b.   Collector streets shall generally carry traffic from residential
neighborhoods to arterial streets or major destination points such as
industrial or commercial centers. Except as required by a subdivision plat,
collector streets shall be the responsibility of the Town to maintain.
c.   Residential streets shall carry traffic from residential lots to collector
streets. The Town bears no responsibility to construct residential streets, or
maintain such streets unless they have been built to Town standards and
formally accepted for maintenance.
2.   Street classification amendment procedure.
a.   All petitions for street classification amendment shall be presented to
the Zoning Administrator and Road Department Supervisor for their evaluation
and recommendation.
b.   The recommendations of the Zoning Administrator and Road Department
Supervisor, together with the petition, shall be forwarded to the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
Thereafter, the procedures set forth in the Chino Valley Unified Development
Ordinance shall be followed.
3.   No new residential street shall be added to the public street system
except as governed by the Subdivision Ordinance of the Town.
C.   INCLUSION IN THE PUBLIC USE ACCESS SYSTEM FOR PRE-EXISTING ACCESS WAYS AND
INCLUSION IN THE PUBLIC STREET SYSTEM
Any person may petition for inclusion of a pre-existing access way into the
public use access system. Any person may also petition for inclusion of a
right-of-way or non-conforming right-of-way into the public street system. The
Council or Commission may petition for inclusion of a new collector or arterial
street into the public street system.
D.   INCLUSION IN THE PUBLIC STREET SYSTEM FOR NEW COLLECTOR OR ARTERIAL
STREETS
E.   RIGHT-OF-WAY DEDICATION
1.   Right-of-way dedication s as required by this Ordinance, or otherwise
offered to or solicited by the Town, are for the purpose of acquiring full
public ownership for the public street system. Recording of such right-of-
way dedication s in no way implies acceptance of any roadway for maintenance.
2.   All right-of-way dedication s shall be offered to the Zoning Administrator
on forms specified by the Town.
3.   The Zoning Administrator and Public Works Director shall, within five (5)
working days from the date of the application, determine the correctness of the
proposed dedication as to size and alignment.
4.   Upon a favorable ruling the proposed dedication shall be recorded with the
Town and the County Recorder.
5.   In no case shall right-of-way or public street of the public use access
system, as required by this UDO, be considered as creating non-conforming lots
or prevent such lots from legally being split as otherwise governed in this UDO
due to loss of area as a result of such requirements.
F.   APPLICATIONS FOR MAINTENANCE
1.   Upon construction of a roadway on any residential right-of-way to Town
standards as specified in the Town Code. Whether by improvement district or
through subdivision regulations, the governing body of the improvement district
or developer for the subdivision may apply to the Town for acceptance of the
roadway for maintenance and the acceptance of the dedicated right-of-way.
2.   All such applications for maintenance shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator on forms specified by the Town and accompanied by a filing fee.
3.   The application shall be placed on the Town Council agenda within fifteen
(15) working days of the application, accompanied by the recommendations of the
Zoning Administrator and Road Department Supervisor.
4.   Upon favorable vote of the Town Council, the roadway, along with all
dedications recorded according to this Ordinance, shall be accepted by
resolution for maintenance as a public street. The acceptance of the dedicated
right-of-way shall be accomplished by the appropriate legal party signing the
recording of the required document.
5.   For lots with a zoning classification of one (1) acre or greater,
dedications of right-of-way or public streets of the public use access system,
as required by this UDO, shall not be considered to create non-conforming lots
from legally being split as otherwise governed in the UDO due to loss of area
as a result of such dedication.
G.   RESERVED
H.   FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY
Town Council shall adopt a map of future rights-of-way desired by the Town.
This map shall depict the roads which are not dedicated rights-of-way and which
are commonly used for access to lots or subdivisions, as well as dedicated
rights-of-way not accepted for maintenance. These are known as the public use
access system. The map shall also show additions to the rights-of-way the Town
currently owns which may be needed for future street/widening or other
purposes. The Future right-of-way Map shall be used to implement this
Ordinance.
I.   PUBLIC USE ACCESS SYSTEM
The map adopted by the Town shall depict the public use access system of the
Town as of the effective date of the adoption of this amendment.
1.   The public use access system designates all existing right-of-way being
used for vehicular access by local residents but which do not conform to all
the public street requirements including, but not limited to, conformance with
this Ordinance.
2.   The public use access system includes all existing access ways being used
for vehicular access by local residents but which do not conform to all the
public street requirements including, but not limited to, lack of right-of-way
and conformance with this Ordinance.
3.   It is the intent of this Ordinance to perfect the public use access system
and ensure the future development of a public street system.
4.   The public use access system is part of the Future right-of-way System.
The Town does not represent the streets of this system as necessarily public or
accepted for maintenance at the date of this amendment, but recognizes that
they exist as vehicular access for general public use.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-734, passed 7-8-2010; Ord. 2020-885,
passed 9-8-2020; Ord. 2022-923, passed 10-11-2022)
4.24 OUTDOOR LIGHTING
INTENT AND PURPOSE:
It is the intent of these regulations to encourage lighting practices and
systems which will: minimize light pollution, glare, light trespass; conserve
energy and resources while maintaining night time safety, utility, security,
and productivity; and curtail the degradation of the night time visual
environment.
APPLICABILITY
A.   NEW USES, BUILDINGS AND ADDITIONS: All proposed new land uses,
developments, buildings, structures, or building additions of twenty-five (25)
percent or more in terms of additional dwelling unit s, gross floor area,
seating capacity, or other units of measurement specified herein, either with a
single addition or cumulative additions subsequent to the effective date of
this Ordinance, shall meet the requirements herein for the entire property.
This includes additions, which increase the total number of required parking
spaces by twenty-five (25) percent or more. For all building additions of less
than twenty- five (25) percent cumulative, the applicant shall only have to
meet the requirements of this Ordinance for any new outdoor lighting provided.
B.   CHANGE OF USE/INTENSITY: Except as provided in Paragraph C. below,
whenever the use of any existing building, structure, or premises is changed to
a new use, or the intensity of use is increased through the incorporation of
additional dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, or other units
of measurement specified herein, and which change of use or intensification of
use creates a need for an increase in the total number of parking spaces of
twenty-five (25) percent or more, either with a single change or cumulative
changes subsequent to the effective date of this Ordinance, then all outdoor
lighting facilities shall meet the requirements herein for the entire property,
to the maximum extent possible as determined by the Zoning Administrator. For
changes of use or intensity which require an increase in parking of less than
twenty-five (25) percent cumulative, the applicant shall only have to meet the
requirements of this Ordinance for any new outdoor lighting provided.
C.   NON-CONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES OR LOTS: Whenever a non-conforming use,
structure or lot is abandoned for a period of six (6) months and then changed
to a new use according to the requirements of this Ordinance, then any existing
outdoor lighting shall be reviewed and brought into compliance as necessary for
the entire building, structure or premises, to the maximum extent possible as
determined by the Zoning Administrator.
APPROVED MATERIALS AND METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION OR INSTALLATION/OPERATION:
A.   Preferred Source - Low-pressure Sodium (LPS) lamps are the preferred
illumination source throughout the Town; their use is to be encouraged, when
not required, for outdoor illumination whenever its use would not be
detrimental to the use of the property.
B.   The provisions of this Ordinance are not intended to prevent the use of
any design, material, or method of installation or operation not specifically
pre-scribed herein, provided any such alternate has been approved by the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may approve any such proposed alternate
provided he/she finds that it:
1.   Provides at least approximate equivalence to the applicable specific
requirements of this Ordinance; and
2.   Is otherwise satisfactory and complies with the intent of this Ordinance.
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Outdoor floodlighting by flood light projection above the horizontal plane
is prohibited.
B.   All light fixtures that are required to be shielded shall be installed in
such a manner that the shielding is effective.
C.   All light fixtures, except streetlights, shall be located, aimed, or
shielded so as to minimize stray light trespassing across property boundaries.
D.   The installation, sale, offering for sale, lease, or purchase of any
mercury vapor light fixture or lamp for use as outdoor lighting is prohibited.
E.   Search lights, laser source lights, or any similar high-intensity light
shall not be permitted, except in emergencies by police and fire personnel or
at their direction or for meteorological data gathering purposes.
F.   Class I lighting may continue only until 9:00 p.m. or for as long as the
area is in active use.
G.   Illumination for outdoor recreation facilities must conform to the
shielding requirements of Table 4.24A below, except when such shielding would
interfere with the intended activity. For such facilities, partially shielded
luminaries are permitted. Examples of activities where partially shielded
luminaries are permitted include, but are not limited to, baseball, softball,
and football. Specifically, tennis, volleyball, racquetball and handball
courts, and swimming pools must utilize fully shielded luminaries. Where fully
shielded luminaries are required, the light fixtures must also conform to the
requirements of Paragraph C. above regarding light trespass.
H.   Multi-class lighting must either conform to the lamp-type and shielding
requirements of the most strict Class, as shown in Table 4.24A, or conform to
the time limitations of the least strict Class.
I.   External illumination for signs shall conform to the provisions of these
regulations.
J.   On projects where an engineer or architect is required, the developer
shall verify in writing to the Development Services Department that all outdoor
lighting was installed in accordance with the approved plans.
K.   Outdoor Light Output, Total. The maximum total amount of light, measured
in lumens, from all outdoor light fixtures. For lamp types that vary in their
output as they age (such as high pressure sodium), the initial output, as
defined by the manufacturer, is the value to be considered. For determining
compliance with this Ordinance, the light emitted from outdoor light fixtures
is to be included in the total output as follows:
1.   Outdoor light fixtures installed on poles (such as parking lot luminaries)
and light fixtures installed on the sides of the buildings or other structures,
when not shielded from above by the structure itself as defined in Paragraphs 2
and 3 below, are to be included in the total outdoor light output by simply
adding the lumen outputs of the lamps used.
2.   Outdoor light fixtures installed under canopies, building overhangs, or
roof eaves where the center of the lamp or luminaries is located at least five
(5) feet, but less than ten (10) feet from the nearest edge of the canopy or
overhang are to be included in the total outdoor light output as though they
produced only one-quarter (1/4) of the lamp’s rated lumen output.
3.   Outdoor light fixtures located under the canopy and ten (10) or more feet
from the nearest edge of a canopy, building overhang, or eave are to be
included in the total outdoor light output as though they produced only one-
tenth (1/10) of the lamp's rated lumen output.
L.   Service station Canopy Lighting. In addition to the calculations for
paragraph K.2. and K.3. above, the following requirements apply to service
station canopies:
1.   All luminaries mounted on the under surface of service station canopies
shall be fully shielded and utilize flat glass or flat plastic (acrylic or
polycarbonate) covers.
2.   The total light output used for illuminating service station canopies,
defined as the sum of all under-canopy initial bare-lamp outputs in lumens,
shall not exceed forty (40) lumens per square foot of canopy. All lighting
mounted under the canopy, including but not limited to luminaries mounted on
the lower surface of the canopy and auxiliary lighting within signage or panels
over the pumps, is to be included toward the total.
M.   Neon lighting is permitted, so long as lumen calculations from such
lighting are included in the total lumen calculations for the site, required by
this subsection. Lumens are calculated on a per foot basis, rather than per
“fixture”. Such lighting shall also be subject to the shielding requirements of
Section , unless exempted by Table 4.24A below.
TABLE 4.24A
LAMP SOURCE AND SHIELDING STANDARDS
Fixture/Lamp Type  Shielded Filtered
TABLE 4.24A
LAMP SOURCE AND SHIELDING STANDARDS
Fixture/Lamp Type                   Shielded  Filtered
Low Pressure Sodium                    Partially None
High Pressure Sodium                   Fully     None
Metal Halide                           Fully     Yes
Fluorescent                            Fully     Yes
Quartz                                 Fully     None
Incandescent 100W of greater per       Fully     None
fixture
Incandescent less than 100W            None      None
Mercury Vapor                          Fully     Yes
Fossil Fuel                            None      None
Glass Tubes filled with Neon, Argon or None      None
Krypton
Other Sources                          As approved by the Zoning Administrator
 
N.   Total outdoor light output (excluding street lights used for illumination
of public rights-of-way) of any development project shall not exceed 100,000
lumens per net acre, averaged over the entire project. Furthermore, no more
than 5,500 lumens per net acre may be accounted for by lamps in unshielded or
partially-shielded fixtures permitted in Table 4.24A, except that lamp(s)
emitting no more than 4,720 lumens per single-family dwelling unit or
duplex dwelling unit for residential outdoor lighting purposes are exempt from
the shielding requirements of Table 4.24A, though they must conform to all
other applicable restrictions. Single-family attached units (e.g. Townhouses),
and multiple-family residential units are limited to 2360 lumens of unshielded
lights per unit.
O.   Outdoor recreational facilities are not subject to the lumens per net acre
limit set, however, no such facility shall be illuminated after 11:00 p.m.
except to conclude a scheduled recreational or sporting event in progress prior
to 11:00 p.m.
P.   Outdoor internally-illuminated advertising signs shall either be
constructed with an opaque background and translucent letters and symbols or
with a colored (not white, cream, off-white, or yellow) background and lighter
letters and symbols. Lamps used for internal illumination of such signs shall
not be included in the lumens per net acre limit set in this subsection. Such
signs shall be turned off at 11:00 p.m. or when the business closes, whichever
is later.
AIRPORT LIGHTING:
Airport lighting, which is required for the safe and efficient movement of
aircraft during flight, take off, landing, and taxiing is exempt from the
provisions of this Ordinance. Lighting used for illumination of aircraft
loading, unloading, and servicing areas is exempt from the lumens per acre
limits, although it must conform to all other requirements of this Ordinance.
All other outdoor lighting at airport facilities shall comply with the
provisions of this Ordinance.
APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Whenever a person is required to obtain a building permit, electrical
permit for outdoor lighting or signage, a Site Plan or Conditional Use Permit,
or subdivision approval by the Town, including all Town projects, the applicant
shall, as part of the application, submit sufficient information to enable the
Zoning Administrator to determine whether the proposed lighting will comply
with this Ordinance.
B.   The application shall include the following:
1.   A Site Plan indicating the proposed location of all outdoor lighting
fixtures and signs;
2.   A photometric analysis of the proposed lighting;
3.   A description of each illuminating device, fixture, lamp, support, and
shield. This description may include, but is not limited to, manufacturer's
catalog cuts and drawings (including sections where required), lamp types, and
lumen outputs;
4.   Photometric data, such as that furnished by manufacturers, or similar,
showing the angle of cut off of light emissions for the proposed luminaries(s);
5.   Such other information as the Zoning Administrator may determine is
necessary to ensure compliance with this Ordinance.
C.   If the Zoning Administrator determines that the proposed lighting does not
comply with this Ordinance, the permit shall not be issued or the plan
approved.
TEMPORARY LIGHTING PERMITS:
A.   The Zoning Administrator may grant a permit for temporary lighting, as
defined herein, if he/she finds the following:
1.   The purpose for which the lighting is proposed is not intended to extend
beyond thirty (30) days;
2.   The proposed lighting is designed in such a manner as to minimize light
pollution and trespass as much as is feasible;
3.   The proposed lighting will comply with the general intent of this
Ordinance;
4.   The permit will be in the public interest.
B.   The application for the Temporary lighting permit shall include the
following information:
1.   Name and address of applicant and property owner;
2.   Location of proposed fixtures;
3.   Type, wattage, and lumen output of lamp(s);
4.   Type, shielding of proposed fixtures;
5.   Intended use of the lighting;
6.   Duration of time for requested exemption;
7.   The nature of the exemption;
8.   Such other information as the Zoning Administrator may request.
C.   The Zoning Administrator shall endeavor to rule on the application within
five (5) business days from the date of submission of the request and notify
the applicant in writing of their decision. The Zoning Administrator may grant
one (1) renewal of the permit for an additional thirty (30) days if he/she
finds that, because of an unanticipated change in circumstances, a renewal
would be in the public interest. The Zoning Administrator is not authorized to
grant more than one (1) temporary permit and one (1) renewal for a thirty (30)
day period for the same property within one (1) calendar year.
NON-CONFORMING LIGHTING:
A.   Mercury vapor lamps in use for outdoor lighting.
B.   Any construction permit which invokes Certificate of Occupancy
requirements shall specify and require that any non-conforming sign, as to
lighting, located within the boundaries of the development site authorized by
the permit shall be brought into conformance with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
C.   No outdoor lighting fixture which was lawfully installed prior to the
enact shall be required to be removed or modified except as expressly provided
herein; however, no modification or replacement shall be made to a non-
conforming fixture unless the fixture thereafter conforms to the provisions of
this Ordinance.
D.   In the event that any non-conforming sign, as to lighting, is abandoned or
is damaged, and if the damage exceeds fifty (50) percent of the reproduction
value, exclusive of foundations, to replace it, the sign shall be brought into
conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
ZONING ADMINISTRATORS:
Any person desiring to install an outdoor lighting fixture that does not meet
the requirements of this Ordinance may apply to the Board of Adjustment for a
Zoning Administrator from the regulation in question.
CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:
In the event of conflict between the regulations set forth in this Ordinance
and any other regulations applicable to the same area, the more stringent
limitation or requirement shall govern.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
4.25 WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
A.   PURPOSE. The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines
for the siting of wireless communications facilities, towers and antennas. The
goals of this section are to:
1.   Ensure access to reliable wireless communications services throughout all
areas of the Town of Chino Valley.
2.   Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of
wireless facilities, towers and antennas.
3.   Encourage the location of wireless facilities, towers and antennas in non-
residential areas.
4.   Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community.
5.   Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing wireless facility and
tower sites as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-
use towers.
6.   Encourage users of wireless facilities, towers and antennas to locate
them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal.
7.   Encourage users of wireless facilities, towers and antennas to configure
them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the wireless
facilities, towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape
screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques.
8.   Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to
provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently.
9.   Ensure public health, safety, welfare and convenience as enumerated in
Section
1.9.2(A) of this code.
10.   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through
engineering and careful sitting of tower structures. In furtherance of these
goals, the Town shall give due consideration to the General Plan, other
provisions of this Ordinance, existing land uses, and environmentally sensitive
areas in approving sites for the location of wireless facilities, towers and
antennas.
B.   DEFINITIONS. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings set forth below:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE means man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples,
light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage
or conceal the presence of antennas, towers or wireless facilities.
ANTENNA means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower,
building or structure and used in communications that radiates or captures
electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies
(excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other
communication signals.
CO-LOCATION means the use by two or more wireless communications providers of
the same support structure or the same site, as defined in subsection “I”
below.
CONCEALED WIRELESS FACILITY means a wireless facility that cannot be directly
seen because it is enclosed within a structure or screen that completely
precludes it from direct view.
DISGUISED WIRELESS FACILITY means a wireless facility that can be directly
observed but uses an ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE or alternative site design or
materials in such a way as to make the identification of the use not readily
apparent to the casual observer.
EXISTING STRUCTURE means light poles, power poles, chimneys, billboards, and
other structures that are situated within the Town at the time of adoption of
this Ordinance.
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT means, when referring to a tower or other structure, the vertical
distance measured from the natural grade level to the highest point of the
structure directly above the natural grade when such structure is not located
in a platted subdivision. If the structure is located in a platted subdivision,
the height shall be the vertical distance measured from the finished grade as
shown on the subdivision grading plans or finished grade as shown on the
individual lot’s grading plans (whichever is lower), to the highest point of
the structure directly above the finished grade. In the event that terrain
problems prevent an accurate determination of height, the Development Director
shall rule as to height and appeal from that decision shall be to the Board of
Adjustment.
PREEXISTING WIRELESS FACILITIES, TOWERS AND ANTENNAS means any wireless
facility, tower or antenna for which a building permit has been properly issued
prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, including permitted wireless
facilities, towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as
such approval is current and not expired.
SITE means the physical location upon which wireless communications facilities
are located. Unless otherwise stated in this Section, “site” shall be limited
to the area occupied by a single tower and its accompanying ground or roof-
mounted equipment.
TOWER means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar
communication purposes, including monopole towers. The term includes radio and
television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers,
cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. The term
also includes the structure and any support thereto.
VISIBLE WIRELESS FACILITY means wireless facilities that are immediately
identifiable to the casual observer, with no incorporation of ALTERNATIVE TOWER
STRUCTURES or alternative designs or materials to obscure the use from a casual
observer.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION means any technology for transmitting communication
through the air.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES means any combination of one or more
antennae, towers and/or structures or equipment used for the transmission of
wireless communication.
C.   APPLICABILITY
1.   New facilities, towers or antennas. All WIRELESS FACILITIES in the Town
shall be subject to these regulations.
2.   Existing facilities, towers or antennas
a.   Preexisting towers or antennas. Legally established preexisting wireless
facilities, towers and antennas shall comply with the requirements of this
Section.
3.   Exceptions.
a.   Amateur radio station operators and/or receive only operations. This
Section shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is
under the maximum building height of the zoning district in which such
structure is located and which is solely used by a federally-licensed amateur
radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive only operations,
including devices necessary for individual subscriptions to commercial wireless
services.
b.   AM array. For purposes of implementing this Ordinance, an AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system which
functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered one tower.
Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall be measured from the
outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM array. Additional tower units
may be added within the perimeter of the AM array by right.
c.   Wireless Facilities used by a governmental agency for public safety
purposes are permitted in all zoning districts subject to Subsection
4.25.E.2 of this code Section.
D.   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1.   Principal or accessory. Wireless facilities, antennas and towers may be
considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of an
existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of a
wireless facility, antenna or tower on such lot.
2.   Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
wireless facility, tower or antenna complies with district development
regulations, including but not limited to setback requirements, lot-coverage
requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot
shall control, even though the antennas, towers or wireless facilities may be
located on leased parcels within such lot.
3.   Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for a wireless facility,
antenna and/or tower shall provide to the Development Director an inventory of
its existing wireless facilities, towers, antennas, or sites approved for
towers or antennas, that are either within the jurisdiction of the Town or
within one mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the
location, height, and design of each tower. Each applicant shall also provide a
one-year build out plan for all other proposed wireless communications
facilities within the Town. The Development Director may share such information
with other applicants applying for administrative approvals or Conditional Use
Permits under this Section or with other organizations seeking to locate
antennas within the jurisdiction of the Town, provided, however that the
Development Director is not, by sharing such information, in any way
representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable.
4.   Aesthetics. Wireless Facilities, Towers and antennas shall meet the
following requirements:
a.   Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or be painted a
neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
b.   At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall,
to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and
landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding
buildings.
c.   If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna,
attachments and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a
neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of
the supporting structure so as to make the antenna, attachments and related
equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
5.   Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted.
6.   State and Federal Requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the
state or federal government with the authority to regulate wireless facilities,
towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, the owners
of the wireless facilities, towers and antennas governed by this chapter shall
bring such wireless facilities, towers and antennas into compliance with such
revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date
of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is
mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring wireless
facilities, towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for the revocation of the standing permit
(if applicable) and removal of the wireless facility, tower or antenna at the
owner's expense.
7.   Building Codes; Safety Standards. To ensure the structural integrity of
towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance
with standards contained in applicable state or local building codes and the
applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries
Association (EIA) and by the Telecommunications Industries Association (TIA),
or subsequent, as amended from time to time. As determined by the Development
Services Director, the Town may require a permit holder to perform inspections
of its structure and, as required, formally report to the Town the status of
compliance with applicable standards. If, upon inspection, the Town concludes
that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a
danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of
the tower, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such tower into
compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into compliance
within thirty (30) days shall constitute grounds for the revocation of the
standing permit (if applicable) and removal of the wireless facility, tower or
antenna at the owner’s expense.
8.   Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and separation
distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located in the Town
irrespective of municipal and County jurisdictional boundaries.
9.   Not essential services. Wireless facilities, towers and antennas shall be
regulated and permitted pursuant to this Section and shall not be regulated or
permitted as essential services, public utilities or private utilities.
10.   Franchises. Owners and/or operators of wireless facilities, towers or
antennas shall certify that all franchises required by law for the construction
and/or operation of a wireless communication system in the Town have been
obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises with the Development
Director.
11.   Public notice. For purposes of this Section, any Conditional Use Permit
request shall be pursuant to Section
1.9.3 of this Ordinance except that the notice required shall include posting
of the property, and mailing to all property owners within one thousand (1,000)
feet of the proposed wireless communications facility, and publication in a
newspaper of general circulation regardless of any expression to the contrary
in Section
1.9.2.
12.   Signs. No signs shall be allowed on a wireless facility, tower or
antenna, or on any portion of the premises leased for wireless
telecommunication use, with the exception of site identification and emergency
contact signage as indicated within this UDO.
13.   Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support equipment
associated with antennas, towers or wireless facilities shall comply with the
requirements of this Section
4.25.
14.   Co-location and multiple antenna/tower plan. The Town encourages wireless
facility, tower and antenna users to submit a single application for approval
of multiple wireless facilities, towers and/or antenna sites and to submit
applications that utilize co-location with an existing wireless
telecommunications provider. Applications for approval of multiple sites or for
co-location with an existing provider shall be given priority in the review
process.
15.   Security fencing. Wireless facilities, towers and antennas (and where
applicable to rooftop installations) shall be enclosed by security fencing not
less than six (6) feet in height and no more than eight (8) feet in height.
Fencing shall be constructed of chain link, block or masonry (as directed by
staff and/or approved by Council), and tower structures shall be equipped with
appropriate anti-climbing devices. For rooftop installations, applicants may
substitute a security and access management plan which demonstrates how access
and security will be managed on site to preclude general access to the
facility; the Town Council may waive such requirements related to security
fencing as it deems appropriate.
16.   Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping
surrounding wireless facilities and towers; provided, however, that the
Town Council may waive such requirements if the goals of this Section would be
better served thereby.
a.   Towers and wireless facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from
residentially zoned property. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped
strip at least four (4) feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound. The
applicant must ensure that any such plant materials shall be sustained for the
life of the proposed facility.
b.   In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the
landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived.
c.   Existing mature plant growth and natural landforms on the site shall be
preserved to the maximum extent possible.
E.   ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMITS
1.   General. The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted uses
and shall require an administrative use permit or a Conditional Use Permit.
2.   Permitted uses, all zones – The following uses are specifically permitted
in any zone via administrative use permit. All such uses shall be fully
compliant with Town design requirements for antennas, towers and wireless
facilities as enumerated in code:
Antennas, towers or wireless facilities located on property owned, leased, or
otherwise controlled or managed by the Town; provided, however, a license or
lease authorizing such wireless facility, antenna or tower has been approved by
the Council. No such license or lease shall be issued for a wireless facility,
tower or antennas located within three hundred (300) feet of any residentially
zoned property until an informational hearing has been held at a regular or
special Town Council meeting and notice of such hearing has been advertised
according to subsection
4.25.D.11 at least seven (7) days but not earlier than fourteen (14) days prior
to such hearing. All other wireless facilities, towers or antennas require
administrative use or Conditional Use Permits as enumerated and regulated
within this UDO
3.   Permits, Information Required and Design Elements.
a.   Intent: The intent of the following development standards is to improve
the design and placement of new Wireless Facilities, towers and antennas, as
well as the modification of such facilities, towers and antennas in order to
reduce the impact on the visual and aesthetic character of the community. The
standards are designed to: Encourage the use of concealment technology;
minimize the construction of new towers through the promotion of co-location on
existing Wireless Facilities, buildings or other structures; ensure continuous
maintenance of Wireless Facilities and enforce the timely removal of any unused
or outdated facilities; and regulate the use of temporary Wireless Facilities.
A Wireless Facility may be Concealed, Disguised or Visible.
b.   Administrative or Conditional Use Permits; additions or changes;
information required. Subject to Subsection 3c. below, a site plan must be
approved or amended by the Development Services Department to reflect any
additional antennae, microwave dishes, or attaching apparatus or a change in
support structure or expanded area for support equipment. Changes to equipment
that is fully enclosed within an equipment shelter that was included on a
previous site plan approval do not require a site plan amendment. No site plan
for a new or amended Wireless Facility, tower or antenna shall be approved
unless the support equipment is located entirely within an equipment enclosure
or equipment shelter that is architecturally compatible with the surrounding
area.
c.   Applicants for both administrative and Conditional Use Permits for a
wireless facility, antenna(s) or tower shall submit the following information:
i.   A scaled Site Plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the
proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning
(including when adjacent to other municipalities), General Plan classification
of the site and all adjoining properties, adjacent roadways, proposed means of
access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower
and any other structures, and other information deemed by the Development
Services Director to be necessary to assess compliance with this section of the
UDO.
ii.   The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest
residentially zoned properties.
iii   The separation distance from other towers described in the inventory of
existing sites submitted pursuant to Subsection
4.25.D.3 shall be shown on an updated Site Plan or map. The applicant shall
also identify the type of construction and height of the existing tower(s) and
the owner/operator of the existing tower(s), if known.
iv.   Method of fencing and finished color and, if applicable, the method of
camouflage or concealment.
v.   A description of compliance with applicable UDO subsections and all
applicable federal, state or local laws.
vi.   A notarized statement by the applicant indicating that the construction
of any tower will accommodate co-location of additional antennas for future
users.
vii.   Two photosimulations from the two (2) nearest intersections of public
rights of way or public lands.
viii.   An alternate site analysis report, detailing all potential sites
investigated by the applicant, and reasons why said alternate sites will not
meet the applicant's Radio Frequency (RF) and service objectives.
ix.   A statement of compliance with Federal Communications Commission (FCC) RF
exposure standards.
d.   Factors considered in Granting Conditional Use Permits for towers (not in
any particular order or priority). In addition to any standards for
consideration of applications pursuant to Section
4.25 of this Ordinance, the Town Council shall consider the following factors
in determining whether to issue a Conditional Use Permit, although the
Town Council may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one or more of
these criteria if the Town Council concludes that the goals of this Ordinance
are better served thereby:
i.   The consistency of the request with the context of the surrounding area;
ii.   The design of a Disguised Wireless Facility must be compatible with the
architectural character and natural features of the site or development;
iii.   The placement of the Wireless Facility on the lot or parcel and its
potential effect on expanding existing or developing future land uses;
iv.   The cumulative effect that existing Wireless Facilities in the vicinity
of the site may have on the request;
v.   Height of the proposed tower.
vi.   Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residentially zoned
district boundaries.
vii.   Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties.
viii.   Surrounding topography.
ix.   Surrounding tree coverage and vegetation.
x.   Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics
that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness.
xi.   Proposed ingress and egress.
xii.   Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures, as
discussed in this Ordinance.
xiii.   Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alterative technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the Town Council that no
existing tower, structure or alternative technology that does not require the
use of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant’s proposed antenna.
An applicant shall submit information requested by the Town Council related to
the availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or alternative
technology.
4. Concealed Wireless Communication Facilities. Concealed Wireless Facilities
used by a governmental agency for public safety purposes are permitted in all
zoning districts subject to Subsection
4.25.E.2. of this UDO section. Other Concealed Wireless Facilities are
permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the following standards:
a.   When there is more than one underlying zoning district, the more
restrictive regulations shall apply. Concealed Wireless Facilities are
permitted on residentially zoned properties as follows:
(1)   Public/quasi-public spaces—Concealed Wireless Facilities are permitted on
residentially zoned property that are designated or used for public or quasi-
public spaces including, but not limited to, schools, churches, golf courses,
parks or government facilities, subject to obtaining an administratively
approved use permit pursuant to the design guidelines herein and other
provisions contained in this Ordinance. Failure to comply with applicable
design guidelines and other required provisions in this Ordinance will mandate
that the proposed Wireless Facility be processed as a Conditional Use Permit.
(2)   Open space residential tracts—Concealed Wireless Facility are permitted
in tracts within residential subdivisions that are zoned or platted for open
space or retention areas, subject to obtaining an administratively approved
use permit pursuant to the design guidelines herein and other provisions
contained in this Ordinance. Failure to comply with applicable design
guidelines and other required provisions in this Ordinance will mandate that
the proposed Wireless Facility be processed as a Conditional Use Permit.
b.   Design guidelines. A site plan must be approved by the Development
Services Department demonstrating that the proposed Wireless Facility meets the
definition of “Concealed”. Site plans for Concealed Wireless Facilities must
demonstrate the following in order to be administratively approved:
(1)   The antenna is fully enclosed, screened or obscured so that it is not
visible at all or, if visible, it is not recognizable as a Wireless Facility to
a casual observer; and
(2)   The antenna does not extend more than twelve (12) inches from the
building or structure to which it is attached; and
(3)   The underlying zoning district must allow the structure being utilized to
support the antenna and the support structure; and
(4)   The Concealed Wireless Facility and its support structure shall comply
with the setback requirements of the underlying zoning district or, if located
in a sign, by the standards contained in this Ordinance; and
(5)   The support equipment is located entirely within an equipment enclosure
that is architecturally compatible with the surrounding area, completely
screened from view, and built in compliance with the standards outlined in this
Zoning Ordinance; and
(6)   A Wireless Facility concealed as a flagpole shall be required to fly a
flag in compliance with the accepted protocol for the type of flag flown. The
flag and pole shall be visible from the building entrances used by the public.
The diameter of the pole structure must not exceed twenty-four (24) inches; and
(7)   The installation of a Concealed Wireless Facility should be done in a
manner that minimizes the removal of mature vegetation or the disturbance of
natural vegetation.
5.   Disguised Wireless Communication Facilities. Disguised Wireless Facilities
used by a governmental agency for public safety purposes are permitted in all
zoning districts subject to Subsection
4.25.E.2. of this Section. Other Disguised Wireless Facilities are permitted in
all zoning districts, subject to the following standards:
a.   When there is more than one underlying zoning district, the more
restrictive regulations shall apply. In addition, Disguised Wireless Facilities
must comply with the following design requirements in order to be
administratively approved; otherwise, a Conditional Use Permit is required:
(1)   Maximum height—Sixty-five (65) feet in height from natural grade to the
highest point of the pole or support structure for all Disguised Wireless.
(2)   Required setbacks—The following minimum setbacks are required for a
Disguised Wireless Facility:
(a)   From another property zoned for residential purposes:
(i)   Disguised Wireless Facility—Except as described below, a minimum of one
hundred fifty (150) feet setback is required from another property zoned for
residential purposes. For purposes of this standard, land uses that are
permitted in residential zoning districts, including those that are designated
for public spaces such as, but not limited to, schools, churches, golf courses,
parks or government facilities shall be considered “residential purposes”.
The setback may be reduced to fifty (50) feet from a property that is zoned for
residential purposes subject to obtaining a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to
this Ordinance.
(ii)   Wireless Facilities co-locating on public utilities—Except as described
below, a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet setback is required from
another property zoned for residential purposes. The setback from a property
that is zoned for residential purposes may be reduced to a lesser distance or
eliminated subject to obtaining a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to this
Ordinance.
(b)   From an adjoining property that is zoned for commercial or industrial
purposes: No setback required except for perimeter landscape setback
requirements.
(c)   Streets: A minimum setback of twenty-five (25) feet from all public and
private rights-of-way or access-ways, unless being located on a previously
existing public utility pole or if a greater setback is required by the
underlying zoning.
(d)   Support structures or signs: The setbacks for any structure that is
supporting a Disguised Wireless Facility must comply with the setback
requirements of the underlying zoning district or this Ordinance if located on
a sign.
(3)   Restrictions on development in residential zoning districts—Disguised
Wireless Facilities are permitted on residentially zoned properties subject to
compliance with the above noted requirements and as follows:
(a)   Public/quasi-public spaces—Disguised Wireless Facilities are permitted on
residentially zoned property that are designated for public or quasi-public
spaces such as, but not limited to, schools, churches, golf courses, parks or
government facilities subject to obtaining a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to
this Ordinance.
(b)   Open space residential tracts—Disguised Wireless Facilities are permitted
in tracts within residential subdivisions that are zoned or platted for open
space or retention areas, subject to obtaining a Conditional Use Permit
pursuant to the provisions contained in this Ordinance.
b.   Design guidelines. A site plan must be approved by the Development
Services Department demonstrating that the proposed Wireless Facility meets the
definition of “Disguised”. The following minimum specifications shall apply to
these types of Disguised Wireless Facility:
(1)   Monopine or Broadleaf tree: A Monopine or Broadleaf tree must meet the
following design guidelines:
(a)   The pole structure must be built of steel or fiberglass and clad with
faux bark. The faux bark shall start at the base of the pole and continue to
the height of the first branch attachment. The balance of the pole structure
and the attachments must be painted or colored and textured to blend with the
faux branches.
(b)   The diameter of the pole structure must not exceed thirty-six (36) inches
at the base and shall taper to no greater than twenty-eight (28) inches at the
top of the pole structure.
(c)   All cables must be concealed within the pole structure.
(d)   The faux branches must:
(i)   Be constructed to a density of 2.5 branches for each one (1) vertical
foot of pole, and
(ii)   Start attachment at no greater than fifteen (15) feet above finished
grade and continue to the top of the pole, and
(iii)   Be a minimum of eight (8) feet long around the circumference of the
lower level and shall taper appropriately as the branches progress upwards.
(e)   The entire length of all antenna and their attaching apparatus shall be
disguised by the branches and the antenna array shall not extend horizontally
more than thirty (30) inches beyond the structure to which it is attached.
(f)   Microwave dishes shall be limited to one (1) square foot in size and must
be painted the same shade of green as the branches. The attaching apparatus
must also be painted the same shade of green as the branches.
(g)   No more than four (4) microwave dishes are permitted on each Monopine or
Broadleaf tree.
(h)   No climbing pegs are permitted on the pole structure.
(i)   The installation of a Monopine or Broadleaf tree should be done in a
manner that minimizes the removal of mature vegetation.
(2)   Ball field light poles: Wireless Facilities may be added to legally
existing or proposed Ball field light poles in compliance with the following
design guidelines:
(a)   The maximum allowable width of an antenna array is four (4) feet.
(b)   The antenna array shall not extend horizontally more than thirty (30)
inches beyond the structure to which it is attached.
(c)   The maximum allowable length of each antenna is ten (10) feet.
(d)   The diameter of the pole structure must not exceed thirty-six (36)
inches.
(e)   The addition of a Wireless Facility to a Ball field light must not
increase the height of the light structure by more than ten (10) feet.
(f)   All cables must be concealed within the pole structure.
(g)   Microwave dishes shall be limited to two (2) square feet in size.
(h)   No more than two (2) microwave dishes are permitted on each Ball field
light pole.
(i)   All microwave dishes, antennas, and attaching apparatus must be painted
to match the Ball field light pole.
(j)   The installation of ball field light poles should be done in a manner
that minimizes the removal of mature vegetation.
(3)   Water towers/tanks: Wireless Facilities incorporated into Water towers or
Water tanks must meet the following design guidelines:
(a)   The maximum allowable width of an antenna array is four (4) feet.
(b)   The antenna shall not extend more than eighteen (18) inches from the
structure to which it is attached.
(c)   The maximum allowable length of each antenna array is ten (10) feet .
(d)   The addition of a Wireless Facility must not increase the height of the
Water tower/tank structure.
(e)   All cables must be concealed within the support structure or fully
enclosed within a cable shroud.
(f)   Microwave dishes shall be limited to two (2) square feet in size.
(g)   No more than two (2) microwave dishes are permitted on each Water tower
or Water tank.
(h)   All microwave dishes, antennas, cable shrouds and attaching apparatus
must be painted to match the Water tower or Water tank.
(i)   The installation of a Water tower or Water tank should be done in a
manner that minimizes the removal of mature vegetation.
(4)   Existing public utility poles: The Town encourages Wireless Facilities to
be added to existing public utility poles, subject to the following design
guidelines:
(a)   Twelve kilovolt (12 kv) utility poles:
(i)   The antenna shall not extend more than twelve (12) inches from the
structure to which it is attached.
(ii)   The maximum allowable length of all antenna added to a 12 kv utility
pole is ten (10) feet.
(iii)   The addition of a Wireless Facility to an existing public utility pole
must not increase the height of the public utility pole by more than ten (10)
feet.
(iv)   All cables must be concealed within the public utility pole or a cable
shroud.
(v)   Microwave dishes shall be limited to two (2) square feet in size.
(vi)   No more than two (2) microwave dishes are permitted on each public
utility pole.
(vii)   All microwave dishes, antennas, cable shrouds and attaching apparatus
must be painted to match the public utility pole.
(b)   Sixty-nine kilovolts (69 kv) or larger utility poles or lattice-type
tower structures:
(i)   The maximum allowable width of an antenna array is four (4) feet.
(ii)   The antenna array shall not extend more than thirty (30) inches from the
structure to which it is attached.
(iii)   The maximum allowable length of each antenna is ten (10) feet.
(iv)   The addition of a Wireless Facility to an existing public utility pole
must not increase the height of the public utility pole by more than ten (10)
feet.
(v)   All cables must be concealed within the public utility pole or a cable
shroud.
(vi)   Microwave dishes shall be limited to two (2) square feet in size.
(vii)   No more than two (2) microwave dishes are permitted on each public
utility pole.
(viii)   All microwave dishes, antennas, cable shrouds and attaching apparatus
must be painted to match the public utility pole.
6.   Visible Wireless Communication Facilities. Visible Wireless Facilities
used by a governmental agency for public safety purposes are permitted in all
zoning districts subject to
4.25.E.2. of this UDO section. All other Visible Wireless Facilities are
permitted only in the Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts and must
comply with the following standards in order to be approved administratively:
a.   When there is more than one underlying zoning district, the more
restrictive regulations shall apply. In addition, Visible Wireless Facilities
must comply with the following:
(1)   Maximum height for Administrative Approvals —Eighty (80) feet from
natural grade to the highest point of pole or fifteen (15) feet higher than the
height of the top of the building to which it is mounted (see also side mounted
antenna height limitations below). Proposals in excess of the maximum height
allowances above require a Conditional Use Permit.
(2)   Required setbacks—The following setbacks are required:
(a)   From another property zoned for residential purposes: A minimum setback
of three hundred (300) feet is required. For purposes of this standard, land
uses that are permitted in those residential zoning districts, including those
that are designated for public spaces such as, but not limited to, schools,
churches, golf courses, parks or government facilities shall be considered
“residential purposes”.
(b)   From an adjoining property that is zoned for commercial or industrial
purposes: No setback required except for any required perimeter landscape
setback standards.
(c)   Streets: A minimum setback of seventy-five (75) feet from all public and
private rights-of-way or access ways, unless a greater setback is required by
the underlying zoning.
(d)   Hillside: No Visible Wireless Facility shall be installed on a property
in or within five hundred (500) feet of a sensitive view shed, ridgeline or
hillside.
b.   Design guidelines. A site plan must be approved by the Development
Services Department demonstrating that the proposed Visible Wireless Facility
meets the following minimum specifications:
(1)   The maximum allowable width of an antenna array is four (4) feet.
(2)   The antenna array shall not extend horizontally more than thirty (30)
inches beyond the structure to which it is attached.
(3)   The maximum allowable length of each antenna array is ten (10) feet.
(4)   The diameter of the pole structure must not exceed forty (40) inches.
(5)   All antenna cables must be concealed within the pole structure or a cable
shroud.
(6)   Microwave dishes shall be limited to two (2) square feet in size and must
be painted the same color as the Visible Wireless Facility.
(7)   No more than two (2) microwave dishes are permitted on each Visible
Wireless Facility.
(8)   All microwave dishes, antennas, cable shrouds and attaching apparatus
must be painted to match the Visible Wireless Facility.
(9)   Antennae mounted on the side of a building shall be permitted subject to
the following provisions:
(a)   The antenna must not extend above the existing profile of the building or
project more than twelve (12) inches from the building face.
(b)   The antenna shall be integrated into the building design in a manner that
is compatible with the architectural style and coloring of the structure,
considers the context and placement of the antenna on the structure, and
minimizes its visual impact.
(c)   Requests to exceed the established building profile shall be subject to
securing a use permit in accordance with the provisions of this UDO when it is
demonstrated that the architectural element to which the antennae are attached
is integrated with and in proportion to the building design.
(10) The installation of a Visible Wireless Facility should be done in a manner
that minimizes the removal of mature vegetation or the disturbance of natural
vegetation. To ensure compliance, the following shall be done:
(a)   If required by the Development Services Department , a plant inventory of
the Wireless Facility and equipment enclosure or shelter site (if no enclosure
used) and a re-vegetation/salvage plan shall be submitted for review and
approval at the time of site plan review; and
(b)   Any trenching or site disturbance shall be re-vegetated to match the
existing or natural vegetation, and
(c)   No protected plant species shall be disturbed during construction unless
re-vegetated as part of an approved salvage plan.
7.   Equipment enclosures, support equipment and structures. Wireless
Facilities include different types and sizes of support equipment and accessory
structures needed to accommodate each antenna. No site plan for a Wireless
Facility shall be approved unless the following standards can be met:
a.   Not permitted—An equipment enclosure and all support equipment must not be
located within the required perimeter landscape setback(s) of a development.
b.   Equipment enclosure—The following standards apply to equipment enclosures:
(1)   Shall be screened primarily by a six (6) or eight (8) foot chain link
fence, decorative solid block or masonry perimeter wall, as required by staff.
No more than five (5) percent of each wall facade may be constructed of
alternative materials, including see through materials, as approved by the
Development Services Department when deemed to be appropriate for security
purposes.
(2)   All entry gates visible from public streets or access ways shall be
constructed of sight-obscuring material approved by the Planning and
Development Services Department .
c.   Equipment shelter—The following standards apply to equipment shelters:
(1)   Maximum height permitted is eight (8) feet in residential zones, fourteen
(14) feet in industrial and commercial zones, to be measured from finished
grade or roof-top elevation of a supporting structure. Below grade shelters are
permitted.
(2)   An equipment shelter shall meet minimum setbacks on the lot or parcel.
d.   Ground-mounted cabinets—Ground-mounted cabinets shall comply with the
following:
(1)   Maximum area shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet for a
single wireless Communications provider.
(2)   Maximum height permitted is eight (8) feet, to be measured from finished
grade elevation.
(3)   Ground-mounted cabinets that are visible from a public street or access-
way must be located within an equipment enclosure, equipment shelter or
enclosed building.
(4)   Ground-mounted cabinets are not permitted to be constructed within the
front yard setback of a residential zoning district.
e.   Other screening allowances—If the support equipment is screened from view
from a public street or accessway, alley, or adjacent property by a permanent
perimeter or interior wall, fence or structure that is permanent, no separate
wall is needed around the equipment enclosure.
f.   Illumination—Equipment enclosures or shelters shall not be externally
illuminated.
g.   Noise level—The average noise level of the support equipment, measured at
any property line that is zoned for residential purposes, must comply with
existing code requirements and nuisance abatement codes.
F.   CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
1.   General. There is hereby created for this section only a Conditional Use
Permit for Wireless Towers, Facilities and Antennas which may be granted by the
Town Council as follows:
a.   If the Wireless Facility, tower or antenna is not an administratively
permitted use under this Ordinance, a Conditional Use Permit shall be required
for the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in all zoning
districts.
b.   Applications for Conditional Use Permits under this Section shall be
subject to the procedures and requirements of this Ordinance, except as
modified in this Section.
c.   In granting a Conditional Use Permit, the Town Council may impose
conditions to the extent such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse
effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties. Such Conditions of
Approval (COAs) shall be incorporated into the building permit Process and made
a part of the final building inspection process and records. The Town will not
conduct any Final Inspection nor will it issue a Certificate of Occupancy
unless all COAs required in the zoning process are satisfied.
d.   Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits,
whether civil, mechanical or electrical, shall be certified by an Arizona
licensed professional engineer.
e.   An applicant for a Conditional Use Permit shall submit the information and
certifications described in Section
4.25.D., E., H., I. and L. and a non-refundable fee established pursuant to a
Resolution of the Town Council.
f.   A Conditional Use Permit issued under this Section shall be conditioned
upon verification by the Town Engineer or his/her designee that such facility
and/or tower structure (and any appurtenances thereto) is structurally sound.
Such verification shall be received by the applicant prior to submission and
shall be reviewed annually.
G.   MINIMUM SETBACKS
1.   Setbacks. The setback requirements shall apply to all wireless facilities,
towers and antennas as required in the UDO; provided, however, that the
Town Council may reduce the standard setback requirements if the goals of this
Section would be better served thereby. Requests for relief from setback
requirements beyond those set forth in the UDO will result in the application
being processed as a conditional use.
H.   BUILDINGS OR OTHER EQUIPMENT STORAGE
1.   Town Council may reduce the standard building and equipment structure
requirements if the goals of this Section would be better served thereby.
Requests for relief from such requirements beyond those set forth in the UDO
will result in the application being processed as a conditional use.
I.   CO-LOCATION
1.   Required. Any new tower constructed in connection with an application
under this Section shall be constructed so that it is suitable for co-location.
2.   Good faith. Applicants, additional users and permittees shall exercise
reasonable good faith efforts to cooperate in co-locating wireless
telecommunications facilities on the same support structures or site. For the
purposes of this section only, a “site” may accommodate more than one (1) tower
and its accompanying equipment; provided, however, that no “site” shall exceed
ten (10) acres.
3.   Exceptions. The Town Council may, upon a determination that the Town's
citizens would be better served, waive any portion of the requirements of this
subsection.
4.   Violation; penalty. Failure to comply with co-location requirements may
result in denial of a permit request or revocation of an existing permit.
J.   REMOVAL OF ABANDONED WIRELESS FACILITIES, ANTENNAS AND TOWERS
Any wireless facility, antenna or tower that ceases to be used or fails to
operate for a period of ninety (90) consecutive days shall be considered
abandoned, and the owner of such wireless facility, antenna or tower shall
remove the same within ninety (90) days after such abandonment. If such tower
or antenna is not removed in a timely fashion, the Town may give written notice
to the owner that it will contract for removal within thirty (30) days
following said notice. Thereafter, the Town may cause removal at the sole cost
of the owner.
K.   PRE-EXISTING and NONCONFORMING USES
1.   No expansion of nonconforming use. Wireless facilities and towers that are
constructed and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter shall not be deemed to constitute the physical expansion of a
nonconforming use or structure.
2.   Preexisting wireless facilities, antennas and towers. Preexisting wireless
facilities, antennas and towers shall be allowed to continue their usage as
they presently exist and shall be allowed to accommodate additional
collocations to the tower site that are proposed in compliance with standing
code and design requirements. Routine maintenance and the replacement of failed
equipment with “like for like” equipment shall be permitted on such preexisting
(and possibly non-conforming) wireless facilities, antennas and towers. “Like
for Like” replacement shall include replacement of equipment with newer
equipment that is in substantial dimensional conformity with the approved
original equipment. Replacement equipment shall conform to site design
requirements and any color or surface treatments required to ensure
compatibility with the existing, standing wireless facility, antennas or tower.
“Like for Like” maintenance shall not allow the introduction of additional
equipment that is visible to the casual observer or was not approved in the
standing permit for the wireless facility, antennas or tower. Maintenance and
replacement of equipment that does not comply with the above “Like for Like”
requirements will require permits and inspections. New construction other than
routine maintenance on a preexisting tower shall comply with the requirements
of this chapter.
3.   Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming wireless facilities, towers
or antennas. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Section, lawful
nonconforming wireless facilities, towers or antennas that are damaged or
destroyed may be rebuilt without having to first obtain a Conditional Use
Permit and without having to meet the requirements specified in subsections
4.25.G.1 and 2. The type, height, and location of the tower on-site shall be of
the same type and intensity as the original facility approval; building permits
to rebuild the facility shall comply with the then applicable building codes
and shall be obtained within ninety (90) days from the date the facility is
damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if said permit expires, the
tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as specified in subsection
4.25.J.
L.   NOTICE
1.   Permit/Entitlement holders operating wireless facilities within the Town
shall be required to
provide updated notice and contact information to the Town if/when ownership of
the facility changes. Such notice and information shall be provided to the
Locality within 60 days of change of ownership.
2.   Wireless facilities within the Town shall display informational signage on
the gate of the wireless facility. Sign shall be four feet by four feet in size
and shall indicate the site name/number and emergency contact information
(phone number) of the facility owner or party responsible for the operation and
maintenance of the facility. Such signage and information shall be present in
order for final inspection and certificate of occupancy to be approved.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 13-767, passed 3-26-2013)
4.26 LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
4.26.1 INTENT
The intent of this Section is to create a strong and well defined framework of
landscaping in public/private property, consistent with the character of the
Town as defined by the Town's General Plan protect and increase property values
by requiring landscaping treatments around buildings, roadways and parking
areas in residential, commercial and industrial areas; to provide buffers
between residential/commercial /industrial uses; and to provide shade and
variation of the landscaping, these standards emphasize the retention of native
trees, shrubs, rock formations, and other natural site features.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-729, passed 7-22-2010)
4.26.2 LANDSCAPE PLANS: WHEN REQUIRED UNLESS MODIFIED BY THE ZONING
ADMINISTRATOR
A.   New multi-family and nonresidential developments are subject to the
requirements of this Section.
B.   Change of use from residential to commercial .
C.   All new subdivisions shall provide landscaping in the public open spaces
as required by this Section.
D.   Expansion, remodeling, and renovation of existing buildings, or a stand
alone parking lot shall provide an amount of landscaping and screening
proportionate with the degree of the improvements.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-729, passed 7-22-2010)
4.26.3 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS, GENERAL
1. Landscape Plan Required, Unless Modified by the Zoning Administrator
A landscape plan showing the following information shall be submitted with the
Site Plan at the time of application for building permit and/or with a
subdivision plat where applicable:
a.   Designer name and address
b.   North arrow, scale, date of preparation and revisions;
c.   Name of project and address
d.   Vicinity map
e.   Sheet numbers
f.   Location of all proposed and existing buildings, structures and pavement;
g.   Location and dimensions of all property lines;
h.   Location of all existing or proposed water features and drainage
facilities;
i.   Location of the one-hundred (100)-year floodplain on the site, if
applicable;
j.   Location, size and common name of any existing trees or shrubs to remain
on site;
k.   Location of all landscaping proposed for the site (drawn at one-half (½)
of mature size) including trees, shrubs, ground cover, ornamental grasses or
flowerbeds;
l.   Location of all existing or proposed signs, walls, fences, earthen berms
(drawn at one (1)-foot contour interval), site furniture, lights, fountains,
and/or sculptures on the site;
m.   Sight visibility triangles as described in Section
4.7;
n.   Location of all existing or proposed sidewalks, bike trails, pedestrian
paths, etc. on the site;
o.   Plant list for all existing or proposed trees or shrubs on the site,
including:
i.   Symbol
ii.   Botanical Name
iii.   Common Name
iv.    Quantity
v.    Installation Size
vi.    Height/Width at Maturity
p.   Location of all existing or proposed curb lines and curb cuts for streets,
alleys, parking lots and parking lot islands;
q.   Any additional information as determined by the Zoning Administrator to be
necessary for approval of the proposed plan.
r.   Proposed inert ground cover/dust control
2.   Installation of Materials
A landscape plan must be approved by the Zoning Administrator prior to the
installation of required landscaping.
3.   Certificate of Occupancy
All landscaping must be installed and inspected prior to the issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy.
4.   Performance Standards
All landscaping shall be required to perform in accordance with the following
provisions:
a.   Safety
i.   Landscaping shall not hinder the vision of motorists and pedestrians
necessary for safe movement into, out of, and within the site. All landscaping
materials shall comply with all sight visibility triangle requirements as
described in Section
4.7.
ii.   Landscaping materials shall be selected and placed in such a manner that
they do not interfere with or damage existing or proposed utilities or drainage
facilities.
iii.   Landscaping materials shall be selected and placed so that the safe and
enjoyable use of surrounding properties is not inhibited.
iv.   Landscaping materials shall be selected and placed with sensitivity
toward the ultimate size that will be achieved over time.
v.   Landscaping with thorns, berries and other harmful plant characteristics
shall be carefully placed and pruned to avoid potential harm to people or
property on and off-site.
vi.   Weak-wooded trees shall only be used where limb breakage will not cause
harm to property, utility lines, or life.
b.   Maintenance
i.   The owner of the premises shall be responsible for the watering,
maintenance, repair and replacement of all landscaping, irrigation systems,
fences and walls, and other visual barriers including refuse disposal area
screens which have died (in the case of plant material) or fallen into
disrepair (in the case of fences or walls).
ii.   All required plant materials shall be maintained in a healthy, vigorous
growing condition, and neat and orderly appearance. They shall be replaced as
necessary, or as directed by the Zoning Administrator, and shall be kept free
of refuse and debris.
iii.   All fences, walls and other barriers shall be maintained in good repair,
meaning structurally sound and attractive in appearance. All fences, required
or otherwise, shall have the finished face directed toward lower intensity
zoned property, where a single-family residential property is located adjacent
to or across from multiple-family residential or non-residential sites.
c.   Size of Plant Material
All plant materials required by this Ordinance shall be selected from the ADWR
drought tolerant/low water use plant lists and meet the following minimum sizes
at the time of planting:
i.   Trees: 75% of trees must be a minimum of 15 gallon. 25% must be 24” box or
larger.
ii.   Shrubs: Minimum 5 gallon or better.
d.   Mulching, Ground Covers and weed control
i.    All required shrubs and trees shall be mulched and maintained with
shredded hardwood bark, cypress, or gravel mulch. Plant groupings shall be
mulched in a continuous bed.
ii.   Mulch shall be applied so as to prevent or retard weed growth and be kept
free of weeds.
iii.   Ground covers shall be planted together in continuous beds and spaced to
achieve a substantially continuous ground cover within two (2) years of the
issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. The ground covers must be mulched or
placed in decorative rock until substantially continuous coverage is achieved.
e.   Penalty for Noncompliance
A property owner, upon notification by the Town, shall have a period of not
less than fifteen (15) days to restore, replace or repair plant material,
fences or other screening found to be in violation of the Performance Standards
set forth herein. If the violation is not corrected within the specified time,
it will be considered a violation of this Ordinance. In the case of landscaping
that performs poorly, Alternative Compliance may be utilized pursuant to
Section
4.26.5. No fine shall be levied during the time that an Alternative Compliance
proposal to remedy the problem situation is being reviewed by the Development
Services Department .
5.   Approval of the Public Works Director is required prior to placing
landscaping and other improvements in the rights-of-way.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-729, passed 7-22-2010)
4.26.4 DETERMINATION OF REQUIREMENTS UNLESS MODIFIED BY THE ZONING
ADMINISTRATOR
1. Residential Subdivisions
a.   Arterial/collector street Trees
As a component of plat approval, residential subdivisions in the Town shall be
required one (1) shade tree a minimum of every thirty (30) linear feet on
center, within the public arterial/collector.
b.   Arterial/collector street Design
Arterial and collector streets shall have a minimum six (6) foot wide sidewalk,
separated from the roadway by a landscaped parkway of at least eight (8) feet.
c.   Local Street Design
Local streets shall have a minimum four (4) foot wide sidewalk, separated from
the roadway by a landscaped parkway of at least six (6) feet.
d.   Preservation/Salvation Credit
Where there exists native vegetation, the property owner may substitute
existing trees for required trees, subject to the Alternative Compliance
provisions of this Section.
2.   Multiple-family, Office, Commercial and Industrial Districts
All lots improved with multi- family residential, office, commercial and
industrial development shall be required to provide landscaping as set forth
herein. (See paragraph 4. c. for a reduction to this requirement).
a.   Front yard Landscaping. A ten (10) foot wide landscape strip is required
along the properties street frontage. For properties adjacent to SR 89, a
twenty (20) foot wide landscape strip is required along the property’s street
frontage.
b.   Side and rear yard landscaping: when adjacent to zoning other than multi -
single family residential zoning, a five (5) foot wide landscape strip is
required along the property’s street frontage.
c.   Corner Lot: Corner lots shall be required to provide front yard
landscaping on all sides fronting on a public street or highway.
d.   Refuse Disposal Areas: Refuse disposal areas shall be screened on all
sides, including a solid gate for access, by a privacy fence, wall, or
equivalent material with a minimum height of six (6) feet and not greater than
seven (7) feet. The finished face of the fence shall face away from the refuse
disposal area.
e.   Mechanical Equipment: All roof top and ground level mechanical equipment
and utilities shall be fully screened from view of the centerline of any street
or the nearest boundary of a single- or two- family residence district as seen
from a height six (6) feet above the finished floor level of the building it
services.
3.   Buffer yards (Side and Rear yard Landscaping When adjacent to Single
family Residential “SR” Zoning)
a.   Buffer yard Required
Whenever a side or rear yard in any non-single-family residential, commercial ,
or industrial zones abuts, or in the absence of an alley would abut any single
family residential district, a buffer yard shall be required.
b.   Depth of yard.
The buffer yard shall be ten (10) percent of the lot width or depth, whichever
is applicable, provided that no buffer yard shall be less than ten (10) feet in
width, and no buffer yard shall be required to be more than twenty (20) feet in
width. For property located on a corner lot where both the rear lot line and
the interior side lot line abut property in the single-family residential
districts, the buffer yard depth for both required buffer yards may be
determined by the lesser dimension of the lot width or lot depth.
4.   Minimum Landscaping Pattern. The minimum landscaping pattern shall include
the following frequency:
a.   One (1) tree per twenty (20) linear feet.
b.   Four (4) shrubs per 400 square feet of required landscaped area.
Clustering of trees and shrubs is encouraged.
c.   Berm. Where a semi-continuous berm measuring a minimum of three (3) feet
and a maximum of four (4) feet in vertical height and not having a slope
greater than 3:1 on either side is provided, required buffer yard landscaping
requirements may be reduced by twenty (20) percent. Slopes may be increased
above 3:1 where retaining walls are used, subject to approval under the
Alternative Compliance provisions of this section. No individual section of the
berm may measure more than forty (40) feet in length. The berm should be
integrated into the overall landscaping plan, including landscaping on the berm
where practical.
d.   Prohibited Use. All driveways, refuse containers, storage areas, aisle
ways, vehicular maneuvering areas, mechanical equipment and structures are
prohibited within the required buffer yard. A sidewalk or paved trail may be
located within a buffer yard when used as a connection to other pedestrian and/
or recreational corridors. A concrete PAD for emergency exits from a building
shall be permitted in the buffer yard provided that the Building Code requires
it.
e.   Utility Areas. All on-site utility areas located within twenty-five (25)
feet of a required buffer yard shall be screened by a fence, wall, berm,
evergreen planting or combination thereof such that a substantially solid
visual barrier of six (6) feet in height is attained. fences or walls, when
provided, must be located between the activity area and the buffer yard.
Utility areas shall include refuse containers/dumpsters; storage; display of
materials or merchandise; loading or unloading goods, production assembly,
processing or demolition of goods. Plantings provided to screen utility areas
shall not count toward required landscaping.
5.   Parking lot landscaping perimeter requirements, unless modified by the
Zoning Administrator. Parking lots in all zoning districts are subject to the
following requirements. The landscape width may be reduced provided the minimum
width requirement, when averaged, is maintained overall. One (1) tree per
twenty (20) linear feet and four (4) shrubs per four hundred (400) square feet
of required landscaped area. Clustering of trees and shrubs is encouraged.
a.   State Route 89 street frontage shall be landscaped with a minimum width of
twenty (20) feet.
b.   All other street frontages shall be landscaped with a minimum width of ten
(10) feet.
c.   Other parking perimeters all other lot lines adjacent to parking areas
shall be landscaped with a five (5) foot wide landscape strip.
d.   Islands. Where internal landscaping of the parking lot is required, there
shall be a minimum of one (1) curbed island provided for each fifteen (15)
parking stalls in each row. The minimum area for planting all types of trees
within parking lots shall not be less than one hundred eighty (180) square
feet. Shade trees and intermediate trees shall not be planted in any area with
a width of less than ten (10) feet. Shrubs shall not be planted in an area of
less than two (2) feet in width. Measurements of width and area shall be from
the inside edge of the curb(s). A minimum of fifty (50) percent of every
landscape island shall be planted with live plant material, such as shrubs, or
ground cover.
e.   Curb materials. Parking lot islands and medians shall be curbed with
concrete or a functionally equivalent material that must be approved by the
Zoning Administrator. The following materials are not considered functionally
equivalent to concrete curbs and are therefore unacceptable for use as curbs:
asphalt, landscape timbers, railroad ties, wood or lumber, and concrete wheel
stops.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-729, passed 7-22-2010)
4.26.5 ALTERNATIVE LANDSCAPE PLANS
1.   Where unique situations complicate the provision of required landscaping,
applicants may choose to follow the requirements described herein or submit an
alternate landscape plan to the Zoning Administrator that illustrates how the
intent of UDO Section
4.26 will be fulfilled in an alternative manner. The Zoning Administrator may
approve, approve with modifications, or deny the alternative landscape plan
based on his or her determination as to meeting the intent of the UDO landscape
requirements and the unique characteristics and challenges of the property at
issue.
2.   If an applicant submits an alternative landscape plan which is not
approved by the Zoning Administrator, the applicant may appeal the Zoning
Administrator’s decision to the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-729, passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 15-798,
passed 6-23-2015)
4.26.6 PRESERVATION OF EXISTING LANDSCAPING
1.   Incentive. Existing landscaping that is in a vigorous growing condition
and is not specifically
prohibited by this Ordinance may count toward meeting the requirements of this
Ordinance.
2.   Protection during construction. Trees that are to be preserved under the
provisions of this Ordinance shall be fenced around the drip line of the tree
and marked to be saved during construction. Care shall be taken to prevent
damage to the tree and its root structure during construction.
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-729, passed 7-22-2010)
4.27 ANIMALS AND PETS
1.   Household pets. The keeping of “pets” such as dogs and cats are allowed in
all zoning districts. This provision also allows for the keeping of indoor
birds (such as parrots, parakeets and canaries). Fish and other pets which will
at all times be kept within a fully enclosed dwelling or accessory building
provided there are not odors, noise, insects, or other nuisances caused by the
keeping of such animals which would affect the health and welfare of the
occupants of surrounding properties, but not non-household animals as defined
below.
2.   Non-household animals. The keeping of non-household animals such as
horses, cattle, sheep, goats, swine, or any breed, strain, or crossbreed
thereof, bees, poultry and other non-household birds shall be prohibited except
in those zoning districts in which they are specifically allowed.
3.   Project animals. This provision is intended to allow for the non-
commercial keeping of non-household animals as “project animals” officially
associated with the 4-H or Future Farmers of America in residential zones where
they are not specifically allowed. The keeping of up to nine (9) “project
animals” shall be allowed on premises. Any one (1) project may include up to
three (3) adult rabbits, poultry (except roosters and geese, which are not
permitted), or other non-hoofed animals.
a.   Annually a completed form, prescribed by the Development Services
Department , with name and physical address of each applicant and type,
duration and number of animals of each project shall be submitted to the
Development Services Department by said resident-poultry, rabbits and other
small animal projects shall be allowed in any residentially zoned lot less than
one (1) acre by special permit only.
b.   Pens, stables, cages and other shelters for such animal projects shall not
be located in the required front or street-side yard setback or closer than ten
(10) feet to any property line. All such structures shall be kept in a neat and
sightly manner and shall be controlled daily from refuse, manure, flies and
other nuisances at all times. Storage of feed, equipment and other material
related to such animals shall be kept within an enclosed building.
4.   Nuisance. Where the keeping of such project animals becomes a nuisance,
the Development Services Director shall have the authority to require a
reduction in the number of and/or removal of such animals. Normally the
Director will allow a ten (10) day grace period for compliance to the
Ordinance. In exceptional cases the Director shall require immediate removal of
such animals.
a.   The provisions of the Ordinance are not intended to authorize the keeping
of animals, regardless of number, size or type, in a manner which constitutes a
nuisance and which impairs the enjoyment or use of nearby properties or
violates other legal applicable land use restrictions the properties are
subject to.
b.   Performance standards
i.   Odors: emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter shall be
contained in such quantities so as not to be offensive, or create a public
nuisance or hazard. Odors normal to the raising of livestock will not be
considered a violation of performance standards unless such odors are excessive
due to overcrowding, poor sanitation or other poor management.
ii.   Burning for agricultural purposes or other purposes as permitted by the
Chino Valley Fire District shall be exempted from the above performance
standards.
(Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008)
4.28 FRONT YARD AND STREET SIDE YARD BUILDING SETBACKS WHEN ADJACENT TO A
STREET
A.   Intent: define where front and street side yard setbacks shall be measured
in anticipation of future required right-of-way dedications.
B.   Setback requirement: all of the setbacks shall be measured from the
subject parcel’s front or street side yard property line. If additional right-
of-way is required along the parcel’s front or street side property line, then
the setback shall be measured from the anticipated property line after
dedication of required right-of-way.
C.   Arterial Streets
1.   Arterial street. Building setbacks shall be 20 feet from the property
line. If additional right- of-way is need to obtain the total 80-foot right-of-
way width required for arterial streets, then the setback shall be 20 feet from
the anticipated property line after all necessary right-of-way dedications are
made.
2.   State Route 89. Building setbacks shall be 50 feet, measured from the
property line. If additional right-of-way is needed along State Route 89 then
the setback shall be 50 feet from the anticipated property line after all
necessary right-of-way dedications are made.
3.   Streets classified as arterial streets:
a.   Road 6 North
b.   Road 5 North
c.   Road 4 North
d.   Road 3 North
e.   Road 2 North
f.   Center Street
g.   Road 2 South
h.   Outer Loop Road/Road 4 South
i.   Road 5 South
j.   Road 1 East
k.   Road 1 West
l.   The East Side of Reed Road; and
m.   Perkinsville Road
D.   Collector streets
1.   Building setbacks shall be 20 feet from the property line. If additional
right-of-way is needed to obtain the total 80-foot right-of-way width required
for collector streets, then the setback shall be 20 feet from the anticipated
property line after all necessary right-of-way dedications are made.
2.   Streets classified as collector streets:
a.   Road 4½ North
b.   Road 3½ North
c.   Road 1 North
d.   Road 1 South
e.   Road 3 South
E.   Local streets
Building setbacks shall be 20 feet from the property line. If additional right-
of-way is needed to obtain the total 50-foot right-of-way width required for
local streets, then the setback shall be 20 feet from the anticipated property
line after all necessary right-of-way dedications are made.
F.   Arterial street side yard setback exemptions.
Properties shall be permitted to utilize a 10-foot reduced arterial street-side
setback if the following conditions have been met:
1.   The arterial street adjacent to the property was previously required to
have 50-foot half street improvements, but for which the requirement is not 40-
foot half street improvements.
2.   The required 50-foot half-street improvements were provided prior to the
reduction to the 40- foot required half street improvements.
3.   The minimum setback from the front of a garage to the street is maintained
at not less than a 20-foot setback from an existing street.
(Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 2021-894, passed 1-12-2021)
4.29 DESIGN CONCEPTS
A.   Development goals: protect investment in the community by encouraging
consistently high quality development and promote projects that are suitable in
the context of a southwest environment.
B.   Applicability: to achieve these goals, the design concepts apply to all
new commercial developments and redevelopment or remodeling of existing
commercial developments where more than 50% of the exterior of the structure
will be substantially modified.
1.   Site planning. The relationship to existing residential development:
a.   Position trash enclosures, compactors, truck loading areas and outdoor
storage away from residential uses to the extent practical.
b.   Locate drive-through lanes away from adjoining single-family and multi-
family developments. Locate speakers and menu boards so that noise is not
directed toward residential uses and incorporate a screen wall and landscaping
to lessen noise.
c.   Construct a masonry wall to separate a residential development from a
proposed commercial development and plant large evergreen trees in the required
landscape area to buffer the residential use.
d.   Strive to minimize driveway cuts on State Route 89 and arterial streets by
providing vehicular cross-access easement s and shared access driveways between
adjacent commercial projects.
2.   Signage:
a.   Screen restaurant menu boards from adjacent public rights-of-way and
adjacent properties.
3.   Landscaping: provide landscaping that is ten (10) percent above the
requirements of the minimum landscaping pattern requirements.
4.   Lighting:
a.   Locate light poles in landscaped areas. Paint concrete light pole bases to
match the primary color of the building or finish the bases to match parking
screen walls.
b.   Highlighting of unique or special features of the site. Such as
architectural features. Specimen trees and artwork with accent lighting should
be considered.
c.   Use decorative wall-mounted sconces or light fixtures when building
lighting is proposed on elevations away from residential uses.
C.   Building design:
1.   Massing: the visual impact of a building depends not only on its size, but
also on the relationship between its length, width and height.
a.   Building mass should be broken into smaller elements, consistent with the
proportions of the architectural style selected and surrounding uses.
b.   In large multi-building projects, vary the size, massing and height of the
buildings in relation to each other.
c.   Reduction of building mass may be achieved by using a combination of the
following techniques:
i.   Variation in the rooflines and form.
ii.   Use of ground level arcades and covered areas.
iii.   Use of protected and recessed entries.
iv.   Use of vertical elements on or in front of expansive blank walls.
v.   Addition of windows on elevations facing streets.
2.   Design:
a.   Provide weather and sun protection, such as overhangs, awnings and
canopies.
b.   Predominant exterior building materials should be of high quality and
durable. These include, but are not limited to:
i.   Brick, adobe, mortar washed slump block.
ii.   Stone, natural or faux.
iii.   Integral color, sand blasted or stained textured masonry.
iv.   Split-face or scored concrete masonry units.
v.   Textured tilt-up concrete panels.
vi.   Stucco.
vii.   Metal roofs.
viii.   Concrete and clay tile roofs.
ix.   Clear and tinted glass.
x.   Architectural metal.
c.   Predominant exterior building materials should not include the following:
i.   Un-textured tilt-up concrete panels.
ii.   Pre-fabricated steel panels.
iii.   Corrugated metal.
iv.   Highly reflective glass.
v.   Grooved plywood.
d.   The front elevation colors should possess low reflectivity
characteristics, and respect the diversity of color in the southwest.
(Ord. 10-729, passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 15-798, passed 6-23-2015)
4.30  COMMERCIAL GREENHOUSE STANDARDS
A.   In commercial or industrial zoning districts:
1.   No greater than ten (10) percent of the floor area shall be used for
retail sales or restaurants which shall be an accessory use to the greenhouse
use.
2.   No greater than twenty (20) percent of the floor area shall be used for
entertainment purposes, which shall be an accessory use to the greenhouse use.
B.   In agricultural/residential zoning districts, no greater than ten (10)
percent of the floor area shall be used for the sale of farm produce that is
primarily grown on site or other accessory uses.
(Ord. 11-738, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 13-779, passed 12-10-2013)
4.31  MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES, OFF-SITE CULTIVATION SITES AND INFUSION
FACILITIES
A.   All medical marijuana facilities shall comply with the regulations set
forth in this section.
B.   All medical marijuana cultivation facilities shall be wholly contained
within an enclosed, locked facility as defined in A.R.S. § 36-2801(6).
C.   Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, a medical marijuana
facility shall provide written evidence of the following from the appropriate
state regulatory agency:
1.   The proposed facility is in compliance with all applicable state
regulatory agency and state law requirements.
2.   Any application submitted to and approval granted by a State regulatory
agency.
3.   In addition to the documents required in Subsections C.1. and C.2., above,
an applicant for an infusion facility, whether located within a dispensary or
cultivation facility, shall provide certified copies of all approved permits
and licenses required by Local Heath Department.
4.   In addition to the documents required in Subsections C.1. and C.2., above,
an applicant for a dispensary shall provide:
a.   A complete list of the cultivation and infusion facilities from which the
dispensary will receive medical marijuana or medical marijuana infused
products. Said list shall include:
(I)   The name and physical location of the cultivation or infusion facility;
(ii)   The number of any state license granted by the state regulating agency
to the cultivation or infusion facility;
(iii)   The name and contact information for each and every member of the board
of directors of the cultivation and/or infusion facility.
b.   A copy of the operating procedures submitted to and approved by the state
regulatory agency.
5.   In addition to the documents required in subsections C.1. and C.2., above,
an applicant for a cultivation facility shall provide a complete list of all
dispensaries for which the cultivation facility will cultivate medical
marijuana, including:
(I)   The name and physical location of the dispensary;
(ii)   The number of any license granted by the regulatory agency; and
(iii)   The name and contact information for each and every member of the board
of directors of the dispensary.
D.   The following separation requirements shall apply to all medical marijuana
facilities:
1.   Five hundred (500) feet from any school, public or private.
2.   Five hundred (500) feet from any public park, public building, or public
community center.
3.   Five hundred (500) feet from any drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility
or correctional transitional housing facility.
4.   Five hundred (500) feet from any residential zoning district.
5.   Five hundred (500) feet from the nearest edge of the right-of-way of State
Route 89.
E.   There shall be no retail sales, restaurant, food service, or entertainment
activities within a medical marijuana cultivation facility.
F.   Dust, fumes, odor, or vapors emitting from any cultivation or infusion
facility shall be mitigated to minimize impact on surrounding properties.
Mitigation includes, but is not limited to, the following: ventilation of
buildings, dust control, and/or installation and use of devices designed to
minimize dust, fumes, odors, or vapors.
G.   All medical marijuana facilities shall be located in a permanent building
or structure. No such facility shall be allowed to locate in a trailer, cargo
container, or motorized vehicle.
H.   The total square footage of a medical marijuana dispensary facility shall
not exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet.
I.   There shall be no consumption of medical marijuana on the premises of any
medical marijuana facility.
J.   Entry into limited access areas within a medical marijuana facility is
restricted to medical marijuana dispensary agents or persons accompanied by a
medical marijuana dispensary agent.
K.   Medical marijuana infusion facilities shall:
1.   Be located on the same site as a dispensary or a cultivation facility.
2.   On-site infusion facilities, whether attached or free standing, shall not
occupy greater than twenty (20) percent of the gross floor area of the
respective dispensary or cultivation facility.
3.   There shall be no retail sales, restaurant, food service, or entertainment
activities within a medical marijuana infusion facility.
L.   All cultivation of medical marijuana shall take place within an enclosed,
locked structure comprised of a roof and walls that fully obscure all plants
and cultivation activities from public view and in compliance with the
provisions of this code and Arizona state law. There shall be no outdoor
cultivation of medical marijuana within the corporate boundaries of the Town.
(Ord. 13-779, passed 12-10-2013; Ord. 16-811, passed 1-26-2016; Ord. 16-816,
passed 6-14-2016)
4.32 METAL STORAGE CONTAINERS
A.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the siting and use of
metal storage containers on commercial, industrial, and larger residential lots
while ensuring that the storage container is compatible with the zoning and the
surrounding area through the reduction of visual prominence by placement,
quantity, and paint.
B.   General Requirements. When allowed, Metal Storage Containers shall meet
the following development standards:
1.   No metal storage container is allowed to be in any district not
specifically authorized by this ordinance.
2.   A primary structure is required on the property in order for any metal
storage container to be allowed.
3.   Metal storage containers shall be placed at the rear of any residential
lot to reduce the visual prominence of the container.
4.   Metal storage containers are for storage only. No human habitation or
occupancy is allowed.
5.   No modification of the metal storage container is allowed, other than
painting and passive ventilation.
6.   No addition of plumbing or electrical equipment is allowed.
7.   When required to be painted, as set forth in
Table 4.32-1, metal storage containers shall be painted a single color, either
the color of the primary/closest structure onsite or an earth tone consistent
with the surrounding terrain.
8.   Metal storage containers shall not be placed in retention basins or known
flood areas.
9.   Metal storage containers shall not occupy any required off-street parking
space.
10.   Metal storage containers shall not be stacked without a valid Conditional
Use Permit.
11.   No graffiti, logos, or signage is allowed on metal storage containers.
12.   Metal storage containers on properties along SR-89 shall be screened from
public view or painted.
13.   Temporary/seasonal (6-week) placement of metal storage containers in
commercial and industrial zones is permissible with Administrative Approval of
a Temporary Use Permit).
14.   All metal storage containers placed on residentially zoned properties
shall be painted. Those placed before September 11, 2024, must be painted no
later than September 10, 2025, and those placed on or after September 11, 2024,
must be painted within one year of placement.
C.   Grandfathering. Metal storage containers existing in Chino Valley before
September 11, 2024, are considered “grandfathered” and not retroactively
required to comply with these regulations, with the exception of residential
painting. Any containers placed after September 11, 2024, must comply with the
standards in Section
4.32.
D.   Containers by Zoning District. Table 4.32-1 below sets forth the number of
metal storage containers allowed per zoning district.
Table 4.32-1
                                                           If Adjacent to SR-
Zoning District Containers* Per Acre Max. # Paint Required 89: Paint/Screening
                                                           Required
Table 4.32-1
                                                           If Adjacent to SR-
Zoning District Containers* Per Acre Max. # Paint Required 89: Paint/Screening
                                                           Required
AR-36           1                    5**    X              X
AR-5            1                    5**    X              X
AR-4            1                    4**    X              X
SR-2.5          1                    2**    X              X
SR-2            1                    2**    X              X
SR-1.6          1                    1**    X              X
SR-1            1                    1**    X              X
PL              1                    1**    X              X
SR-0.16         Prohibited
SF-24,000       Prohibited
SF-12,000       Prohibited
PAD             Prohibited
MR-1            CUP                                        X
MHP-4           CUP                                        X
OS              CUP                                        X
CL              5                           Along 89       X
CH              5                           Along 89       X
I               5                           Along 89       X
*   All containers are limited to 40' in length. Two 20' containers can be
used in place of one 40' container in all zones where containers are
permitted.
**   For properties larger than the minimum acreage in the zone: for every
five acres above the base acreage in the zone, an additional 40' container is
allowed.
For all zones: Contractors and Homeowners may use metal storage containers in
any zone for temporary storage of construction equipment, materials, or
personal household items during construction that is authorized by a Town of
Chino Valley building permit. The containers are allowed for the duration of
the building permit.
Property owners requesting more than the maximum number of containers may
apply for a CUP.
No new Metal Storage Containers permitted in HMU-designated areas of the 2040
General Plan.
 
(Ord. 2024-943, passed 9-10-2024)
5 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
5.1 INTENT
The intent of these regulations is to provide procedures consistent with State
Law that promote the health, safety and general welfare for all citizens of the
Town by allowing for orderly growth and harmonious development of the Town in a
manner that:
A.   Implements the General Plan, any applicable specific plans, the zoning
ordinance, design requirements, and all other codes and ordinances of the Town.
B.   Ensures that future development will preserve and enhance the Town's
natural scenic attributes.
C.   Ensures that all new development will maintain and encourage a pleasing
environment and be in harmony with the special character and historic quality
of the Town.
D.   Establishes and maintains safe and effective vehicular and non-vehicular
circulation through coordinated street, transit, bicycle and pedestrian systems
with relation to major thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions, and public
facilities.
E.   Ensures the adequate provisions to all property for water, sewer and other
utilities, drainage and stormwater retention, and other health and safety
requirements.
F.   Ensures the provision for adequate sites for schools, recreation and open
space, and other public facilities.
G.   Promotes the conveyance of land by accurate legal description.
These Subdivision Regulations accommodate growth by considering the need for
services generated by new lots together with public ability to provide and/or
private willingness to contribute to the costs of these services.
(Ord. 2020-885, passed 9-8-2020)
5.1.2 SHORT TITLE
For the purpose of identification, these subdivision regulations as set forth
in this Section 5 of the Unified Development Ordinance (Chapter 154 of the Town
Code) shall hereafter be referred to as the “Subdivision Regulations”.
(Ord. 2020-885, passed 9-8-2020)
5.1.3 AUTHORITY
The Subdivision Regulations are authorized by Title 9, Chapter 4, Articles 6.2
and 7 of the Arizona Revised Statutes.
(Ord. 2020-885, passed 9-8-2020)
5.1.4 JURISDICTION
These regulations shall govern the division of all land that lies within the
corporate limits of the Town. These Subdivision Regulations apply to all
properties within the Town limits proposed for division in any manner,
including subdivision, land split, or lot line adjustment.
(Ord. 2020-885, passed 9-8-2020)
5.1.5 GENERAL REGULATIONS; ADMINISTRATION
A.   Permits Prohibited: The Town shall not issue any building or other
development permit for property that has been divided without meeting the
requirements of these Subdivision Regulations.
B.   Interpretation: The interpretation and application of the provisions of
these Subdivision Regulations shall be made by the Zoning Administrator or his/
her designee. Where any provision of these Subdivision Regulations imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision, or any other
ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the provision that is
more restrictive or imposes higher standards controls. Nothing contained in
these Subdivision Regulations shall be construed as relieving an applicant from
the requirements imposed by the Arizona Revised Statutes.
C.   Administration: The Zoning Administrator or his/her designee is hereby
authorized to receive, process, and otherwise act upon preliminary and final
subdivision plats, and land splits not requiring a subdivision, in accordance
with these regulations. The Planning and Zoning Commission and Town staff shall
provide recommendations to the Council with respect to these Subdivision
Regulations. Town staff is charged with the duty of investigating and reporting
upon matters referred to them in accordance with these Subdivision Regulations.
D.   Fees: Fees for Town services provided in the administration of these
Subdivision Regulations shall be set by Resolution of the Council and may be
changed from time to time.
E.   Actions Prohibited: Until a preliminary plat and final plat of
subdivision, as applicable, have been approved in accordance with these
Subdivision Regulations, no person proposing a subdivision within the Town
shall subdivide or file a record of survey, map or plat for record, or sell any
part of a subdivision, or proceed with any improvement or other work on same.
(Ord. 2020-885, passed 9-8-2020)
5.1.6 PLATTING OR DIVISION REQUIRED
No division of land is permitted unless it conforms to the provisions of this
chapter. All divisions of land that meet the conditions of Section
5.1.7 below shall follow the subdivision process in these Subdivision
Regulations; all Land Splits are permitted pursuant to the Land Split
provisions in Section
5.2.6 below; divisions of land not meeting the definition of Land Split or
Subdivision are subject to improvement requirements as set forth in Section
5.2.6 below. No person shall, for the purpose of circumventing this chapter,
sell, offer to sell or divide any lot, piece or parcel of land without first
having recorded a Town-approved plat or a land split thereof, as applicable, in
accordance with this chapter. The Town does not recognize recorded divisions of
land that have not first obtained Town approval.
(Ord. 2020-885, passed 9-8-2020)
5.1.7 SUBDIVISION APPLICABILITY
A.   Subdivision approval shall be required to divide improved or unimproved
land for the purpose of financing, sale or lease, whether immediate or future,
into:
1.   Four (4) or more lots, tracts or parcels or land; or
2.   Two (2) or more lots, tracts or parcels or land, if a new street is
involved; or
3.   Two (2) or more lots, tracts or parcels of land, if the boundaries of said
land have been fixed by a recorded plat.
B.   Subdivision Approval shall also be required for any condominium,
cooperative, community apartment, townhouse or similar project containing four
(4) or more parcels, in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with
the right of exclusive occupancy of any unit located thereon, but plat of such
projects need not show the buildings or the manner in which the buildings or
airspace above the property shown on the plat are to be divided.
C.   Within a subdivision, tracts of land must be designated with letters, lots
must be designated with numbers and streets or roads must be named.
(Ord. 2020-885, passed 9-8-2020; Ord. 2022-923, passed 10-11-2022)
5.2 SUBDIVISION APPLICATION PROCEDURES
5.2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)
A.   In General: Every land division shall conform to the goals and objectives
of the General Plan, Unified Development Ordinance, and other ordinances
adopted by Council and laws of the State of Arizona that specifically relate to
subdivisions and the development of land.
B.   Owner/Agent Authorization: Applications shall only be submitted by
property owners or their authorized representatives. The Zoning Administrator
may require proof of ownership/agency prior to accepting an application.
C.   Zoning Standards: Proposed subdivisions must be designed to meet the
specific requirements of the zoning district in which they are located. In the
event that a change in zoning is required to enable the development to be built
as proposed, any necessary zoning amendment must be initiated by the property
owner (or authorized agent) in accordance with the procedures for processing
applications for changes in zoning set forth in the Town’s Unified Development
Ordinance. No subdivision plat for which a zone change is required may be
considered by the Council until the required zone change has been adopted by
the Council. The applications for both the requested zoning amendment and the
preliminary plat may be filed concurrently.
D.   Dedication or Reservation of Public Land: Where a tract to be subdivided
contains all or any part of a planned park, recreation facility, school, open
space, water facility, wastewater facility, public safety facility, flood
control facility or other area shown on the General Plan as a public area, or
required by Council as a public area, such site shall be dedicated to the Town
of appropriate public entity or reserved for acquisition by the Town or
appropriate public entity within a specified time period. The applicant and the
Town or appropriate public agency shall reach an agreement regarding dedication
or acquisition of the property for such purpose prior to consideration of final
plat by the Council. If a parcel of property is to be reserved rather than
dedicated, the Town may require the Subdivider to designate the reserved area
on the final plat subject to the following conditions:
1.   The land reserved shall be in the size and shape as to permit the
remainder of the land area in which the reservation is located to develop in an
orderly and efficient manner.
2.   The public entity for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall have a
period of one year after the recording of the final subdivision plat to enter
into an agreement to acquire such reserved land area. The purchase price shall
be the fair market value thereof at the time of the filing of the preliminary
plat plus the taxes against such reserved area from the date of the
reservation, and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance
of such reserved area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering
such reserved area.
3.   If the public entity for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not
exercise the reservation agreement set forth in paragraph 5.2.1(D)(3) above,
within the agreed upon period of time, the reservation of such area shall
terminate unless a mutually agreeable time extension is executed between the
entity and the subdivider.
E.   Outline of the Review Process: The preparation, review and approval of
subdivisions within the Town Limits shall proceed through the following
progressive stages:
1.   Pre-Application Conference with Town staff;
2.   Preliminary plat submittal: The preliminary plat will be reviewed by Town
staff to ensure it is complete and consistent with these Subdivision
Regulations; the complete preliminary plat submittal is then considered by
Planning and Zoning Commission and Council;
3.   Subdivision Technical Review - considered and reviewed by Town Staff and
pertinent outside public service and utility agencies;
3.   Final plat submittal - Includes review by the Town staff to ensure the
Final Plat meets the requirements of these Subdivision Regulations and
Subdivision Technical Review by Town staff and pertinent outside public service
and utility agencies, all prior to consideration of the Final Plat by the
Council.
5.2.2 PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE
Pre-application Conference: The pre-application conference precedes preparation
of platting and improvement plans by the applicant. During this conference,
applicants informally provide Town staff with an overview of the proposed land
division, after which the Town staff advises the applicants of specific public
objectives related to the subject tract, and provides the applicant with
detailed information regarding platting procedures and requirements.
A.   At the pre-application meeting, the applicant must provide a general
outline of the proposed development including:
1.   Sketch plan(s) and ideas regarding land use, street and lot arrangement,
and tentative lot sizes.
2.   Tentative proposals regarding water supply, sewage disposal, surface
drainage and street improvements.
B.   Town staff will discuss the proposal with the applicant and provide input
and suggestions regarding procedural steps, including the public hearing
timeline, public policy objectives, design and improvement standards, and
general platting requirements. Then, depending upon the scope of the proposed
development, the Town staff will:
1.   Check the existing General Plan land use designation for the proposed
subdivision and determine if a General Plan amendment will be required and if
such amendment will be obtained prior to additional processing of the
application.
2.   Check the existing zoning of the proposed subdivision and recommend
changes in zoning if necessary or desirable.
3.   Provide the applicant with information regarding existing and proposed
schools, parks, and other public places, and inform the applicant of the Town’s
requirements for infrastructure improvements required for the proposed
subdivision.
4.   Inspect the site or otherwise determine its relationship to major streets,
utility systems, and adjacent land uses, and identify any unusual problems,
including but not limited to those related to topography, utilities, and
drainage.
5.   Determine whether a Development Master Plan (DMP) will be required prior
to the preparation of a preliminary plat, and the extent to which the property
owner will be required to prepare it.
C.   Subdivision Referral and Approval Process: Within fifteen (15) calendar
days after the pre- application conference, the Zoning Administrator or his/her
designee will send a written notice to the subdivider with staff’s
recommendations related to preparation and submittal of a preliminary plat by
developer to be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the
Council, and with a determination as to whether a Development Master Plan will
be required pursuant to 5.2.2(D) of these Subdivision Regulations. If the
proposed subdivision does not require a Development Master Plan, the subdivider
may proceed with the preparation of a preliminary plat to be considered by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the Council. As a prerequisite of
preliminary plat review by the Development Services Director and the Public
Works Director, the subdivider shall submit copies of letters written to the
following agencies informing them of the intent to subdivide and to learn the
general requirement for public utilities and public dedications applicable to
the subdivision needs:
1.   Appropriate public utilities
2.   Cable television and communication companies
3.   Chino Valley Unified School District
4.   Yavapai County Health Department
5.   ADOT
6.   U.S.D.A. Soil Conservation Service
7.   Yavapai Flood Control District
D.   Development Master Plan: A DMP shall be required prior to the preparation
of a preliminary plat if any of the following apply: (i) the tract is larger
than 100 acres; (ii) the tract is to be developed in multiple phases or if the
tract is only a portion of a larger landholding of the subdivider; or (iii) the
tract is part of a larger land area the development of which is complicated by
unusual topographic, utility, land use, land ownership, or other conditions. As
part of the notification described in 5.2.2(C) above, the Zoning Administrator
or his/her designee shall notify the subdivider of the requirement to prepare a
DMP. To ensure cohesive development, the subdivider may include areas within
its DMP that are anticipated for future acquisition. If subdivider is
requesting a zone change as part of the development, the conceptual land use
plan required for such zone change application may, at the reasonable
discretion of the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee, serve as the DMP
for the subdivision.
1.   Preparation: Development Master Plans must be prepared to a scale and
accuracy commensurate with their purposes, and must include:
a.   General street pattern with particular attention to collector streets and
future circulation throughout the development;
b.   General location and size of existing and proposed school sites, parks,
and other public areas;
c.   Location of shopping centers, multiple-family residential or other non-
residential land uses;
d.   Methods proposed for sewage disposal, water supply and storm drainage;
e.   Approximate densities and intensities of various land uses.
2.   Phasing Plan: If development is to take place in several stages, the DMP
must be submitted as a supporting document for each stage. The DMP must be kept
up to date by the subdivider as modifications take place.
3.   Approval: After Town staff has determined the required elements in 5.2.2
(D)(1) are included in the proposed DMP, the DMP shall be forwarded to the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the Council for review and approval. Upon
acceptance of the general design approach by the Commission and the Council,
the subdivider may submit a preliminary plat for review.
(Ord. 2020-885, passed 9-8-2020)
5.2.3 PRELIMINARY PLAT
To ensure that a subdivision complies with the most-current edition of these
Subdivision Regulations, preliminary plats must be submitted to the Town for
review no later than 120 calendar days after (i) the date of the Zoning
Administrator’s comment letter described in paragraph
5.2.2(C) in the case where a DMP is not required, and (ii) the date of Council
approval of the DMP as described in paragraph
5.2.2(D)(3), an applicant shall apply for a preliminary plat or submit a
Development Master Plan (DMP); provided, however, that this time period may be
extended by the Zoning Administrator to a time mutually agreed upon with the
subdivider if the result of such extension will not cause the comment letter
described in paragraph
5.2.2(C) to be inconsistent with a later change to the Subdivision Regulations.
A.   Application Procedures and Requirements in General: The preliminary plat
stage of land subdivision involves detailed subdivision planning, submittal,
review, and approval of the preliminary plat. The preliminary plat must
substantially conform to the conceptual land use plan provided to the Town
during the pre-application meeting described in Section
5.2.2 and, if applicable, to the approved DMP. A preliminary plat may only be
submitted for review subsequent to the issuance of the Zoning Administrator’s
comment letter described in
5.2.2(C) and must be accompanied by payment of the prescribed fee. The
subdivider must provide all essential information outlined below to enable the
Zoning Administrator to determine the character and general acceptability of
the proposed development.
B.   Preliminary plat Submission: In addition to a completed preliminary plat
application form, a complete submittal shall include a digital copy of the
preliminary plat, or if the applicant is unable to produce a digital copy,
twelve (12) blueline (or blackline) copies of the preliminary plat, which must
be scaled to fit on one twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches sheet
(where practical, although the scale may not exceed one hundred (100) feet to
the inch), in addition to two eleven (11) inches by seventeen (17) inches
reduced copies; whether digital or in blueline (or blackline), the preliminary
plat must show:
1.   Identification and Descriptive Data
a.   Proposed subdivision name, location by Township, range, and section, and
reference by dimension and bearing to a section or quarter section corner.
b.   North arrow, scale, and date of preparation.
c.   Name, address and phone number of the owner, and the engineer, surveyor,
landscape architect, or land planner who prepared the preliminary plat.
d.   Vicinity map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to main
traffic arterials and any other landmarks that would help to locate the
project.
e.   Property owners name, fee number or assessor’s parcel numbers for all
abutting properties.
f.   Legal description of the property.
2.   Existing Conditions Data
a.   Topography by one (1), two (2) or five (5) foot contour intervals adequate
to reflect the character and drainage of the land as determined by the Public
Works Director, and related to U.S. Coastal and Geodetic Survey (USC&GS) datum,
or other datum approved by the Public Works Director.
b.   Surveyed location of all existing improvements on public rights-of-way and
private property including land use, structures and fences, walls, shacks,
barns, utility lines, wells, streams, irrigation canals and structures, private
and public culverts, ditches, washes, lakes, water features of all types,
direction of flow, flow pattern, location and extent of areas subject to
inundation, and whether such inundation is frequent, periodic, or occasional
and data regarding frequency.
c.   Location, width, and names of all platted streets, drainage and utility
easements, public areas, and municipal boundaries within, adjacent to, or
extending from the property.
d.   Location of historic and archaeological sites, if any.
e.   Acreage and zoning of the property and abutting properties.
f.   Complete boundary dimensions of the property and engineer's calculations
and estimated values for each tributary storm runoff channel for ten (10),
fifty (50), and one hundred (100)-year frequency storms (the values should be
indicated along the boundary of the survey map for all points of drainage
entering and exiting the property).
g.   Evidence of adequate access from an existing public right-of-way.
3.   Proposed Conditions Data
a.   Proposed lot configuration, including approximate size and dimensions of
each lot, and identification of each lot by number, and total number of lots;
building setback lines; street layout, including location, width, curve radii,
and proposed names.
b.   Lot and tract table, containing the overall size of each lot, and
Identification of average and minimum lot size(s).
c.   Designation of all land(s) to be dedicated and reserved for public use
with use and acreage for each indicated.
d.   Location of all proposed private and controlled access streets and
identification of all access devices on local streets within the subdivision;
their means of accomplishing access control (e.g. signage, traffic barriers,
gates, etc.) and monitoring devices and facilities; and their hours of
operation and standards and procedures for admittance.
e.   Location and description of proposed and existing utilities within the
subdivision; location of all above-ground utilities cabinets and facilities;
location of water and sewer mains with respect to property lines, easements
and/or street centerlines, with line sizes and valve/manhole locations shown.
f.   Location of the permanent subdivision identification sign(s).
g.   Location of all proposed fire hydrants within the subdivision.
h.   Location of vehicular non-access easements.
i.   Typical maximum construction envelope containing minimum building setbacks
and maximum lot coverage permitted; non-typical buildings setbacks shall be
specifically noted.
j.   Location of water wells, streams, ditches, washes, lakes, or other water
features; direction of flow; 100-year flood plain; location and extent of areas
subject to inundation, whether such inundation is frequent, periodic or
occasional, within the subdivision boundaries and 200 feet beyond such
boundaries. In addition, the proposed location(s) of storm-water detention
facilities shall be indicated.
k.   A statement whether the proposed sewage disposal system will be by
individual lot septic tanks or Town sewer.
l.   A statement as to the types of potable water facilities proposed shall be
included with the preliminary plat application. Such statement shall show
evidence of adequate volume and quality of proposed water supply and facilities
to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director.
m.   Preliminary calculations and description of proposed stormwater disposal
outlets in a form acceptable to the Public Works Director.
4.   Additional Information and Requirements
a.   An electronic copy of the preliminary plat on disk or other digital format
compatible with the Town computer database. Typically, the form of these files
will be in DXF, DWG or other similar industry-standard digital file (latest
edition of AutoCAD or similar).
b.   Payment of prescribed filing fee.
c.   A preliminary draft or outline of conditions, covenants and restrictions
that demonstrate the proposed theme and character of the proposed subdivision.
d.   Such other information as, in the reasonable opinion of the Zoning
Administrator or his/her designee, will be required to complete a thorough
analysis of the preliminary plat in terms of its compliance with all Town
Codes, ordinances, rules and regulations.
e.   Water Certificates for assured water supply shall be required in
accordance with A.R.S. § 45-576, as amended and as may be supplemented by rules
promulgated by the Arizona Department of Water Resources.
C.   Preliminary plat Review and Approval
1.   Upon acceptance of an application for approval of a preliminary plat, the
Zoning Administrator or his/her designee will have five (5) working days to
advise the applicant if the submittal is complete. Copies of complete
applications will be forwarded to the Town departments and utility and public
safety agencies that serve the area for their review and comment.
2.   The reviewing agencies and departments shall transmit their comments and
recommendations to the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee. The Zoning
Administrator or his/her designee will then summarize the comments and
recommendations, prepare a staff report, and present it to the Commission.
3.   The Commission shall consider the proposed preliminary plat at a properly
posted and advertised public meeting. The Commission shall provide a
recommendation to the Council to approve the preliminary plat as submitted, to
approve the preliminary plat with conditions, or to deny the preliminary plat.
4.   After the Planning and Zoning Commission has forwarded its recommendation
to the Council, the Council shall consider the proposed preliminary plat at a
properly posted and advertised public meeting. The Council may approve the
preliminary plat as submitted, approve the preliminary plat with conditions as
recommended by the Commission, approve the preliminary plat with additional or
modified conditions, or deny the preliminary plat.
5.   Preliminary plat approval constitutes authorization for the subdivider to
proceed with the preparation and submittal of engineering plans and
specifications for public infrastructure improvements and the final plat.
Preliminary plat approval does not ensure final plat approval.
6.   Each approved preliminary plat shall expire if a final plat for that
property has not been submitted within three (3) years of the preliminary plat
approval.
5.2.4 FINAL PLAT
When the subdivider submits an application for final plat approval, all
required documents, civils, and plans outlined below shall be required for a
complete application. The Town will not accept any application if all required
submittal documents are not included. The time limitations for expiration of
the preliminary plat will not be extended by submittal of an incomplete
application.
A.   Application Procedure and Requirements
1.   In General: The final plat will be processed in stages involving the final
design of the subdivision, submittal of engineering plans and specifications
(if not already completed), final CC&Rs clearly setting forth the requirements
for property owners form and operate a homeowners' association to maintain
private streets, satisfactory assurance documentation, execution of a
development agreement (if applicable), and signing of an infrastructure
improvement agreement.
2.   Zoning: The zoning of a tract must permit the proposed development. If a
zoning amendment is required to enable the property to be developed as
proposed, the rezoning must be approved by Council prior to approval of a final
plat; provided that the subdivider must file an application for such rezoning
prior to consideration of the preliminary plat. In the event a preliminary plat
is not required as permitted in Section
5.2.7.
3.   Easements:
a.   The subdivider shall be responsible for providing on the final plat, prior
to plat approval, the location and width of all easements necessary to provide
the infrastructure improvements required by these Subdivision Regulations. All
easements shown on the final plat shall be accompanied by the necessary
dedication and acceptance statements to convey the easement to the appropriate
person or entity to meet the requirements of these Subdivision Regulations.
b.   The following notation shall be placed on all final plats: "Construction
within easements, except by public agencies and utility companies, shall be
limited to utilities, fencing (wood, wire or removable section-type), and/or
landscaping. Utility companies will not be required to replace any obstructions
or landscaping that must be removed during the course of maintenance,
construction, or reconstruction within any utility easement."
4.   Technical Review: The subdivider must submit the documents below at the
same time as the application for final plat approval.
a.   A complete set of engineering plans and specifications prepared by a civil
engineer who is currently registered in the State of Arizona, including water,
sanitary sewer, streets, grading and drainage and all other improvements; such
plans and specifications shall be designed based upon the approved preliminary
plat.
b.   The final plat shall not be presented to Council until all engineering
plans have been approved by the Development Services Director, the Public Works
Director, and other applicable review agencies.
c.   When applicable, for water and sewer mainline extensions, the subdivider
must furnish to the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ) and the
Town's Public Works Director such evidence as the ADEQ may require regarding
the adequacy of the design and operation of the proposed potable water and
sanitary sewerage facilities. Applications for plan review by ADEQ may only be
made with written authorization of the Public Works Director. For the purposes
of calculating distances for required water and sewer improvements, extension
of utilities shall be measured from property line of the parent parcel that is
closest to the existing water or sewer lines. If the proposed sewage disposal
system will be by individual lot septic tanks, where permitted, the result of
the percolation test and test boring logs shall be submitted to the Public
Works Director.
d.   In conjunction with all necessary engineering plans prescribed in these
Subdivision Regulations, the subdivider shall provide a Comprehensive
Development Plan (CDP) that illustrates the physical relationship of all
proposed utility improvements for the proposed subdivision. This plan shall
cumulatively index all proposed utility improvements for future reference, and
help coordinate ongoing development within the Town.
(1)   The subdivider may submit a preliminary CDP for Town staff review with
the preliminary plat, or prior to the preparation and submittal of a final CDP
and other engineering or improvement plans.
(2)   The CDP shall depict the following:
i.   Proposed location and separation of all public improvements and how they
relate to the lots or blocks of the subdivision.
ii.   Approximate distances and measurements of all proposed rights-of-way,
easements, one hundred (100)-year floodplain limits for regulatory flows,
utility placements, edge of pavement, curb, gutter, and sidewalk (if required);
drainage structures and building envelopes for each lot.
iii.   Topographic contours with an interval of between two (2) and ten (10)
feet. The topographic mapping should extend fifty (50) feet beyond the
subdivision boundaries. Spot elevations for the proposed grading should be
provided at various locations to assist in determining the suitability of
topography for the proposed subdivision.
iv.   Phase lines, phase numbers and infrastructure to be provided in each
phase.
e.   Until such time as the Town formally adopts its own Engineering Design
Details, the subdivider shall be required to use the Maricopa Association of
Governments Standard Specifications and Details (most recent version), the Quad
City Standards as published by the City of Prescott, and the Yavapai County
Drainage Manual.
B.   Final plat Submission: A complete Final Plat application submittal shall
include the following:
1.   Two (2) copies of a record plat drawn in permanent black ink on linen or
mylar on a twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches sheet with the
scale not to exceed one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. The Zoning
Administrator or his/her designee may permit a variation in that scale if there
is a unique or unusual size or shape to the subject property. If more than two
(2) sheets are required for the drafting of the final plat, an index sheet of
the same dimensions illustrating the layout of the entire subdivision shall be
included.
2.   A certificate or letter from each utility company providing service to the
area indicating approval of the plans for utility installations and confirming
the availability of services.
3.   An Arizona Department of Transportation access permit, where required.
4.   An Infrastructure Improvement Agreement, completed and recorded, between
the subdivider and the Town, including all required bonds to cover warranties.
5.   A completion date for the construction of the improvements. Council shall
approve the completion date as part of the final plat approval. The completion
date for the improvements should not exceed two (2) years from the date of such
approval. If subdivider fails to complete the improvements by the completion
date, the Council may, in its sole discretion, draw upon the assurances
described hereafter to complete the improvements.
6.   In addition to the paper submittal required above, an electronic version
of the final plat, in digital format compatible with the Town's computer
database (DXF, DWG or other similar digital file developed with the latest
AutoCAD or ArcGIS), to facilitate the inclusion of the final plat into the
Town's parcel database.
7.   A copy of the subdivision's proposed covenants, conditions and
restrictions (CC&Rs). The CC&R submittal, including any HOA requirements as set
forth in these Subdivision Regulations, shall be in recordable format and shall
be submitted and recorded with the final plat.
8.   Identification Data
a.   A title that includes the name of the subdivision and its location by
section, township, and range.
b.   Name, address, registration number, and valid seal of the registered land
surveyor who prepared the plat.
c.   Names, addresses, and signatures of all owners of record.
d.   Names and addresses of the engineer and applicant for the project.
9.   Survey Data
a.   Subdivision boundary lines and corners, together with courses and
distances and all curve or angle data. Subdivision corners must be shown and
must close on the ground within 0.05 foot per one hundred (100) feet; other
monuments, lot corners, and other survey points must also be described and
located. One (1) tie must be made by true course and distance to a GLO corner,
or, if none exists, to a corner of common acceptance. Proposed subdivisions
adjacent to existing subdivisions must tie to the corners of the existing
subdivisions. Adjoining property must be identified by subdivision name, or as
"unsubdivided" if applicable. Forest Service lands must be identified. All
connecting streets (public and private) and Forest Service roads must be shown
and named.
b.   Name, courses, length and width of all streets and street cross sections;
radii, points of tangency, and central angles of all curvilinear streets; radii
of all rounded street line intersections; location, dimensions, bearings,
radii, arcs, and central angles of all sites to be dedicated to the public; and
a statement noting that the streets dedicated on the plat will not be accepted
for Town maintenance until they are brought up to minimum Town standards.
c.   Certification by a registered professional land surveyor that all lots are
staked, or will be staked within six (6) months.
10.   Existing Conditions Data
a.   Utility easements intended to remain on the property, including a
reference to the recorded documents that granted the easements.
b.   Drainage easements intended to remain on the property, with the following
notation: "Natural, unimpeded flow is preferred in all drainage ways, wherever
practical. No structure of any kind may be constructed or placed, nor may any
vegetation be planted nor be allowed to grow within, on or over any drainage
easement, which would obstruct or divert the flow of storm water. The Town may
construct and/or maintain drainage facilities on or upon or under the land in
any drainage easement."
c.   Zoning on surrounding properties.
11.   Descriptive Data Required:
a.   Name, right-of-way lines, courses, lengths, width of all streets,
crosswalks, and utility easements; radii, points of tangency and central angles
of all curvilinear streets and rounded street line intersections.
b.   Utility easements shown in the manner and including the information
required as part of the preliminary plat submittal.
c.   All drainage ways, including rights-of-way or easements for all major
drainage ways, as designated by the Public Works Director, which shall be
dedicated to the public on the face of the plat.
d.   Location and dimension of all residential lots, including identification
of each lot by number and size of each lot, total number of lots and average
and minimum lot sizes.
e.   All residential lots shall be numbered by consecutive numbers throughout
the plat. "Exception" parcels, "tracts" and amenities such as parks shall be so
designated, lettered or named and clearly dimensioned.
f.   Locations, dimensions, bearings, radii, arcs, and central angles of all
sites to be dedicated to the public, with the use clearly indicated.
g.   Location of all adjoining subdivisions with date, map and page number of
recordation noted, or if unrecorded or unsubdivided, so marked.
12.   Assurances:
a.   In order to ensure proper installation of subdivision improvements, the
subdivider shall designate the type of assurance in a form and method
acceptable to the Town Attorney and approved by Council in conjunction with
review of the final plat. A final copy of the assurance shall be submitted to
the Zoning Administrator within ninety (90) calendar days of Council approval,
and prior to the recordation of any final plat approved by Council.
b.   The amount of the assurance shall be based on a cost estimate prepared by
a registered civil engineer in an amount to cover one hundred ten percent
(110%) of the complete installation of the improvements. This assurance shall
provide for its forfeiture to the Town in the event the Town does not accept
the improvements by the declared completion date due to the default of the
subdivider. Any portion of the forfeiture in excess of the expenses incurred by
the Town in connection with the installation of the improvements shall be
returned to the subdivider. The owner must provide the Town with one of the
following types of financial assurances for the completion of the construction
of the improvements required for the development of the subdivision:
(1)   Surety Bond
i.   A surety bond shall be executed by the subdivider with a corporation duly
licensed and authorized to transact surety business in the State of Arizona, as
surety. The bond shall be in favor of the Town, shall be continuous in form,
and shall require that the total aggregate liability of the surety for all
claims shall be limited to the face amount of the bond, regardless of the
number of years the bond is in force.
ii.   The bond shall be released upon satisfactory performance of the work and
its acceptance by the Town according to its customary requirements.
iii.   The bond may be only cancelled by the subdivider if other security,
satisfactory to the Town Attorney, has been deposited with the Town in an
amount that will cover the obligations of the subdivider that remain to be
performed.
iv.   Any work abandoned or not completed by the subdivider may be completed by
the Town, which shall recover the construction costs first from cash deposit or
the bond, and second from the subdivider as to any amounts not covered by the
cash deposit or the bond.
(2)   Irrevocable Letter of Credit
i.   A letter of credit shall be provided by a banking institution authorized
to transact business in the State of Arizona. The letter of credit shall be in
favor of the Town for the full amount of the required assurance.
ii.   The letter of credit shall be released upon satisfactory performance of
the work and its acceptance by the Town according to its customary
requirements. In the Town's sole discretion as infrastructure is completed, the
subdivider may subsequently replace the original letter of credit with
substitute letters of credit as the required infrastructure is completed and
accepted, so long as the total amount available to the Town is at all times
sufficient to cover the cost of the remaining infrastructure to be built.
iii.   The letter of credit will only be surrendered by the Town if the
subdivider provides other security to the Town, in a form satisfactory to the
Town Attorney, and in an amount that will ensure completion of the subdivider's
obligations that remain to be performed.
iv.   Any work abandoned or not completed by the subdivider may be completed by
the Town, which shall recover the construction costs first from the letter of
credit, and second from the subdivider as to any amounts not covered by the
letter of credit.
(3)   Cash or Certified Check
i.   A cash deposit for the full amount of the required assurance in an account
held by subdivider separate from other subdivider accounts, at a banking
institution authorized to transact business in the State of Arizona. The
subdivider shall execute a deposit account control agreement in the Town's
favor, authorizing the Town to have exclusive control over the account until
all of subdivider's obligations have been met.
ii.   The cash deposit shall be released upon satisfactory performance of the
work and its acceptance by the Town according to its customary requirements. In
the Town's sole discretion as infrastructure is completed, the Town may release
amounts from the account as the required infrastructure is completed and
accepted, so long as the total amount available to the Town is at all times
sufficient to cover the cost of the remaining infrastructure to be built.
iii.   The cash deposit will only be surrendered by the Town if the subdivider
provides other security to the Town, in a form satisfactory to the Town
Attorney, and in an amount that will ensure completion of the subdivider's
obligations that remain to be performed.
iv.   Any work abandoned or not completed by the subdivider may be completed by
the Town, which shall recover the construction costs first from the cash on
deposit, and second from the subdivider as to any amounts not covered by the
cash on deposit.
(4)   Alternative Assurances. In lieu of providing cash, a letter of credit, or
a surety bond, the Town Attorney may approve and recommend to Council such
alternative assurances that it deems sufficient to guarantee and assure
construction of the required improvements.
c.   When no adjacent arterial or collector (as identified on the Chino Valley
Streets Master Plan) is being constructed and the improvement of an arterial or
collector street by a governmental agency is anticipated in the short-term
future, the subdivider shall deposit the current estimated cost of improving
the abutting half street with the Town in full satisfaction of its
responsibility to the Town for such half-street improvements.
13.   Dedication and acknowledgment - A statement dedicating all streets and
easements for public use by the person holding legal title of record to the
property. If the property contains any liens, all lien holders shall execute an
appropriate release for all dedications. If the plat shows private access ways,
it must include the appropriate easements to allow for use by, and access to,
public utility providers, refuse collectors, and other public services. All
signatures for dedication and acknowledgment shall be notarized.
14.   Final plat Review and Approval
a.   Complete Application: Upon acceptance of an application for approval of a
final plat, the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee will have five (5)
working days to advise the applicant if the submittal is complete. Copies of
complete applications will be sent to the Town departments and utility and
public safety agencies that serve the area. No application shall be deemed
complete unless it includes all of the required items set forth above.
b.   The Commission shall consider the final plat at a properly posted and
advertised public meeting. The Commission shall provide a recommendation to the
Council to approve the final plat, as submitted, to approve final plat with
conditions, or to deny the final plat.
c.   After the Planning and Zoning Commission has forwarded its recommendation
to the Council, the Council shall consider the proposed final plat at a
properly posted and advertised public meeting. The Council may approve the
final plat as submitted, approve the final plat with conditions as recommended
by the Commission, approve the final plat with additional or modified
conditions, or deny the final plat.
d.   Recordation: Upon receipt of the required assurances, and proof of
adequate water supply, the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee will have
the final plat recorded and provide a recorded copy of the plat to the
applicant.
e.   Each approved final plat shall expire if not recorded within one (1) year
of receiving approval from the Town Council.
(Ord. 2020-885, passed 9-8-2020; Ord. 2022-923, passed 10-11-2022)
5.2.5 SUBDIVISION PLAT AMENDMENTS
There are three (3) types of plat amendments that apply to any recorded
subdivision:
A.   Replat: The following activities shall be considered a replat and require
an application and processing with the Final Plat procedures and subsequent
approval by the Council:
1.   Any division of a lot or lots in a recorded subdivision resulting in an
increase in the total number of lots in that subdivision.
2.   Any revision to a final plat involving dedication or abandonment of land
for a public street, public easement, or other public rights-of-way.
3.   Any change in lot lines in a recorded subdivision affecting 5% or more of
the total lot area within the subdivision; provided that no such adjustments
shall be permitted to reduce lot sizes below the minimum for the applicable
zoning category.
4.   Any changes in the location of streets, easements or and other rights-of-
way that are adjacent to 10% or more of the lots in a subdivision.
5.   Any changes in the exterior boundary of a recorded subdivision.
B.   Lot Line Adjustment: The following activities shall be considered a lot
line adjustment and shall require an application in accordance and processing
with the Final Plat procedures, but may be administratively approved by the
Development Services Director. Notwithstanding the above, the Development
Services Director may request and the Council may direct that any re-plat
request be acted on by the Council.
1.   Any joining or merger of lots in a recorded subdivision.
2.   Any joining of lots and subsequent division of those same lots in a
recorded subdivision, so long as such division results in no increase in the
total number of lots in that subdivision.
3.   Any changes in lot lines that result in only nominal increases or
decreases of lot sizes (less than 5% of total lot area).
4.   Any nominal changes (adjacent to 10% or fewer of the lots in a
subdivision) in the location of streets, easements, and other rights-of-way.
C.   Plat Correction: An amendment to a plat for the sole purpose of correcting
a scrivener's error, such as for a distance or course, may be administratively
approved by the Development Services Director with the correction noted and the
plat labeled as "Amended Map of ______."
(Ord. 2020-885, passed 9-8-2020)
5.2.6 LAND SPLITS AND OTHER DIVISIONS OF LAND NOT REQUIRING A SUBDIVISION
Land splits or divisions of land not meeting the definition of land split or
subdivision do not require the submission and approval of preliminary and/or
final plats. Such divisions do not include or allow for a land split or further
division of previously-subdivided land. Land splits with a resulting lot size
of less than one (1) acre in size do not qualify for land splits and are
required to go through the subdivision process.
A.   All parcels or lots created by any division of land must meet the minimum
parcel size applicable under the current zoning of the lots or parcels created
by the division of land.
B.   All parcels or lots created in a division of land shall have the required
frontage on a dedicated and improved street. If a parcel or lot does not have
the required frontage (determined by the zoning) on a dedicated and improved
street (public or private), then the applicant shall be required to go through
the subdivision process.
C.   The proposed division of land may not modify lot lines in a manner that
would cause building setbacks to be less than required by the underlying zoning
or increase the non-conformance of an already non-conforming structure relating
to building setbacks.
D.   The parcels or lots created by the division of land shall have permanent
legal access by connecting to a street that is part of the public access
system, or to a private street created by a properly recorded plat.
E.   A person proposing a land split shall submit a Record of Survey prepared
by a civil engineer or registered land surveyor licensed in Arizona that
reflects the lots or parcels created by the land split and the required legal
access for the lots or parcels created, as set forth in Subsection
5.2.6(D). The access required to be depicted on the Record of Survey shall be
only that portion leading to a public street or a street that is part of the
public access system. No building permit shall be issued for a lot or parcel
created by a land split until the party seeking the building permit has
provided the requisite Record of Survey reflecting compliance with this Section
5.2.6 and has paid the required fees for review and approval of land splits as
those fees may be established by the Council. No building permit shall be
issued for a lot or parcel created by a division of land other than a land
split or a subdivision until the party seeking the building permit has provided
the requisite Record of Survey reflecting compliance with this Section
5.2.6.
F.   All land splits or divisions of land not meeting the definition of land
split or subdivision shall be required to provide street improvements along the
lot frontage proportional to the impact of the parcel on the existing or
planned street and consistent with the improvements constructed by adjoining
parcels, but in no event less than the required street improvements for private
streets in subdivisions of fewer than three lots, as shown in Table 5.2 below.
If the parcel is adjacent to a public arterial or collector street, in lieu of
making the street improvements described in this paragraph, the owner of the
new parcel may contribute an amount to the Town equal to the parcel's
proportionate share of the improvements already made, or to be made, to the
public street. After the owner makes such contribution, the Town shall be
responsible for the costs related to any such improvements.
G.   Extension of utilities shall be measured from the closest property line of
the Parent Parcel.
H.   When a parcel is divided via land split pursuant to this Section
5.2.6, the Zoning Administrator may require the applicant to include on the
Record of Survey the following statement:
   "The parcels depicted on this Record of Survey were created on the date of
this survey, and any further division of the land shown on this Record of
Survey shall be treated as a subdivision."
(Ord. 2020-885, passed 9-8-2020; Ord. 2022-923, passed 10-11-2022)
5.2.7 MINOR SUBDIVISION
The minor subdivision process provides relief from certain administrative
requirements related to subdivisions of ten (10) or fewer lots with a resulting
lot size of greater than or equal to one (1) acre in size. In order to utilize
the minor subdivision process, the subdivider shall provide, as part of its
application, certification that the land sought to be subdivided consists of
ten (10) or fewer lots and that such subdivision is situated such that future
extensions of streets therein cannot facilitate a subdivision of more than ten
(10) lots. The minor subdivision process cannot be used for lots with a zoning
classification of less than one (1) acre in size. Subdivisions meeting the
requirements of a minor subdivision shall meet all of the requirements of these
Subdivision Regulations except as follows:
A.   Preliminary Plats. Subdividers of minor subdivisions shall be permitted to
seek final plat approval in a single stage, without the need for a preliminary
plat approval by the Commission.
B.   Drainage Design. A minor subdivision subdivider shall not be required to
submit an engineered drainage study as required by Section
5.3.5(H) of these Subdivision Regulations; provided, however that the
subdivider shall be required to provide documentation containing sufficient
detail, as determined by the Public Works Director, to show the drainage for
the subdivision will meet the requirements of Sections
5.3.5(A)–(G) of these Subdivision Regulations.
C.   Traffic Study. A minor subdivision subdivider shall not be required to
submit an engineered traffic study as required by Section
5.3.1(C)(2) of these Subdivision Regulations; provided, however that the
subdivider shall be required to provide documentation containing sufficient
detail, as determined by the Public Works Director, to show how traffic from
the subdivision will safely join the existing street system.
D.   Geotechnical Report. A minor subdivision subdivider shall not be required
to submit a geotechnical report as required by Section
5.4(E) of these Subdivision Regulations; provided, however that the subdivider
shall be required to provide documentation containing sufficient detail, as
determined by the Public Works Director, to show that safe, durable streets
will be constructed.
(Ord. 2020-885, passed 9-8-2020; Ord. 2022-923, passed 10-11-2022)
5.2.8 RURAL SUBDIVISION
Property with an underlying residential zoning designation of one acre or
larger may be developed as a rural subdivision. Unless also permitted to
utilize the reduced procedural requirements of a minor subdivision, all rural
subdivisions shall follow the submittal and review requirements for
subdivisions under these Subdivision Regulations. Rural subdivisions shall be
required to meet the subdivision improvement standards set forth in these
Subdivision Regulations, except for the following:
A.   Private Streets. Rural subdivisions may utilize private streets meeting
the requirements set forth in Table 5.2.
B.   Sidewalks, vertical curb and gutter, as described in Table 5.1.
(Ord. 2020-885, passed 9-8-2020)
5.3 DESIGN PRINCIPLES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
5.3.1 STREET LOCATION AND ARRANGEMENT
A.   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all
streets should conform to the Town's General Plan Circulation/Transportation
Element and Transportation Plan and should ensure public safety and
convenience, and respond to existing natural features of terrain, vegetation,
and drainage.
B.   Street layout shall provide for the continuation of existing principal
streets through new subdivisions. Principal streets shall typically follow
section or mid-section lines, however, if the alignment is impractical then
principal street right-of-way should be provided at least every three thousand
(3,000) feet.
C.   Proposed streets shall be arranged to provide future connection with
adjoining unplatted lands.
1.   Street connections to an adjoining platted tract shall be made only to
those extended streets of the platted tract.
2.   Street connections shall be designed to accommodate the amount of
increased traffic flow generated by the proposed subdivision, as determined by
an engineered traffic study or as approved by the Public Works Department.
D.   Local streets shall be so arranged as to discourage their use by through
traffic. If topography allows and suitable alternate locations are available,
the subdivider shall provide at least two (2) points of access for ingress/
egress into the subdivision.
E.   The maximum length of cul-de-sac streets shall be one thousand, five
hundred (1,500) feet measured from the intersection of the right-of-way lines
to the extreme depth of the turning circle along the street centerline.
Regardless of length, no cul-de-sac shall provide access to more than twenty-
five (25) single family residences.
F.   Where a proposed subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
arterial and collector routes, sufficient right-of-way may be required for
access, frontage streets, and/or turning movements or for reverse frontage
combined with a one (1) foot non-vehicular access easement abutting the major
route; or for such other treatment as may be justified for protection of
residential properties from traffic hazards occurring on the major route.
G.   Where a subdivision abuts or contains the right-of-way of a limited access
highway or an irrigation canal or abuts a commercial or industrial land use,
the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee may recommend location of a street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance
suitable for appropriate use of the intervening land. Such distance shall be
determined with due regard for approach grades, drainage, bridges or future
grade separations.
H.   Streets shall be so arranged in relation to existing topography as to
produce desirable lots of maximum utility and streets of reasonable gradient
and to facilitate adequate drainage.
I.   No alleys may be constructed in residential, commercial, and
industrial subdivisions, except that the Zoning Administrator or his/her
designee may waive the requirements in certain areas because of topography,
open space provided or service access.
J.   Half streets shall be discouraged, but may be permissible where necessary
to provide right-of-way required by the Town's General Plan and Transportation
Plan, to complete a street pattern already begun or to assure reasonable
development of a number of adjoining parcels. The minimum paved street width of
a half street is twenty (20) feet. Where there exists a platted half
street abutting the tract to be subdivided, the remaining half shall be platted
within the tract. In lieu of the actual construction of a half street, the
subdivider may provide the Town a cash payment for the probable cost of the
half street. The amount of the cash payment shall be determined by a registered
civil engineer and must be approved by the Public Works Director. Such funds
will be held on deposit by the Town until such time as the Town proceeds to
improve the full width of the street.
K.   A minimum of two (2) permanent reference survey monuments shall be
required for a street as a recoverable point for future surveys.
(Ord. 2020-885, passed 9-8-2020)
5.3.2 STREET DESIGN
All streets in the Town, unless otherwise specified in these Subdivision
Regulations, shall be designed to the standards in this subsection and as
follows:
A.   Minimum required Right-of-Way widths shall be provided as set forth in
Table 5-1 below. Additionally, the following standards shall apply:
1.   Cul-de-sac streets shall terminate in a circular right-of-way sixty (60)
feet in radius with a minimum improved traffic turning circle forty-eight (48)
feet in radius.
2.   Dead end streets will not be approved except in locations designated by
the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee as necessary for future extension
to facilitate development of adjacent lands. A dead end street serving more
than four (4) lots shall provide a temporary turning circle with a forty-eight
(48) foot radius or other acceptable design to accomplish adequate access.
3.   Local roads for commercial or industrial subdivisions are highly
recommended at sixty (60) feet. However, when the size of subdivisions or other
factors limit the inclusion of the sixty (60)-foot rights-of-way, the Zoning
Administrator or his/her designee may approve the use of fifty (50)-foot
rights-of-way with all intersection chamfers at forty-five (45) feet.
4.   Access or frontage streets shall be provided as required by a traffic
impact study.
 
   Table 5-1
   Town Public Street Minimum Design Standards
                                                          Rural
                                                 Urban    Local Road
          Principal Urban    Rural     Urban     Local    SR-1, SR-  Commerci
Item      Arterial  Arterial Arterial  Collector Road     1.6, SR-2, al &
          (1)                                    SR-0.16, SR-2.5,    Industrial
                                                 MR       AR-4, AR-
                                                          5, AR-36
Minimum   Per ADOT
Right-of- (1)       80'      80'       80'       50'(4)   50'        60'
way
Minimum
Roadway
Width w/  Per ADOT  51'      24'       28'       24'      20' - 24'  28'
o On
Street
Parking
                             4' - 6'                      4' - 6'
Pavement                     shoulder,                    shoulder
Edge      7" ADOT   6" Vert. each      Vertical  Rolled   each side, 6" Vert.
Treatment C&G       C&G      side,     Curb      Curb     thickened  C&G
                             thickened                    edge
                             edge
                                                                     5'
          6' on     5' Min.            5' Min.   5' Min.             detached
Sidewalk  each side on each  None(3)   on one    on one   None(3)    6' Min. on
                    side(2)            side(3)   side(3)             each side
                                                                     (2)
Street Design Notes
(1)   Currently, all principal arterial routes are state highways, owned and
maintained by the Arizona Department of Transportation.
(2)   Sidewalk may be required on only one (1) side of the road with an
increased width if approved by the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee and
the Public Works Director. (Also, see note #3.)
(3)   A minimum of two (2) foot wide shoulders is required if no sidewalk is
installed. These shoulders shall maintain the same slope as the pavement and
shall be constructed of ABC or an approved equal. However, construction of
sidewalks on collector roads shall be determined through a Development
Agreement.
Note: These standards are primarily for new roadway construction. These
standards may be adjusted on projects involving rehabilitation or
reconstruction of existing improvements as approved by the Public Works
Director.
(4)   62' versus 50-feet right-of-way options for urban level local street to
accommodate subdivision that have on-street parking versus no on-street
parking.
 
 
Table 5-2
Rural Subdivision Private Street Minimum Design Standards(1) (2)
          Right-of-way
Number of Width             Subgrade Base  Surface    Edge         Accept
Lots(3)   Total Improvement          Depth Depth      Improvements ROW?
          Width Width
                                           2" Dust
2 to 3    50    20          6"       4"    free       None         No
                                           material
                                           Double     Ribbon/
4 to 10   50    24          6"       6"    Chip       Thickened    No
                                                      Edge
More than                                             Ribbon/      Council
10        50    24          6"       6"    3" Asphalt Thickened    Discretion
                                                      Edge
(1)   Rural subdivision private streets shall meet the roadway geometric
criteria and pavement structural section requirements set forth in Sections
5.3.2(A) - (D) of these Subdivision Regulations.
(2)   Subdividers utilizing rural subdivision private streets shall be
required to meet the homeowners’ association requirements set forth in
Section
5.3.2(E) of these Subdivision Regulations.
(3)   If the proposed subdivision serves as an access point to other lots or
parcels, and the total number of potential remaining lots that could be
developed, together with the proposed subdivision, is more than 10, the
proposed subdivision shall make the “Improvement Width” the same as a
development with 10 or more lots. As an example, if the proposed subdivision
is three lots, but the private street could continue beyond the proposed
subdivision to include more than 10 lots, the “Improvement Width” must be 24
feet. Surface Depth and Edge Improvements shall remain as listed for the
proposed number of lots in the proposed subdivision.
 
B.   Grades
1.   Maximum:
a.   Arterial routes: as determined by the Public Works Director.
b.   Collector streets eight (8) percent.
c.   Local residential streets twelve (12) percent.
(Maximum longitudinal slopes of up to eighteen (18) percent may be used for a
distance not to exceed three hundred (300) feet if existing terrain dictates,
and if approved by the Public Works Director).
d.   Cul-de-sacs eight (8) percent.
e.   Intersections five (5) percent for a minimum of fifty (50) feet from
points of intersection.
2.   Minimum: all streets shall have a minimum longitudinal slope of four-
tenths (0.4) percent.
3.   Desirable: all streets six (6) percent.
4.   Exceptions may be made upon showing of extraordinary circumstances by the
subdivider and review and approval by the Public Works Director.
C.   Vertical Curves
1.   Arterial routes: Minimum length, one hundred (100) feet, or as determined
by using the AASHTO Standards.
2.   Collector and minor streets: Minimum length, one hundred (100) feet, or as
determined by using the AASHTO Standards for residential streets, the length of
the vertical curve may be reduced to fifty (50) feet if existing terrain
dictates and if approved by the Public Works Director.
3.   When the longitudinal grade for all streets changes with an algebraic
difference of one (1) percent as measured between the tangent grades in
percent, a vertical curve shall be provided.
D.   Horizontal Alignment
1.   Arterial routes: As determined by the Public Works Director.
2.   When tangent center lines deflect from each other more than ten (10)
degrees and less than ninety (90) degrees, they shall be connected by a curve
with a minimum centerline radius of five hundred (500) feet for collector
streets and one hundred fifty (150) feet for local streets.
3.   Between reverse curves there shall be a tangent section of centerline not
less than one hundred (100) feet long, unless the radius exceeds seven hundred
fifty (750) feet on arterial and collector streets or two hundred fifty (250)
feet on local streets, in which cases fifty (50) feet of tangent shall be
required if approved by the Public Works Director.
4.   Intersecting arterial and collector streets shall do so at an angle that
shall not vary from ninety (90) degrees by more than ten (10) degrees;
intersections of local streets shall not vary from ninety (90) degrees by more
than fifteen (15) degrees.
5.   Street jogs shall be avoided. Street intersections shall be a minimum of
one hundred-fifty (150) feet apart unless otherwise approved by the Public
Works Director.
6.   Minor streets intersecting a collector street or arterial route shall have
a tangent section of centerline at least one hundred fifty (150) feet in length
measured from the right-of-way line of the major street; except that, no such
tangent is required when the minor street curve has a centerline radius greater
than four hundred (400) feet with the center located on the major street right-
of-way line.
Where topographic conditions make necessary other treatment to secure the best
overall design, these standards may be modified by the Public Works Director.
7.   Street intersections with more than four (4) legs, and Y-type
intersections where legs meet at acute angles shall be avoided.
8.   At street intersections, property line corners shall be rounded by
circular arc having a minimum chamfer length of thirty-five (35) feet for
collector and arterial streets and twenty-five (25) feet for local streets.
E.   Private Streets
1.   Private streets in zoning districts that do not permit rural subdivisions
shall be constructed to conform to current Town street standards, including but
not limited to right-of-way widths, roadway geometric criteria, and pavement
structural section. Private streets in zoning districts that allow rural
subdivisions shall be constructed to conform to current Town street standards,
including but not limited to right-of-way widths, roadway geometric criteria,
and pavement structural section, except as specifically modified by Table 5-
1 above.
2.   If private streets are proposed for a subdivision, whether urban or rural,
maintenance of such streets shall be solely the responsibility of the
homeowners. A homeowners’ association shall be established at the time the
final plat is approved with a mechanism for collecting funds to be placed in an
escrow account for future maintenance of the private streets. A note shall be
placed on the final plat that states, “All private streets shown on this plat
shall be maintained by the homeowners association. The Town will not maintain
these streets and will not take the streets into the public street system
unless they are improved, at the sole expense of the property owners, to the
Town public street standards that are in effect at the time of the request.”
3.   An emergency rapid entry system for unrestricted entry of police and fire
emergency vehicle at all gated locations shall be provided. For uniformity, the
only allowable system shall be the “Knox Rapid Entry System.”
(Ord. 2020-885, passed 9-8-2020)
5.3.3 WATER FACILITIES DESIGN
Until September 1, 2025, any lot that is created in conformance with the
requirements for (1) land splits not requiring a subdivision in Section
5.2.6, or (2) a combination of the minor subdivision and rural subdivision
provisions in Sections
5.2.7 and
5.2.8 of these Subdivision Regulations, may be developed without connecting to
the Town’s water system, even if the lot is served at the time of building
permit application.
See Town Code Title V for all other regulations.
(Ord. 2020-885, passed 9-8-2020; Ord. 2022-923, passed 10-11-2022)
5.3.4 SEWER FACILITIES DESIGN
Until September 1, 2025, any lot that is created in conformance with the
requirements for (1) land splits not requiring a subdivision in Section
5.2.6, or (2) a combination of the minor subdivision and rural subdivision
provisions in Sections
5.2.7 and
5.2.8 of these Subdivision Regulations, and which otherwise meets the
requirements of these Subdivision Regulations and any applicable law,
regulation or ordinance, may be developed without connecting to the Town’s
sewer system, even if the lot is served at the time of building permit
application.
See Town Code Title V for all other regulations.
(Ord. 2020-885, passed 9-8-2020; Ord. 2022-923, passed 10-11-2022)
5.3.5 DRAINAGE DESIGN
A.   Drainage and topography shall be a primary consideration of any
subdivision.
B.   The preservation of natural flood areas, streams, washes, arroyos, rivers
or ephemeral drainage courses should be maintained, if possible, in their
natural state. The limits of the ten (10) year flood event shall define the
extent of the area of concern. The only exceptions are for roadway crossings
and utility lines, if no other alternative exists. Subdividers are encouraged
to preserve natural flood areas to the maximum extent possible.
C.   Drainage layout and development shall meet all State and Federal
requirements to allow residents of Chino Valley to purchase flood insurance, to
receive disaster relief, to obtain real estate loans and to minimize flood
damage.
D.   Subdivision improvements that propose grading and/or grade changes shall
not have an adverse impact on surrounding property. At the boundaries of the
subdivision, all drainage and floodwaters shall be accepted and released so
that the flow characteristics are minimally disturbed by providing appropriate
entrance and exit transitions.
E.   All weather access to all lots shall be provided during the regulatory
flood, which means depths of flows over streets will not exceed one (1) foot to
allow passage of emergency vehicles. The standard applies to both public and
private streets.
F.   All drainage ways that convey fifty (50) cubic feet per second or more
during a one-hundred (100)-year flood event, shall be considered regulatory
flood ways. Regulatory flood ways shall be maintained by the adjacent property
owner within the subdivision, unless the Town has agreed to allow such flood
ways to be dedicated to the Town with provisions for maintenance access ramps.
Flows less than fifty (50) cubic feet per second shall be regulated for impacts
to buildings and structures, particularly, the placement of the finished first
floor or basement, and areas designated for containing such flows shall be
identified as a common area or noted on the final plat as impacting a lot and
the lot owner's responsibility for maintenance.
G.   Drainage basins or watersheds with known flood hazards shall be designated
as critical basins. Within designated critical basins, all proposed
subdivisions shall address on-site detention for the two (2)-, ten (10)- and
one hundred (100)-year flood events to mitigate the post-development drainage
to the pre-development levels. If the subdivider can demonstrate that on-site
detention will exacerbate the downstream condition then the Public Works
Director may allow for modifications to the requirement.
H.   A drainage study that addresses the hydrologic and hydraulic components
relating to onsite and off-site drainage shall be developed for each
subdivision. The study shall be prepared by a registered Arizona Professional
Engineer. The drainage study shall be approved before the street improvement
plans and final plat are approved. If the subdivision will be developed in
phases, a master drainage plan will be required.
5.3.6 BLOCK DESIGN
A.   Blocks should not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet in length
between street centerlines. Variation from this requirement may be justified
where topography or optimal lot configurations are achieved or when lot sizes
average one-half acre or greater.
B.   Blocks should have sufficient width for an optimal layout of two (2) tiers
of lots of the size required by these Subdivision Regulations.
C.   Where practical, pedestrian ways with a minimum width of ten (10) feet may
be required at mid-block and/or internal connection locations where essential
for access to schools, playgrounds, common open space or other community
facilities. Pedestrian ways may be used for utility purposes.
(Ord. 2020-885, passed 9-8-2020)
5.3.7 LOT PLANNING
A.   Lot width, depth, and area shall comply with the minimum development
standards of the applicable zoning district.
B.   Lots having double frontage should be avoided except where necessary to
provide separation of the residential development from traffic collectors and
arterials.
C.   Corner lots should be a minimum of ten (10) feet wider than the interior
lots within the same block.
D.   The depth to width ratio of useable area shall be no greater than three
(3) to one (1).
E.   Grouping of wider side yards of no less than thirty (30) feet in combined
width shall be encouraged to convey openness and privacy as well as create
useable storage area.
F.   Where gross densities of four (4) units to the acre or greater are
provided, front yard setback lines should be staggered within a ten (10)-foot
range to create a diversified streetscape. No front yard should be less than
twenty (20) feet in depth, measured from the property line to the closest point
of the structure.
G.   Where a two (2)-story single-family dwelling is provided, the rear yard
setback should be a minimum of thirty (30) feet.
(Ord. 2020-885, passed 9-8-2020)
5.3.8 EASEMENT PLANNING
A.   Generally, a Public Utility Easement (PUE) shall be twenty (20) feet in
width. The location of the PUE of shall be approved by the Public Works
Director.
B.   The subdivider must provide a one (1)-foot easement prohibiting vehicular
access to and from arterials and collectors from rear yards of double frontage
lots.
C.   No wall structures are allowed or permitted within any Public Utility
Easement (PUE).
(Ord. 2020-885, passed 9-8-2020)
5.4 IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS AND SPECIFICATIONS
A.   Purpose
1.   The purpose of this Section
5.4 is to establish the minimum acceptable standards for improvement of public
streets and utilities, to define the responsibility of the subdivider in the
planning, constructing, and financing of public improvements and to establish
procedures for review and approval of engineering plans.
2.   All improvements required in streets or easements that are required as a
condition to plat approval shall be the responsibility of the subdivider.
3.   Any subdivider failing to comply with the following minimum acceptable
standards shall be punished as provided in these Subdivision Regulations.
B.   Engineering Plans
1.   Except for specific exemptions relating to rural subdivisions as set forth
in these Subdivision Regulations, the subdivider shall have a complete set of
engineering plans and specifications prepared by a registered civil engineer
who is currently registered in the State of Arizona, and submit such plans to
the Public Works Department for approval. Such plans and specifications shall
be based on the approved preliminary plat and shall be prepared in conjunction
with the comprehensive development plan, or if no comprehensive development
plan is required, prepared and submitted in conjunction with the final plat
review process.
2.   Final engineering plans shall be approved by the Public Works Director
prior to recordation of the final plat. This final plan approval is valid for a
period of one (1) year. If construction is not started prior to the plan
approval expiration, the plans shall be resubmitted to the Public Works
Department for an update approval according to then-current standards and
guidelines. If, after construction has begun on a project and it is stopped for
any reason for a period of one year or more, the plans must be resubmitted for
update approval prior to restarting construction. The plans will be reviewed
for compliance with then-current standards and requirements.
3.   Improvement plans shall include plans, profiles and typical street cross
sections that contain the following minimum information:
a.   The cover sheet shall include at least the following information:
(1)   Name and type of plan.
(2)   Vicinity map.
(3)   Location map.
(4)   Benchmarks approved by the Town.
(5)   Basis of bearing for the project.
(6)   Name, address, and phone number of subdivider.
(7)   Name, address, phone number, and professional seal of engineer preparing
plans.
(8)   List of utility agencies serving the proposed development.
(9)   Plan sheet index.
(10)   Approval signature block of the Town officials, including the Public
Works Director.
(11)   Bluestake note.
b.   Plans shall include at least the following information:
(1)   Street names.
(2)   A north arrow and graphic on each plan sheet.
(3)   Stationing and lateral dimensions of streets and rights-of-way, including
pertinent survey data and curb return data.
(4)   Location of existing and proposed utilities being designed and existing
streets to be joined.
(5)   Drainage structures, including cross gutters, culverts, catch basins, or
similar items. Show a positive outlet for all drainage leaving the site
sufficient to ensure will not have a negative impact on the downstream
property. All concentrated drainage flowing from public right-of-way onto
private property must have a drainage easement to flow into or a note on the
final plat relating the drainage impact on the lot.
(6)   Curb, gutter, sidewalks and asphalt structures.
(7)   Survey monument location to be set, existing control monuments to be
referenced prior to destruction and all benchmarks used.
(8)   New traffic control devices, all existing traffic control devices within
the area of the project, and changes in traffic control devices in the vicinity
of the project that are required as a result of the project.
(9)   The top and toe of slopes for both cuts and fills shall be shown if the
project extends outside of the right-of-way limits.
(10)   Location of all existing and proposed water lines, water valves, water
meters, water service lines, fire hydrants, sewer manholes, sewer services,
storm drains, and street lights shall be shown on the plans.
(11)   Construction notes indicating any and all construction items for
utilities, paving, storm drainage, etc.
(12)   Town current general notes for construction.
(13)   A plan sheet showing the location of all traffic control signs shall be
included as a plan sheet.
(14)   Additional information needed to clarify plans or deal with specific
conditions.
c.   Profiles shall include at least the following information:
(1)   Bench marks, including description, location and elevation;
(2)   Existing and finished grade profiles. Profiles of centerline and right
and left gutter control line or edge of pavement are required. The presentation
must clearly show and distinguish existing profiles and other profile
information;
(3)   Finished elevations including BVC, PI, and EVC of vertical curves,
vertical intersection points, curb returns match lines and all other points
needed for vertical control of construction.
(4)   Slopes and vertical curve lengths.
(5)   Curb return profiles at intersections.
(6)   Drainage structures and utilities.
(7)   Extension of the improvement project as required to ensure that the
design is compatible with future extensions.
(8)   Consistent stationing throughout the plans.
(9)   Additional information needed to clarify profiles or deal with special
conditions, including, but not limited to, profile or drainage channels,
stationing and elevations at beginning and end of all curb returns, grade
breaks and beginning and end of construction.
d.   Cross Sections shall include at least the following:
(1)   Typical street cross-sections are needed for each condition encountered
and each should be clearly identified as to where it applies.
(2)   Materials and thickness, including sub-base select material aggregate
base, prime coat, asphaltic concrete, curb and gutter, and sidewalk with
notation of the engineering firm preparing the soils reports and the report
numbers, if applicable. The specification and types of materials shall be
stated.
(3)   Horizontal dimensions to all key points, including rights-of-way.
(4)   Cross slopes.
(5)   Parkway conditions. Maximum and minimum slopes are to be shown for cuts,
fills, and side hill conditions. Any side ditches or other special conditions
are to be shown. A minimum two (2)-foot wide flat area shall be constructed
behind the sidewalk or curb before the slope begins.
(6)   Right-of-way widths in relation to centerline, and identified by street
name to which it is applicable;
(7)   Limits of applicability by station if necessary.
e.   The plans shall contain the current Town “General Notes” for water, sewer,
grading, and paving construction as prepared by the Public Works Director.
f.   One set of Record Drawings on reproducible film and electronic file
(AutoCAD or approved equal) of all improvements must be submitted to and
approved by the Public Works Director prior to final approval of the project.
C.   Construction and Inspection
1.   All improvements in the public rights-of-way and easement s shall be
constructed under the inspection and approval of the Town. The subdivider shall
be responsible for the total cost of all inspection and testing during the
construction of all improvements. The subdivider will execute an Infrastructure
Improvement Agreement (IIA) with the Town and the subdivider will be
responsible for the performance of the required inspections and testing. If the
IIA provides that the Town will perform the inspection and testing, an
estimated advance payment will be provided to the Town prior to the
commencement of any construction work. If the IIA provides that the subdivider
will be responsible for providing qualified engineers to conduct inspection and
testing, a payment in the amount as established by resolution, will be required
for the Town's oversight and monitoring of the IIA requirements.
2.   All construction work shall be performed and all material furnished shall
be in reasonably close conformity to the lines, grades, cross sections,
dimensions, and material requirements, including tolerances shown on the plans
and profiles or indicated in the specifications. The Public Works Director
shall determine the limits of reasonably close conformity in each individual
case and the Public Works Director's judgment shall be final and conclusive.
3.   The Public Works Director shall be notified at least three (3) calendar
days before the start of any construction. Clearing and grubbing activities
shall not proceed without approved Improvement Plans by the Public Works
Director.
4.   All relocation and reconstruction of irrigation and utility facilities
shall be conducted to the standards of the owning utility and the Town.
5.   All underground utilities installed in streets shall be constructed prior
to the surfacing of such street. Service stubs for underground utilities to
platted lots within the subdivision shall be placed to such length as not to
necessitate disturbance of street improvements when service connections are
made.
6.   Prior to the Town accepting any subdivision, the subdivider shall submit
engineering record drawings or as-built plans for all water and sewer
infrastructure.
The record information shall be submitted on both a high quality mylar having a
thickness of approximately four (4) mil and in a digital format that is
compatible with the Town computer database to facilitate the inclusion of the
plans into the Town database. Typically, the form of these files will be in
DXF, DWG or other similar industry standards digital file developed in a recent
version of AutoCAD according to the Town’s technological capabilities.
Additionally, a certified letter from a professional land surveyor shall be
required, stating that the centerlines of streets, easements, and survey
monuments are located as denoted on the final plat.
7.   When public infrastructure improvements for a subdivision are accepted by
Council for maintenance and operation, the developer shall provide all
approvals from all appropriate regulatory agencies (for example, ADEQ Approval
of Construction) and shall provide a warranty or guarantee for a period of two
(2) years against defective materials and workmanship.
D.   Development of Plans and Specifications
The “Uniform Standard Specifications and Details for Public Works Construction”
as published by the Maricopa Association of Governments (MAG) are recognized as
acceptable construction specifications and standard details. Because of
variations in climate, soils, and availability of materials, modifications to
the MAG specifications may have been implemented by the Town. The MAG
specifications shall be utilized at the direction and approval of the Public
Works Director. Other pertinent manuals for the development of plans and
specifications include “A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets”
as distributed by AASHTO; all design manuals, specifications, and standard
details as distributed by the Arizona Department of Transportation; all
engineering bulletins as distributed by the Arizona Department of Environmental
Quality; “Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways”
as distributed by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway
Administration; and the various design manuals, procedures, and guidelines as
published by professional organizations and governmental agencies.
E.   Streets
1.   Except as specifically exempted for rural streets as set forth in these
Subdivision Regulations, a geotechnical report shall be required for the
pavement design of all subdivision streets. The design approach shall be based
on the latest methodology that is utilized by the Arizona Department of
Transportation or the American Association of Highway and Transportation
Officials.
Traffic volumes for the pavement design shall be based on a trip generation
analysis as developed by the Institute of Transportation Engineers.
2.   Portland cement concrete shall normally be used for all required curb and
gutter, valley gutters, and sidewalks unless otherwise approved by the Public
Works Director.
3.   A seal coat shall be required on all street paving projects. If pavement
cuts occur after the final lift of asphaltic concrete then a chip seal will be
required.
4.   The developer shall be responsible for the installation of all regulatory,
warning, and street signs for the orderly movement of vehicles and for public
safety. Regulatory and warning signs shall be in conformance Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices. Street signs shall be in accordance with Town
standards and include 911 or emergency addressing.
F.   Drainage
1.   Subdivider must show the limits of the one hundred (100)-year floodplain
on the final plat in a readily retraceable manner with frequent ties to
intersecting lot lines for all flows of fifty (50) cubic feet per second or
more.
2.   Watercourses that are relocated, altered, or include any man-made
improvements, should be developed with channel treatments that allow for the
reestablishment of vegetation. The use of concrete will be limited to
headwalls, cut-off walls, transitions, and areas with limited right-of-way
because of existing improvements. The placement of concrete structures shall be
at the discretion of the Public Works Director.
3.   Culverts for streets shall be designed to convey at the fifty (50)-year
peak discharge with no flow over the roadway. Additionally, the flow depth over
the street shall be limited to one (1.0) foot for one hundred (100)-year peak
discharge if the street provides all weather access.
4.   A minimum pipe diameter of eighteen (18) inches is required for all street
crossings and a minimum pipe diameter of twelve (12) inches is required for all
driveways.
5.   Culvert outlet velocities should be kept below fifteen (15) feet per
second unless approved by the Public Works Director due to special conditions.
The maximum velocity should be consistent with the channel stability
requirements at the culvert outlet. If the culvert velocities exceed
permissible velocities for the proposed outlet (greater than five (5) feet per
second for natural conditions depending on soil types), suitable outlet
protection must be provided.
6.   Drainage ditches or storm drains along streets and adjacent areas shall be
required to avoid trapping water and to ensure positive drainage away from the
streets. Street drainage shall be designed to provide for one (1) lane of
traffic on all local streets and one (1) lane of traffic in both directions for
all collectors and arterials for the ten (10)-year peak discharge.
G.   Water
1.   New water facilities shall be designed in accordance with the Arizona
Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ) and the Arizona Department of Health
Services Bulletin No. 10 (latest edition). Any deviation from the bulletin's
requirements shall have the written approval of the Public Works Director.
2.   All water mains shall be a minimum of six (6) inches in diameter, unless
designated otherwise by the Public Works Director, to ensure minimum water flow
requirements of the pressure zone or the Chino Valley Comprehensive Water
Master Plan.
3.   All water mains, valves, and fittings shall be constructed with materials
having a working pressure rating of two hundred (200) pounds per square inch.
4.   The longitudinal bending of water mains shall not be allowed. All changes
in direction or angle will require the appropriate fittings.
5.   All dead ends on new mains shall be provided with a blow-off cock in the
plug or cap, and reaction backing or thrust blocking shall be arranged not
encased or covered by the concrete, if used.
6.   Fire hydrants shall be spaced at a distance no greater than five hundred
(500) feet apart in residential areas and five hundred (500) feet apart in
commercial and industrial areas. The measurement between fire hydrants shall be
linear and the measurement will be effected along the centerline of the
streets. The Chino Valley Fire District may adjust the distances between fire
hydrants when circumstances dictate.
7.   The water system for the subdivision must be capable of supplying and
sustaining the required flows for fire protection throughout all subdivided
properties as approved by the Town. For residential areas, the minimum required
fire flow capability is one thousand (1,000) gallons per minute for a duration
of two (2) hours with a minimum system pressure of twenty (20) pounds per
square inch while the required fire hydrant flow rate is being met. For all
multi-family, industrial and commercial areas, the Chief Building Code
Official, in consultation with the Chino Valley Fire District, shall determine
minimum fire flow capability and that flow will be provided with a minimum
system pressure of twenty (20) pounds per square inch.
8.   The approval of the final design of the water system rests with the
Council and will be based on the conformity of the design to policy, standards,
and specifications. The subdivider is responsible for all approvals with ADEQ
and other regulatory agencies.
9.   The Town may issue building permits after the approval of the water system
and the installation of an all-weather road. Approval of the water system
requires that the water lines have been successfully pressure tested and
disinfected to Town standards and that fire flow can be provided to all
subdivided properties. An all-weather road for this purpose means that the sub-
grade and aggregate base material has been constructed to the approved plans
and specifications and the width of the road is a minimum of twenty (20) feet
wide. Water service shall not be connected to any structures until approval
from ADEQ is received.
10.   The Town will not issue any certificates of occupancy until the
subdivision improvements are accepted for maintenance and operation by Council.
H.   Sewer
1.   New sanitary sewerage facilities shall be designed in accordance with the
Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ) and the Arizona Department
of Health Services Bulletin No. 11 (latest edition). Any deviations from the
bulletins requirements must have the written approval of the Public Works
Director.
2.   New sanitary sewers shall be designed to carry the designated peak wet
weather flow from the area that will be ultimately tributary to the respective
reach of sewer.
3.   No public gravity sewer lines shall be less than eight (8) inches in
diameter. All gravity sewer line pipes shall be of bell and spigot and gasketed
joints.
4.   The longitudinal bending of PVC SDR 35 sewer pipe is allowable with a
minimum allowable radius of one hundred-fifty (150) feet and no joint
deflection. Because longitudinal bending is allowable for PVC sewer pipe, drop
manholes shall be discouraged with elevational differences addressed by
vertical sweeps of the sewer main.
5.   Testing of gravity sewer lines and manholes may include multiple test
methods to ensure a minimum of inflow and infiltration. Sewer lines shall be
subject to but not limited to low pressure air testing, deflection testing, and
closed circuit TV inspection. Manholes, at a minimum, shall be vacuum tested
after the frame and cover are installed.
6.   Low pressure pipe shall be PVC SDR 21 with gasketed joints or HDPE SDR 11
with welded joints. Substitution may be provided if the pipe is of equal or
better quality.
7.   Low pressure sewer system shall be pressure tested in accordance with
applicable test procedures for potable water lines.
8.   The outfall for all low-pressure sewer systems shall include adequate
measures to prevent sulfide corrosion of manholes and to mitigate odors.
9.   Pump stations that are to be operated and maintained by the Town shall be
designed as a wet/dry well type system and include odor control, corrosion
mitigation measures, and supervisory/control and data acquisition systems.
10.   Sewer house service connections shall have adequate separation or
protection from potable water house service connections. Sewer service lines
should be installed at points ten (10) feet from the lowest lot corner adjacent
to the sewer main. Crossing of water and sewer service lines, especially a low-
pressure sewer with water service line, may require that the sewer service line
be sleeved.
11.   The Town will not issue any certificates of occupancy until the
subdivision improvements are accepted for maintenance and operation by Council.
5.5 ENFORCEMENT
Fines/Imprisonment: Any person, as principal, owner, agent, tenant, employee,
or otherwise found violating these Subdivision Regulations, or violating or
failing to comply with any order or regulation made hereunder, shall be guilty
of a civil violation punishable as provided in these Subdivision Regulations.
Such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
during which any such violation or failure to comply with these regulations is
committed, continued or permitted. All remedies provided for herein shall be
cumulative and exclusive. A finding of guilty or responsible and punishment of
any person hereunder shall not relieve such person from the responsibility to
correct prohibited conditions. In addition to the other remedies provided
herein, any adjacent or neighboring property owner who is damaged by the
violation of any provision of these Subdivision Regulations may institute any
action in law or equity to prevent or abate such violation.
Enforcement Action: Any division of property contrary to these Subdivision
Regulations is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the Town Attorney
may, upon order of Council, or on his or her own initiative, immediately
commence all necessary actions or proceedings for the abatement, enjoinment,
and removal thereof in the manner provided by law; and may take such other
lawful steps as may be necessary, and shall apply to such court or courts as
may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate, enjoin, and restrain
any person from violating these Subdivision Regulations.
(Ord. 2020-885, passed 9-8-2020)
5.6 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
The Town designates the Yavapai County Flood Control District as the
enforcement authority for all floodplain management activities within the
Town’s corporate limits. The district is hereby authorized to exercise the
powers and duties set forth in Title 45, Chapter 10, Article 4, Arizona Revised
Statutes, within all areas of the Town.
(Ord. 2020-885, passed 9-8-2020)
6 RESERVED
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Arizona Statutes Annotated
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ARIZONA STATUTES ANNOTATED
A.R.S. Cites Code Section
A.R.S. Cites                    Code Section
Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 6   2.2
Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 6.2 5.1.3
Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 7   5.1.3
9-238                           2.2
9-462.01                        1.9.2
9-474                           4.4
9-835(E)                        1.9.2
12-124                          1.11.8
13-707                          1.11.11
13-802                          1.11.11
13-902                          1.11.11
13-3912                         1.10.5
36-481                          3.5
                                3.6–
                                3.11,
36-581                          3.12.1–
                                3.14,
                                3.20
                                3.5–
                                3.11,
36-582                          3.12.1–
                                3.14,
                                3.20
36-1681                         4.8
36-2801                         2.2
36-2801(6)                      4.31
36-2801(11)                     2.2
36-2806(e)                      42.1
Title 38, Chapter 3, Article 8  1.4.4,
                                1.5.5
41-4001(17)                     2.2
41-4001(33)                     2.2
41-4001(33)(a)                  2.2
41-4001(33)(b)                  2.2
41-4001(33)(c)                  2.2
41-4001(33)(d)                  2.2
41-4001(33)(e)                  2.2
45-576                          5.2.3
Title 45, Chapter 10, Article 4 5.6
                                
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
                     1.1 -
                     1.3,
                     1.4.1 -
                     1.4.5,
                     1.5.1 -
                     1.5.6,
                     1.6.1 -
                     1.6.3,
                     1.9,
                     1.9.1,
                     1.9.1.1 -
                     1.9.1.3,
                     1.9.2,
                     1.9.3,
                     1.9.4.1,
                     1.9.4.2,
                     1.9.5,
                     1.10.1 -
                     1.10.6,
                     1.11.1 -
                     1.11.9,
                     1.11.11,
                     1.12,
                     2.1,
06-678   11-9-2006   2.2,
                     3.1 –
                     3.4,
                     3.6–
                     3.11,
                     3.13 –
                     3.17,
                     4.2 –
                     4.22,
                     4.22.1 -
                     4.22.11,
                     4.23 -
                     4.25,
                     4.26.1 -
                     4.26.6,
                     5.1,
                     5.1.2 -
                     5.1.5,
                     5.2.1 -
                     5.2.7,
                     5.3.1 -
                     5.3.8,
                     5.4,
                     5.5.1 -
                     5.5.3,
                     5.6
                     1.11.1 –
                     1.11.9,
                     1.11.11,
07-683   1-11-2007   2.1,
                     2.2,
                     4.5,
                     5.2.6
07-694   9-13-2007   1.11.7,
                     1.11.11
                     2.1,
                     2.2,
                     3.6–
                     3.11,
08-707   10-23-2008  3.13 –
                     3.17,
                     4.22.2 –
                     4.22.4,
                     4.27,
                     4.28
                     1.9.1.3,
                     2.1,
                     2.2,
                     3.4,
                     3.6–
10-729   7-22-2010   3.11,
                     3.13 –
                     3.17,
                     4.22.8,
                     4.26.1 -
                     4.26.6,
                     4.29
10-734   7-8-2010    4.23
                     1.9.4,
                     1.9.4.1,
10-742   11-9-2010   1.9.4.2,
                     3.1,
                     3.18,
                     4.19
                     2.1,
                     2.2,
                     3.6–
                     3.11,
11-738   1-11-2011   3.15 –
                     3.17,
                     4.5,
                     4.22.4,
                     4.22.8,
                     4.30
13-776   11-12-2013  4.8
13-778   11-12-2013  4.21
                     2.1,
                     2.2,
                     3.6, 
13-779   12-10-2013  3.7,
                     3.15 -
                     3.17,
                     4.30,
                     4.31
14-784   6-10-2014   4.21
                     2.1,
                     2.2,
                     3.6–
14-785   7-8-2014    3.11,
                     3.13,
                     3.15,
                     4.10
                     1.9.2,
14-786   7-22-2014   1.9.4.1 -
                     1.9.4.3
                     1.1,
                     1.4.1 -
                     1.4.5,
15-795   4-28-2015   1.5.1,
                     1.5.2,
                     1.5.4 -
                     1.5.8
15-797   6-23-2015   1.9.2
                     1.9,
                     1.9.1,
                     1.9.1.1 -
                     1.9.1.4,
                     2.1,
15-798   6-23-2015   2.2,
                     4.21,
                     4.22.8,
                     4.26.5,
                     4.29,
                     5.2.2 -
                     5.2.4
                     3.6,
                     3.7,
16-811   1-26-2016   3.15,
                     3.16,
                     4.31
16-812   3-22-2016   1.9.5
16-816   6-14-2016   4.31
                     2.1,
                     2.2,
17-819   3-14-2017   4.21,
                     4.21.1 -
                     4.21.9
2019-862 7-23-2019   1.6.2
2019-867 7-23-2019   3.19
2019-875 11-12-2019  1.6.2
                     2.1,
                     2.2,
                     3.15,
2020-878 1-28-2020   4.21.2,
                     4.21.3,
                     4.21.5,
                     4.21.6,
                     4.21.8
2020-881 6-22-2020   3.6 -
                     3.11
2020-882 7-28-2020   4.21.3,
                     4.21.7
                     1.9,
                     2.1,
2020-883 9-22-2020   2.2,
                     4.5,
                     5.1 -
                     5.6
                     1.9.4.3,
                     2.1,
                     2.2,
                     4.5,
                     4.23,
                     5.1.1 -
                     5.1.7,
2020-885 9-8-2020    5.2.2,
                     5.2.4 -
                     5.2.8,
                     5.3.1 -
                     5.3.4,
                     5.3.6 -
                     5.3.8,
                     5.5,
                     5.6
2021-894 1-12-2021   4.28
2021-899 3-23-2021   2.1,
                     2.2
2022-909 1-11-2022   3.20
2022-916 4-12-2022   3.12.1,
                     3.12.2
                     2.1,
                     2.2,
                     4.5,
                     4.23,
                     5.1.7,
2022-923 10-11-2022  5.2.3,
                     5.2.4,
                     5.2.6,
                     5.2.7,
                     5.3.3,
                     5.3.4
2023-932 4-25-2023   4.5
                     2.2,
                     3.6 -
2024-943 9-10-2024   3.11,
                     3.15 -
                     3.17,
                     4.32
2024-941 10-22-2024  2.2
2025-950 2-25-2025   1.9.2
2025-953 6-25-2025   3.5
                    
 
