TOWN OF COLORADO CITY, ARIZONA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-11 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2025-12, passed 7-14-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2008-04
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE TOWN OF COLORADO CITY,
ARIZONA, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION DEALING WITH SUBJECTS
EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the political
subdivision are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in
form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of
its affairs; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Arizona empower and
authorize the political subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile, any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances and revisions into one
ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, the Legislative Authority of the Political Subdivision has authorized
a general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the
Political Subdivision of a general and permanent nature and publication of such
ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF COLORADO
CITY, ARIZONA:
Section 1.   The general ordinances of the Political Subdivision as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the Town of Colorado City,
Arizona."
Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following Titles:
   COLORADO CITY, ARIZONA
   TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter
   TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      10.   General Code Construction; General Penalty
   TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
      30.   Mayor and Council
      31.   General Administration Provisions
      32.   Police and Fire Departments
      33.   Town Magistrate
      34.   Tax Code Adopted
   TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
      50.   Sewer Regulations
      51.   Water Regulations
      52.   Utility Billing
   TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
      70.   Administration
      71.   Traffic Regulations
      72.   Parking Regulations
      73.   Jaywalking
   TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      90.   Animals
      91.   Health and Sanitation
      92.   Parks and Recreation
   TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      110.   General Licenses
      111.    Peddlers
   TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
      130.    Offenses
   TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
      150.    Building Code
      151.    Flood Damage Prevention
      152.    Airport Zoning
      153.    Land Division
   TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
      Table
      I.    Franchises
      II.    Annexations
   PARALLEL REFERENCES
      References to Arizona Revised Statutes
      References to 1986 Code
      References to Resolutions
      References to Ordinances
   INDEX
Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the Mayor and Council and the Clerk of the Town of Colorado
City is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of Ordinances
in the Office of the Clerk.
Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
Section 6.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Mayor and Council of the Town of Colorado City,
Arizona on this 15th day of October, 2008.
            Terrill Johnson /s/
            Mayor
Attest:
Vance Barlow /s/
Town Clerk
Approved As To Form:
Steve Horton /s/
Town Attorney
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to chapters and sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time; calculation of time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinances
   
10.17   Conflicting provisions
   
10.18   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.19   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated “The Code of the Town of Colorado City, Arizona,”
and may be so cited. The code may also be cited as “The Colorado City Town
Code.”
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   The rules and the definitions set forth in this chapter shall be
observed in the construction of this code and the ordinances of the town unless
the construction would be inconsistent with either the manifest intent of the
Council or the context of this code or the ordinances of the town.
   (B)   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood
according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to the peculiar
and appropriate meaning.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, MUNICIPALITY or TOWN. The Town of Colorado
City, Arizona.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.
      COUNCIL. The Town Council of the Town of Colorado City, Arizona.
      COUNTY. Mohave County, Arizona.
      DAY. The period of time between any midnight and the midnight following.
      DAYTIME. The period of time between sunrise and sunset.
      DEPARTMENT, BOARD, COMMISSION, OFFICE, OFFICER or EMPLOYEE. Whenever any
department, board, commission, office, officer or employee is referred to, it
shall mean a department, board, commission, office, officer or employee of the
town unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
      EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the Fire, Police and Public Service
Departments and legally authorized ambulances and emergency vehicles of the
State of Arizona, Mohave County, or any political subdivisions thereof, and
vehicles of public service corporations.
      EMERGENCY WORK.  Any work performed to prevent or alleviate physical
trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency, which has or
may result in a disruption of service, and which is necessary to protect the
health, safety and welfare of persons or property.
      IN THE TOWN or WITHIN THE TOWN. All territory over which the town now
has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police
powers or other regulatory powers.
      JOINT AUTHORITY. All words purporting to give a joint authority to 3 or
more town officers or other persons shall be construed as giving the authority
to a majority of the officers or other persons unless it shall be otherwise
expressly declared in the law giving the authority.
      MAJORITY. When used in reference to the Town Council, means 51% of those
members in attendance provided that a quorum of the Council is also present.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      MOTOR VEHICLE.  Every self-propelled device in, upon or by which any
person or property is, or may be, transported upon a public highway, excepting
aircraft and devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
      NIGHTTIME. The period of time between sunset and sunrise.
      OATH. Includes affirmation or declaration.
      PERSON. Shall extend and be applied to firms, corporations or voluntary
associations, as well as to individuals, unless plainly inapplicable.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes every species of property, except real
property as defined in this section.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. The words PRECEDING and FOLLOWING mean next
before and next after, respectively.
      PROPERTY. Real and personal property.
      REAL PROPERTY. Lands, tenements and hereditaments.
      SHALL or MAY.  SHALL is mandatory and MAY is permissive.
      SHALL HAVE BEEN. Includes past and future cases.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the signer cannot write,
the signer’s or subscriber’s name being written near the mark by a witness who
writes his or her own name near the signer's or subscriber's name.
      STATE. The State of Arizona.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      TENANT or OCCUPANT. When applied to a building or land shall include any
person holding a written or an oral lease or who occupies the whole or part of
the building or land, either alone or with others.
      TOWN. The Town of Colorado City, Arizona.
      WEEK. Consists of 7 consecutive days.
      WRITING. Includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension
by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is
required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English
language unless it is expressly provided otherwise.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, except where otherwise provided.
Statutory reference:
   Definitions and construction of statutes generally, see A.R.S. §§ 1-211
through 1-215
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of
the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:
   (A)   And/or. “Or” may be read “and,” and “and” may be read “or,” if the
context requires it.
   (B)   Acts by agents. When this code or an ordinance requires an act to be
done which may by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, the
requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an
authorized agent.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.
      (1)   Words of the masculine gender include the feminine; words in the
singular number include the plural, and words in the plural number include the
singular.
      (2)   The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the
future includes the present.
   (D)   General terms. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council that the titles,
chapters, subchapters, sections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code
shall be severable, and if any provision of this code is held unconstitutional
for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality
shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of the code.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO CHAPTERS AND SECTIONS.
   (A)   All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and
sections of this code unless otherwise specified.
   (B)   Whenever in 1 section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the town exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within the town for the transaction of all municipal
business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME; CALCULATION OF TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done as provided in this code or
in any order issued pursuant to any ordinance, when expressed in days, shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the
last day is a Saturday, Sunday or holiday it shall be excluded; and when such
time is expressed in hours, the whole of Saturday, Sunday or a holiday, from
midnight to midnight, shall be excluded.
Statutory reference:
   Computation of time, see A.R.S. § 1-243
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   (A)   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced.
   (B)   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code, except
as otherwise provided in §
10.14.
   (C)   However, all rights, duties and obligations created or imposed by the
repealed ordinances shall continue and exist in all respects as if this code
had not been adopted and enacted.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   The adoption and enactment of this code shall not be construed to repeal or
in any way to modify or affect:
   (A)   Any special ordinance or ordinances regarding franchises, annexations,
dedications or zoning;
   (B)   Any ordinance making an appropriation;
   (C)   Any ordinance affecting any bond issue or by which any bond issue may
have been authorized;
   (D)   The running of the statute of limitations in force at the time this
code becomes effective;
   (E)   The continued existence and operation of any department, agency,
commission or office heretofore legally established or held;
   (F)   Any bond of any public officer;
   (G)   Any taxes, fees, assessments or other charges incurred or imposed; and
   (H)   Any ordinances authorizing, ratifying, confirming, approving or
accepting any compact or contract with any other municipality, the State of
Arizona or any county or subdivision thereof, or with the United States or any
agency or instrumentality thereof.
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision unless it shall be expressly so provided.
   (B)   The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty
incurred before the repeal took effect nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding
pending at the time of the repeal for any offense committed under the ordinance
repealed.
§ 10.17 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If any provision of this code conflicts with any other provision of this
code, any other local legislation, or any state or federal law, the provision
which is more stringent or restrictive in nature shall apply unless the context
clearly requires or indicates otherwise.
§ 10.18 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section may be specifically repealed and a
new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place, or the chapter or section may be referenced as, “hereby created to read
as follows:....” The chapter or section should be set out in full.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to the
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.19 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (A.R.S. § 9-240) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1985)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the town published in 1986 and subsequently amended, the 1986
code section number shall be indicated in the history by “(1986 Code, §
     ).”
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found responsible for violating any provisions of this
code, except as otherwise provided in this code, shall be responsible for a
civil code infraction, and upon such finding of responsibility therefor may be
punished by a civil sanction not to exceed the amount provided for under state
law. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable
as herein provided.
      (1)   In this section the term “violation of this code” does not include
the failure of a town officer or town employee to perform an official duty
unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as
provided in this section.
      (2)   In addition to any monetary civil sanction, the Civil Hearing
Officer shall order the defendant to abate the civil code infraction, unless it
has been abated by the date of a finding of responsibility therefor.
      (3)   The Civil Hearing Officer shall have the authority, within his or
her discretion, to suspend the payment of any civil sanction imposed.
      (4)   In any case involving a civil code infraction relating to the
occupancy or use of land, any monetary civil sanction imposed pursuant to this
section upon a defendant who holds an ownership interest in such land shall be
recordable as a lien upon the land and shall run with the land. The town, at
its sole option, may record a notice of civil sanction and abatement order with
the Mohave County Recorder and thereby cause compliance by any person(s) or
entity thereafter acquiring the property. When the property is brought into
compliance by the owner or responsible party, a satisfaction of notice of civil
sanction and abatement order shall be filed at the request and expense of the
owner or responsible party. It shall be the property owner’s responsibility to
secure the satisfaction of notice of civil sanction and abatement order from
the town.
   (B)   Any violation of or failure or refusal to do or perform any act
required by Title VII of this code constitutes a civil traffic offense which
shall result in a civil penalty not to exceed the amount provided for under
state law. In addition, the court shall levy penalty assessments pursuant to
A.R.S. §§ 12-116.01 and 12-116.02. Civil traffic violations are subject to the
provisions of A.R.S. §§ 28-1592 et seq., as amended.
Statutory reference:
   Maximum penalty for civil traffic violations, see A.R.S. § 28-1598
   Misdemeanor penalty authorized, see A.R.S. § 9-240(28)(b)
   Misdemeanor sentence of imprisonment, see A.R.S. § 13-707
   Misdemeanor fines, see A.R.S. §§ 13-802 and 13-804
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   MAYOR AND COUNCIL
      
31.   GENERAL ADMINISTRATION PROVISIONS
      
32.   POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS
      
33.   TOWN MAGISTRATE
      
34.   TAX CODE
CHAPTER 30: MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Section
Town Council
   
30.001   Elected officers
   
30.002   Corporate powers
   
30.003   Duties of office
   
30.004   Vacancies in Council
   
30.005   Compensation
   
30.006   Oath of office
   
30.007   Bond
   
30.008   Financial disclosure statement
Mayor
   
30.020   Selection of Mayor
   
30.021   Vice Mayor
   
30.022   Acting Mayor
   
30.023   Powers and duties of the Mayor
   
30.024   Failure to sign documents
Council Election
   
30.035   Primary election
   
30.036   Non-political ballot
   
30.037   General election nomination
   
30.038   Election to office
   
30.039   Candidate financial disclosure
Council Procedure
   
30.050   Regular meetings
   
30.051   Special meetings
   
30.052   Meetings to be public
   
30.053   Quorum; attendance requirement
   
30.054   Agenda
   
30.055   Order of business
   
30.056   Committees and commissions
   
30.057   Voting
   
30.058   Suspension of rules
Ordinances, Resolutions and Contracts
   
30.070   Prior approval
   
30.071   Introduction
   
30.072   Same day passage prohibited
   
30.073   Two separate readings
   
30.074   Requirements for an ordinance
   
30.075   Effective date of ordinances
   
30.076   Signatures required
   
30.077   Publishing required
   
30.078   Posting required
TOWN COUNCIL
§ 30.001 ELECTED OFFICERS.
   (A)   The elected officers of the town shall be 7 Council members, 1 of whom
shall be designated as Mayor in accordance with §
30.020 below. The Mayor and Council members shall constitute the Council and
shall continue in office until assumption of duties of office by their duly
elected successors.
   (B)   Members of the Council shall be divided by lot into 2 classes. The
first class shall consist of 3 Council members and the second class of 4
Council members. Those of the first class shall hold office until the next
regular election in 1988, and those of the second class shall hold office until
the regular election of 1990.
   (C)   At the regular election of 1988, 3 Council members shall be selected,
and at the regular election of 1990, 4 Council members shall be elected.
Thereafter, Council members shall be elected in classes of 3 and 4 at
successive, regular elections.
   (D)   The regular term of office for Council members shall be 4 years each
and until their successors are elected and qualified.
(A.R.S. §§ 9-231 and 9-301) (1986 Code, § 2-1-1)
§ 30.002 CORPORATE POWERS.
   (A)   The corporate powers of the town shall be vested in the Council and
shall be exercised only as directed or authorized by law.
   (B)   All powers of the Council shall be exercised by ordinance, resolution,
order or motion.
(1986 Code, § 2-1-2)
§ 30.003 DUTIES OF OFFICE.
   Council members shall assume the duties of office at the regularly scheduled
Council meeting next following the date of the general election at which, or
effective as of the date of which, the Council members were elected.
(A.R.S. § 9-232) (1986 Code, § 2-1-3)
§ 30.004 VACANCIES IN COUNCIL.
   The Council shall fill by appointment for the unexpired term any vacancy
that may occur for whatever reason.
(A.R.S. § 9-235) (1986 Code, § 2-1-4)
§ 30.005 COMPENSATION.
   The compensation of elective officers of the town shall be fixed from time
to time by resolution of the Council.
(A.R.S. § 9-232.01) (1986 Code, § 2-1-5)
§ 30.006 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Immediately prior to assumption of the duties of office, each Council member
shall, in public, take and subscribe to the oath of office.
(A.R.S. § 38-231) (1986 Code, § 2-1-6)
§ 30.007 BOND.
   (A)   Prior to taking office, every Council member shall execute and file an
official bond, enforceable against the principal and his or her sureties,
conditioned on the due and faithful performance of his or her official duties,
payable to the state and to and for the use and benefit of the town or any
person who may be injured or aggrieved by the wrongful act or default of the
officer in his or her official capacity.
   (B)   A person so injured or aggrieved may bring suit on such bond under
provisions identical to those contained in A.R.S. § 38-260. Bonds shall be in
such sum as shall be provided by resolution, and the premium for the bonds
shall be paid by the town.
(A.R.S. § 9-302) (1986 Code, § 2-1-7)
§ 30.008 FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE STATEMENT.
   The Mayor and each member of the Council shall file by January 31 of each
year a financial disclosure statement on a form prescribed by the Clerk and
with such information as provided by resolution of the Council and pursuant to
state law.
(A.R.S. § 38-545) (1986 Code, § 2-1-8)
MAYOR
§ 30.020 SELECTION OF MAYOR.
   (A)   The Mayor shall be directly elected by the people of a majority vote
of the qualified electors.
   (B)   The term of the Mayor shall be for four years.
   (C)   A candidate cannot run for both Mayor and Council member at the same
election.
   (D)   Council members who desire to run for Mayor must resign their position
on the Council as of the day they submit their nomination papers unless they
are in the last year of their term.
(A.R.S. § 9-232) (1986 Code, § 2-2-1) (Am. Ord. 2025-11, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 30.021 VICE MAYOR.
   (A)   The Council members shall at the first regular meeting after their
election designate one of its members as Vice Mayor, who shall serve at the
pleasure of the Council.
   (B)   The Vice Mayor shall perform the duties of the Mayor during his or her
absence or disability.
(A.R.S. § 9-236) (1986 Code, § 2-2-2) (Am. Ord. 2025-11, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 30.022 ACTING MAYOR.
   In the absence or disability of both the Mayor and Vice Mayor, the Council
may designate another of its members to serve as acting Mayor who shall have
all the powers, duties and responsibilities of the Mayor during that absence or
disability.
(1986 Code, § 2-2-3)
§ 30.023 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR.
   The powers and duties of the Mayor shall include the following:
   (A)   He or she shall be the chief executive officer of the town;
   (B)   He or she shall be the Chairperson of the Council and preside over its
meetings. He or she may make and second motions and shall have a voice and vote
in all its proceedings;
   (C)   He or she shall enforce the provisions of this code;
   (D)   He or she shall execute and authenticate by his or her signature such
instruments as the Council or any statutes, ordinances or this code shall
require;
   (E)   He or she shall make such recommendations and suggestions to the
Council as he or she may consider proper;
   (F)   He or she may, by proclamation, declare a local emergency to exist due
to fire, conflagration, flood, earthquake, explosion, war bombing or any other
natural or human-made calamity or disaster or in the event of the threat or
occurrence of riot, rout or affray or other acts of civil disobedience which
endanger life or property within the town. After declaration of the emergency,
the Mayor shall govern by proclamation and impose all necessary regulations to
preserve the peace and order of the town, including but not limited to:
      (1)   Imposition of a curfew in all or any portion of the town;
      (2)   Ordering the closing of any business;
      (3)   Closing to public access any public building, street or other
public place; and
      (4)   Calling upon regular or auxiliary law enforcement agencies and
organizations within or without the political subdivision for assistance.
   (G)   He or she shall perform such other duties required by state statute
and this code as well as those duties required as chief executive office of the
town.
(A.R.S. § 9-236) (1986 Code, § 2-2-4)
§ 30.024 FAILURE TO SIGN DOCUMENTS.
   If the Mayor refuses or fails to sign any ordinance, resolution, contract,
warrant, demand or other document or instrument requiring his or her signature
of 5 days consecutively, then a majority of the members of the Council may, at
any regular or special meeting, authorize the Vice Mayor or, in his or her
absence, an acting Mayor to sign such ordinance, resolution, contract, warrant,
demand or other document or instrument which when so signed shall have the same
force and effect as if signed by the Mayor.
(1986 Code, § 2-2-6)
COUNCIL ELECTION
§ 30.035 PRIMARY ELECTION.
   Any candidate who shall receive at the primary election a majority of all
the votes cast shall be declared to be elected to the office for which he or
she is a candidate effective as of the date of the general election, and no
further election shall be held as to the candidate; provided that if more
candidates receive a majority than there are offices to be filled than those
equal in number to the offices to be filled receiving the highest number of
votes shall be declared elected.
(A.R.S. § 9-821.01) (1986 Code, § 2-3-1)
§ 30.036 NON-POLITICAL BALLOT.
   Nothing on the ballot in any election shall be indicative of the support of
the candidate.
(A.R.S. § 9-821.01) (1986 Code, § 2-3-2)
§ 30.037 GENERAL ELECTION NOMINATION.
   (A)   If at any primary election held as above provided there be any office
or offices for which no candidate is elected, then as to such office or
offices, the election shall be considered to be a primary election for
nomination of candidates for such office or offices, and the second or general
municipal election shall be held to vote for candidates to fill the office or
offices.
   (B)   Candidates to be placed on the ballot at the second or general
municipal election shall be those not elected at the first election, shall be
equal in number to twice the number to be elected to any given office or less
than that number if there be less than that number named on the primary
election ballot, and persons who receive the highest number of votes for the
respective offices at the first election shall be the only candidates at the
second election, provided that if there be any person who, under the provisions
of this subchapter, would have been entitled to become a candidate received an
equal number of votes therefor, then all those persons receiving an equal
number of votes shall likewise become candidates for that office.
(A.R.S. § 9-821.01) (1986 Code, § 2-3-3)
§ 30.038 ELECTION TO OFFICE.
   The candidates equal in number to the persons to be elected who receive the
highest number of votes shall be declared elected.
(A.R.S. § 9-821.01) (1986 Code, § 2-3-4)
§ 30.039 CANDIDATE FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE.
   Each candidate for office of Council member shall file a financial
disclosure statement on a form prescribed by the Clerk, when the candidate
files a nomination paper. The statement shall contain such information as
required by resolution of the Council pursuant to state law.
(A.R.S. § 38-545) (1986 Code, § 2-3-5)
COUNCIL PROCEDURE
§ 30.050 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   The Council shall hold regular meetings on the Monday following the second
weekend of each month at 5:00 p.m. All regular meetings of the Council shall be
held in the Town Hall of Colorado City unless otherwise posted.
(A.R.S. § 9-233) (1986 Code, § 2-4-1) (Am. Ord. 2017-01, passed 10-16-2017; Am.
Ord. 2025-12, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 30.051 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   The Mayor, upon his or her own motion, or the Clerk upon the request of four
members, may convene the Council at any time by notifying the members of the
date, hour and purpose of the special meeting. Notice of the meeting shall be
made, pursuant to state law. In the case of an actual emergency, a meeting may
be held upon the notice as is appropriate to the circumstances.
(1986 Code, § 2-4-2)
§ 30.052 MEETINGS TO BE PUBLIC.
   All proceedings of the Council shall be open to the public, except that upon
approval by a majority vote of the Council, the Council may meet in a closed
executive session pursuant to the provisions of state law.
(A.R.S. Title 38, Ch. 3, Art. 3.1) (1986 Code, § 2-4-3)
§ 30.053 QUORUM; ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENT.
   A majority of the Council members shall constitute a quorum for transacting
business, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time and compel the
attendance of absent members.
(1986 Code, § 2-4-4)
§ 30.054 AGENDA.
   At least 24 hours prior to each Council meeting, or on or before a time
fixed by the Council for preparation and distribution of an agenda, whichever
is earlier, the Clerk shall collect all written reports, communications,
ordinances, resolutions, contracts and other documents to be submitted to the
Council, prepare an agenda according to the order of business and furnish each
Council member and the Mayor with a copy.
(1986 Code, § 2-4-5)
§ 30.055 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   The business of the Council shall be taken up for consideration and
disposition in the following order.
   (A)   Call to order. The Mayor shall take the chair precisely at the hour
appointed for the meeting and shall immediately call the Council to order. In
the absence of the Mayor, the Vice Mayor shall call the Council to order. In
the absence of both Mayor and Vice Mayor, the Clerk shall call the Council to
order and an acting Mayor shall be selected to chair the meeting. Upon the
arrival of the Mayor, the Vice Mayor or the acting Mayor shall immediately
relinquish the Chair upon the conclusion of the business immediately before the
Council. The Mayor shall preserve order and decorum, decide all questions of
order and conduct the proceedings of the meetings in accordance with the
parliamentary rules contained in Robert’s Rules of Order.
   (B)   Roll call. Before proceeding with the business of the Council, the
Clerk or his or her deputy shall call the roll of the members, and the names of
those present shall be entered in the minutes. If a quorum is not present, the
members present may adjourn pursuant to §
30.053 above.
   (C)   Minutes. The Clerk or his or her deputy shall read or present the
minutes of the preceding Council meeting, which shall be approved if correct.
Any errors noted shall be corrected.
   (D)   Petitions. Petitions, remonstrances, communications and comments or
suggestions from citizens present may be heard by the Council. All remarks
shall be addressed to the Council as a whole, and not to any member thereof.
The remarks shall be limited to 3 minutes, unless additional time is granted by
the Council. No person other than the individual speaking shall enter into the
discussion without the permission of the presiding officer. No question shall
be asked a Council member except through the presiding officer.
   (E)   Reports by officers. Town officials and committees shall present any
reports required by the Council.
   (F)   Unfinished business. The Council shall consider any business that has
been previously considered and which is still unfinished.
   (G)   New business. The Council shall consider any business not heretofore
considered, including the introduction of ordinances and resolutions.
   (H)   Claims. The Clerk shall present any claims against the town, which
will then be approved or disapproved by the Council.
   (I)   Miscellaneous business. Prior to adjournment, the Council shall, as it
deems necessary, consider such business as is not specifically provided for
herein.
   (J)   Adjournment. The Council may, by a majority vote of those present,
adjourn from time to time to a specific date and hour. A motion to adjourn
shall always be in order and decided without debate.
(A.R.S. § 9-234) (1986 Code, § 2-4-6)
§ 30.056 COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS.
   The Council may create such boards, committees and commissions, standing or
special, as it deems necessary. They shall consist of as many members and shall
perform such duties as the Council may require and shall exist at the pleasure
of the Council.
(1986 Code, § 2-4-7)
§ 30.057 VOTING.
   (A)   The Mayor shall vote as a member of the Council.
   (B)   Upon the request of any member, the ayes and nays upon any questions
shall be taken and entered in the minutes.
(1986 Code, § 2-4-8)
§ 30.058 SUSPENSION OF RULES.
   Any of the provisions of this subchapter may be temporarily suspended in
connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote of 3/4 of the
members present, except that this section shall not be construed to permit any
action that is contrary to state statutes.
(1986 Code, § 2-4-9)
ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND CONTRACTS
§ 30.070 PRIOR APPROVAL.
   All ordinances, resolutions and contract documents may before presentation
to the Council, have been reviewed as to form by the attorney and may, when
there are substantive matters of administration involved, be referred to the
person who is charged with the administration of the matters. Such person may
have an opportunity to present his or her objections, if any, prior to the
passage of the ordinance, resolution or acceptance of the contract.
(1986 Code, § 2-5-1)
§ 30.071 INTRODUCTION.
   Ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects requiring action by
the Council may be introduced and sponsored by a member of the Council, except
that the attorney, the manager or the Clerk may present ordinances, resolutions
and sponsorship thereof by moving that the ordinance, resolution, matter or
subject be adopted; otherwise, they shall not be considered.
(1986 Code, § 2-5-2)
§ 30.072 SAME DAY PASSAGE PROHIBITED.
   No ordinance except emergency ordinances shall be put on its final passage
on the same day on which it was introduced.
(1986 Code, § 2-5-3)
§ 30.073 TWO SEPARATE READINGS.
   All ordinances except emergency ordinances shall have 2 separate readings,
but the first and the second reading shall never be made on the same day. The
first reading shall be in full, unless the Council, in possession of printed
copies of the ordinance, shall unanimously allow reading by title only.
(1986 Code, § 2-5-4)
§ 30.074 REQUIREMENTS FOR AN ORDINANCE.
   Each ordinance should have but 1 subject, the nature of which is clearly
expressed in the title. Whenever possible, each ordinance shall be introduced
as an amendment to this code or to an existing ordinance, and, in such case,
the title of the sections to be amended shall be included in the ordinance.
(1986 Code, § 2-5-5)
§ 30.075 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   No ordinance, or franchise shall become operative until 30 days after its
passage by the Council and approval by the Mayor, except measures necessary for
the immediate preservation of the peace, health or safety of the town, but such
an emergency measure shall not become immediately operative unless it states in
a separate section the reason why it is necessary that it should become
immediately operative, and unless it is approved by the affirmative vote of 3/
4 of all the members elected to the Council, taken by ayes and nays.
(A.R.S. § 19-142B) (1986 Code, § 2-5-6)
§ 30.076 SIGNATURES REQUIRED.
   Every ordinance passed by the Council shall, before it becomes effective, be
signed by the Mayor and attested by the Clerk.
(1986 Code, § 2-5-7)
§ 30.077 PUBLISHING REQUIRED.
   Only such orders, resolutions, motions, regulations or proceedings of the
Council shall be published as may be required by state statutes or expressly
ordered by the Council.
(A.R.S. Title 9, Ch. 7, Art. 2) (1986 Code, § 2-5-8)
§ 30.078 POSTING REQUIRED.
   Every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, forfeiture or other punishment
shall, after passage, be posted by the Clerk in 3 or more public places within
the town and an affidavit of the person who posted the ordinance shall be filed
in the office of the Clerk as proof of posting.
(A.R.S. § 9-813) (1986 Code, § 2-5-9)
CHAPTER 31: GENERAL ADMINISTRATION PROVISIONS
Section
Officers in General
   
31.01   Officers
   
31.02   Treasurer and collector of taxes
   
31.03   Additional officers
   
31.04   Bond
   
31.05   Vacancies; holding more than 1 office
   
31.06   Additional powers and duties
   
31.07   Overtime pay
Officers
   
31.20   Town Manager
   
31.21   Town Clerk
   
31.22   Town Marshal
   
31.23   Town Engineer
   
31.24   Town Attorney
   
31.25   Town Magistrate
   
31.26   Building Official
Purchasing
   
31.40   Applicability of provisions
   
31.41   Procedure generally
   
31.42   Performance bond
   
31.43   Emergency procedures
   
31.44   Forms
OFFICERS IN GENERAL
§ 31.01 OFFICERS.
   (A)   There are hereby created the Offices of Town Manager, Town Clerk, Town
Marshal, Public Works Director, Town Engineer and Town Attorney who shall be
appointed by the Council and who shall serve at the pleasure of the Council.
   (B)   There is hereby created the Office of Town Magistrate, who shall be
appointed by the Council. The Magistrate shall serve for a term of 2 years with
the beginning and end of the term to be specified at the time of appointment.
During that term, a Magistrate may be removed only for cause.
(A.R.S. §§ 9-237 and 9-303) (1986 Code, § 3-1-1)
§ 31.02 TREASURER AND COLLECTOR OF TAXES.
   The Town Clerk shall act as Treasurer, and the Town Marshal shall act as
collector of taxes.
(A.R.S. § 9-238) (1986 Code, § 3-1-2)
§ 31.03 ADDITIONAL OFFICERS.
   The Council may appoint and remove from time to time such other officers as
it may deem necessary and that are not provided for in this code or state
statute.
(1986 Code, § 3-1-3)
§ 31.04 BOND.
   The Council shall require each officer of the town to give bond for the due
discharge of his or her duties in such sums and with such security as it may
direct and approve as determined by resolution. The town shall pay the costs of
the bond.
(A.R.S. § 9-239) (1986 Code, § 3-1-4)
§ 31.05 VACANCIES; HOLDING MORE THAN 1 OFFICE.
   Any vacancy that shall occur in any town office shall be filled by
appointment by the Council, provided that 1 person may hold more than 1 office
and that at the discretion of the Council, the functions of a town official may
be validly performed and discharged by a deputy or another town official, or an
otherwise qualified individual not holding office but employed at the pleasure
of the Council.
(A.R.S. § 9-239) (1986 Code, § 3-1-5)
§ 31.06 ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   In addition to any powers and duties prescribed in this code, each officer
shall have such further powers, perform such further duties and hold such other
office as may be provided by the Council through ordinance, resolution or
order.
(1986 Code, § 3-1-6)
§ 31.07 OVERTIME PAY.
   The Council has the authority to authorize the payment of overtime pay for
such employees as may work in excess of a normal work period. Those rates of
pay and periods of work shall be in conformity with wages and salaries enacted
by the Town Council.
(1986 Code, § 3-1-7)
OFFICERS
§ 31.20 TOWN MANAGER.
   (A)   Creation of office. The Office of Town Manager is hereby established.
The Town Manager shall be appointed by the Council, and he or she shall hold
office during the pleasure of the Council.
   (B)   Qualifications. The Town Manager of the Town of Colorado City shall be
appointed by the Council wholly on the basis of his or her administrative and
executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office for and at the
pleasure of the Council.
   (C)   Powers and duties. The Town Manager shall be the head of the
administrative branch of the town government. Under specific direction and
control of the Council, he or she shall be responsible to the Council for the
proper administration of the affairs of the town. In addition to his or her
general powers as head of the administrative branch of the town government, and
not as a limitation thereon, the Town Manager shall have the powers and duties
set forth below:
      (1)   Devote his or her time to the discharge of his or her official
duties, and attend all meetings of the Council unless excused therefrom by the
Council or the Mayor;
      (2)   See that all ordinances are enforced, and that the provisions of
all franchises, leases, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the town
are observed;
      (3)   To supervise and give directions to all heads of departments,
subordinate officers and employees of the town except elected or judicial
officers and their respective staffs. In the event the Town Manager shall also
serve as a department head of a particular department of the town, then the
Town Manager shall not supervise that department head and the supervision shall
be the responsibility of the Council;
      (4)   Appoint and, when deemed necessary for the good of the town, lay
off, suspend, transfer, demote or remove department heads and employees of the
town;
      (5)   Recommend to the Council for adoption such measures and ordinances
as he or she deems beneficial to the town;
      (6)   To keep the Council at all times fully advised as to the financial
conditions and needs of the town;
      (7)   To prepare and submit to the Council the annual tentative budget;
      (8)   To purchase or cause to be purchased all supplies and equipment and
to make arrangements for contractual services for all of the departments or
divisions of the town;
      (9)   To make investigation into the affairs of the town, and any
department or division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of
any obligations of the town;
      (10)   To investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning
the administration of the town government and in regard to the service
maintained by public utilities in the town;
      (11)   To exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public
parks and other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of
the Council; and
      (12)   Performs such other duties as may be delegated to him or her from
time to time by the Council.
   (D)   Orders and directions. The Council shall deal with the administrative
services of the town through the Town Manager, except for the purpose of
inquiry, and neither the Council nor any members thereof shall give orders to
any subordinates of the Town Manager. It shall be the responsibility of the
Council and its members to aid and assist in an advisory capacity any
department head, but such assistance shall not conflict with the administrative
duties of the Town Manager.
   (E)   Policy making. The Town Manager shall not exercise any legislative
function, nor shall he or she engage in policy making. The Town Manager shall
implement policy made by the Council. Implementation may include creating
guidelines.
   (F)   Public relations. In the discharge of his or her duties as Town
Manager, the person holding such position shall endeavor at all times to
exercise the highest degree of tact, patience and courtesy in his or her
contacts with all town boards, departments and employees and shall use his or
her best efforts to establish and maintain a harmonious relationship between
all personnel employed in the government of the town to the end that the
highest possible standards of public service shall be continuously maintained.
   (G)   Removal. In case of his or her removal by the Council, the Town
Manager shall be furnished with a written notice stating the Council’s
intention to remove him or her and the reasons therefor at least 30 days before
the effective date of his or her removal. Within 7 days after delivery to him
or her of the notice, the Town Manager may, by written notification to the
Council, request a public hearing, which shall be held at the usual place of
meeting before the expiration of the 30-day period, and at which time the Town
Manager shall appear and be heard. After furnishing the Town Manager with
written notice of intention to remove, the Council may suspend him or her from
duty, but his or her salary shall continue until his or her removal by
resolution of the Council passed after the public hearing. The Council may
remove the Town Manager, in the exercise of its discretion, with or without
cause. The purpose of the hearing is to allow the Town Manager publicly to
present to the Council his or her grounds of opposition to removal.
   (H)   Resignation. The Town Manager shall give a written notice of his or
her intention to resign before leaving his or her office.
   (I)   Acting Town Manager. In the event of the Town Manager’s absence or
disability, the Council may appoint an acting Town Manager. If the Manager is
temporarily unable to perform his or her official duties, the powers and duties
of the Office shall devolve upon the Clerk.
   (J)   Employment agreements. Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed
as a limitation on the power or authority of the Council to enter into any
supplemental agreement with the manager delineating additional terms and
conditions of employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this
subchapter.
(A.R.S. § 9-303) (1986 Code, § 3-2-1)
§ 31.21 TOWN CLERK.
   (A)   Records. The Clerk shall keep a true and correct record of all
business transacted by the Council and any other records that either pertain to
the business of the town or that the Council directs. The Clerk shall number,
plainly label and file separately in a suitable cabinet all resolutions,
ordinances, notices, deeds, surveys, leases, paid and unpaid vouchers,
inventories, letters, orders and other documents of whatever nature.
   (B)   Public inspection of records. The Clerk shall keep convenient for
public inspection all public records and public documents under his or her
control, as provided by state statute.
   (C)   Monthly reports. The Clerk shall prepare and collect from town
officers and employees such monthly reports prepared in such manner and to
include such information as may be directed by the Council.
   (D)   Minutes. The Clerk shall prepare or cause to be prepared all minutes
of Council proceedings and ensure their correctness and accuracy.
   (E)   Ordinances, resolutions, budgets and notices. The Clerk shall process,
record, file, publish and, if required by state statute post all ordinances,
resolutions, budgets and notices that may be passed by the Council.
   (F)   Duties as Treasurer. The Clerk shall hold the office of Town Treasurer
and receive and safely keep all monies that shall come to the town and pay out
the same when authorized by the Council, or manager as authorized by the
Council. He or she shall keep a separate record and account of each different
fund provided by the Council, apportion the monies received among the different
funds as prescribed by the Council, and keep a complete set of books showing
every money transaction of the town, the state of each fund, from what source
the money in each fund was derived and for what purpose expended. He or she
shall make monthly reports to the Council of all receipts and disbursements and
the balance in each fund.
   (G)   Election official. The Clerk shall be the town election official and
perform those duties required by state statute.
   (H)   Licenses. The Clerk shall issue or cause to be issued all licenses
that may be prescribed by state statute or this code.
   (I)   Administrative duties. The Clerk shall acquire and keep a current
inventory of all the personal property owned by the town. The Clerk shall
perform those administrative responsibilities and duties that are conferred
upon him or her by the Council in addition to those specified in this code.
(A.R.S. § 9-238) (1986 Code, § 3-2-2)
§ 31.22 TOWN MARSHAL.
   The Marshal shall be the Chief of Police and shall be collector of all taxes
of the town provided that the collection of such taxes may be administered by
the Clerk. He or she shall perform such duties as may be required of him or her
by law and as the Council may deem necessary.
(A.R.S. § 9-238) (1986 Code, § 3-2-3)
§ 31.23 TOWN ENGINEER.
   The Engineer shall have charge of the town streets, sewers and waterworks
and shall perform such duties as may be required of him or her by law and such
other duties as the Council may deem necessary.
(A.R.S. § 9-238) (1986 Code, § 3-2-4)
§ 31.24 TOWN ATTORNEY.
   (A)   The Attorney shall act as the legal counselor and advisor of the
Council and other town officials and, as such, shall give his or her opinion in
writing when requested.
   (B)   He or she shall draft all deeds, contracts, conveyances, ordinances,
resolutions and other legal instruments when required by the Council.
   (C)   When requested, he or she shall approve as to form, in writing, all
drafts of contracts and all official or other bonds before final approval or
acceptance thereof by the Council.
   (D)   He or she shall return all ordinances and resolutions submitted to him
or her for consideration by the Council, with his or her approval or
disapproval as to form noted thereon, together with his or her reasons
therefor, in a timely manner.
   (E)   He or she shall prosecute and defend all suits, actions or causes
where the town is a party and shall report to the Council, when required, the
condition of any suit or action to which the town is a party.
(1986 Code, § 3-2-5)
§ 31.25 TOWN MAGISTRATE.
   The Town Magistrate shall be the presiding officer of the Magistrate’s Court
and shall be selected by the Council and shall perform those functions
necessary to the maintenance of the Magistrate’s Court as provided by state
statute.
(A.R.S. § 22-402) (1986 Code, § 3-2-6)
§ 31.26 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   The Building Official shall receive applications required by this code,
issue permits and furnish the prescribed certificates. He or she shall examine
premises for which permits have been issued and shall make necessary
inspections to see that the provisions of law are complied with. He or she
shall enforce all provisions of the Building Code.
(1986 Code, § 3-2-7)
Cross-reference:
   Building Code, see
Chapter 150
PURCHASING
§ 31.40 APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Professional services. Unless required by the Council, the provisions
of this subchapter shall not apply to professional services. Such services
shall include but not be limited to, the following: physicians, attorneys,
engineers, accountants and similar professions.
(1987 Code, § 3-4-8)
   (B)   Cooperative purchasing.
      (1)   This subchapter shall not apply to purchases made by, through or
with the state or its political subdivisions.
      (2)   The town may make purchases or award contracts for services without
a formal bidding process whenever other governmental units have done so for the
same item or service if, in the opinion of the purchasing agent, a separate
bidding process is not likely to result in a lower price for such items or
services.
(1986 Code, § 3-3-9)
§ 31.41 PROCEDURE GENERALLY.
   (A)   The Town Treasurer shall be the purchasing agent for the town. No
purchase or contract for services of any kind or description, payment for which
is to be made from funds of the town, shall be made by the purchasing agent, or
any officer, employee or agent of the town, except in the manner set forth in
this subchapter, and unless the purchase is in accordance with the adopted town
budget.
(1986 Code, § 3-3-1)
   (B)   The town purchasing and procurement policy shall be established by
Town Council resolution which may be changed or modified at any time separate
from the rest of this code. The change by resolution will become a part of this
code immediately upon adoption.
   (C)   The town purchasing and procurement policy shall be adopted separately
by the Town Council and may be updated or changed at the discretion of the
Council.
(Am. Ord. 2010-02, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 31.42 PERFORMANCE BOND.
   The purchasing agent shall have the authority to require a performance bond,
in cash or otherwise, for such amount as he or she may deem sufficient to
secure the execution of the contract for the best interest of the town.
(1986 Code, § 3-3-5)
§ 31.43 EMERGENCY PROCEDURES.
   In case of an emergency which requires immediate purchases of supplies or
services and when time is of the essence, the Mayor shall be empowered to
authorize the purchasing agent to purchase or secure services without complying
with the procedures of this subchapter. A full report in writing of the
circumstances of any emergency purchase shall be filed by the purchasing agent
with the Town Council at its next meeting.
(1986 Code, § 3-3-6)
§ 31.44 FORMS.
   The Purchasing Agent shall prescribe and maintain such forms as he or she
shall find necessary for the operation of the provisions of this subchapter.
(1986 Code, § 3-3-7)
CHAPTER 32: POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS
Section
Police Department
   
32.01   Created; composition
   
32.02   Appointment of officers
   
32.03   Compensation of officers
   
32.04   Departmental rules and regulations
   
32.05   Duties of the Police Department
   
32.06   Answering calls outside the town
Fire Department
   
32.20   Composition
   
32.21   Entry upon adjacent property
   
32.22   Acknowledgment of right-of-way
   
32.23   Fire alarms
   
32.24   Orders of Fire Chief
   
32.25   Fire Code
Statutory reference:
   Power of Council to regulate police and fire, see A.R.S. § 940-240(B)(12)
and (7)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.01 CREATED; COMPOSITION.
   There is hereby created a Police Department for the town which shall consist
of a Chief of Police, who shall also serve as Town Marshal, and as many police
officers as may from time to time be deemed necessary by the Council for the
safety and good order of the town.
(1986 Code, § 4-1-1)
§ 32.02 APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Council and shall serve
at the pleasure of the Council.
   (B)   The Council shall appoint as many police officers as may from time to
time be deemed necessary for the safety and good order of the town.
( 1986 Code, § 4-1-2)
§ 32.03 COMPENSATION OF OFFICERS.
   The Chief of Police and the police officers of the town shall be compensated
as determined by the Council. The Chief of Police shall not receive any
perquisites, commissions or compensation for his or her services as Chief of
Police Town Marshal or Tax Collector, except as the Council may prescribe.
(1986 Code, § 4-1-3)
§ 32.04 DEPARTMENTAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Police Department shall be operated and managed in accordance with such
departmental rules and regulations as may from time to time be adopted by the
Council.
(1986 Code, § 4-1-4)
§ 32.05 DUTIES OF THE POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   It is the duty of the Police Department, under the direction of the Chief of
Police, to:
   (A)   Enforce this code and the statutes of the State of Arizona within
jurisdictional limits as conferred by law and to arrest and charge the
violators thereof;
   (B)   Take charge of the town jail and all prisoners confined therein, and
all those who are sentenced to labor on the streets or public works of the town
and to see that orders and sentences with reference to such are fully executed
and complied with;
   (C)   Deliver any persons who may be confined in the jail upon conviction of
a crime committed under the jurisdiction of the Magistrate’s Court to any
authorized officer of the town who shall at any time demand the prisoners. Any
such authorized person so demanding and receiving such prisoners shall work
those prisoners on the streets or alleys of the town or on any and all
authorized work as may be determined by the Council;
   (D)   Render such account of the Police Department, its duties and receipts
as may be required by the Council and keep records of the office open to
inspection by the Council at any time, except those records as may be exempted
by state or federal law;
   (E)   Enforce the traffic regulations of the town as specified in Title VII
of this code and enforce the traffic laws of the state within the limits of the
town;
   (F)   Inspect and ascertain the condition of traffic control devices of
every description which have been erected within the town on the authority of
the Council and notify the Council of any defects found therein;
   (G)   Perform such additional duties as may be required by the Council;
   (H)   Submit a monthly report to the Council with such information as may be
required by the Council; and
   (I)   Any peace officer or duly authorized agent of the town may stop and
detain a person as is reasonably necessary to investigate an actual or
suspected violation of any provision of this code, and to serve a copy of the
traffic complaint for any alleged civil or criminal violation of this code.
(1986 Code, § 4-1-5)
§ 32.06 ANSWERING CALLS OUTSIDE THE TOWN.
   The members of the Police Department of the town are duly authorized to
answer calls for aid and assistance beyond the corporate limits of the town
whenever the Chief of Police in his or her discretion shall deem it necessary
to protect lives and property.
(1986 Code, § 4-1-6)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.20 COMPOSITION.
   The Colorado City Fire District shall be the acting fire authority for the
Town of Colorado City and all rules, regulations and requirements shall be in
force or effective herein.
( 1986 Code, § 4-2-1)
§ 32.21 ENTRY UPON ADJACENT PROPERTY.
   It is lawful for any firefighter acting under the direction of the Chief or
another officer in command to enter upon the premises adjacent to or in the
vicinity of any building or other property that is on fire for the purpose of
controlling, containing or extinguishing the fire, and no person shall hinder,
resist or obstruct any firefighter in the discharge of his or her duty.
(1986 Code, § 4-2-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 32.22 ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Each member of the Department who drives a private motor vehicle in an
official capacity shall be issued suitable insignia which may be attached to
the motor vehicle. All motor equipment of the Department shall have right-of-
way over all other traffic when responding to an alarm.
   (B)   No unauthorized vehicle shall follow within 500 feet of any apparatus
belonging to the Department nor park any vehicle or otherwise cause any
obstruction to be placed within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station or other place where fire apparatus is stored and on the side of a
street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance
or within 15 feet of any fire hydrant.
   (C)   No person shall drive any vehicle over a fire hose, whether charged or
flat, except upon specific orders from the Chief or other officer in charge
where the hose is used.
(A.R.S. §§ 28-624, 28-775 and 28-873) (1986 Code, § 4-2-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 32.23 FIRE ALARMS.
   (A)   Suitable arrangements or equipment, such as the 9-1-1 public service
answering point, may be provided for citizens to turn in an alarm and for
notifying all members of the Department so that they may promptly respond.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person knowingly to turn in or cause to be
turned in a false alarm.
(1986 Code, § 4-2-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 32.24 ORDERS OF FIRE CHIEF.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any firefighter or citizen to refuse to obey an
order issued by the Fire Chief pursuant to his or her authority.
   (B)   (1)   The Fire Chief shall inspect buildings and premises and serve
written notice upon the owner or occupant to abate, within a specified time,
any and all fire hazards that may be found.
      (2)   For the purpose of conducting the inspection, the Chief is hereby
empowered to enter any and all buildings and premises within the town at any
reasonable hour.
      (3)   Any person served with such written notice shall comply and notify
the Chief of his or her compliance within 30 days from the date of service of
notice.
(1986 Code, § 4-2-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 32.25 FIRE CODE.
   The Fire Code of the Town of Colorado City shall be adopted as outlined in
Chapter 150: Building Code of the town code.
(1986 Code, § 4-3)
CHAPTER 33: TOWN MAGISTRATE
Section
   
33.01   Magistrate Court established; jurisdiction
   
33.02   Town Magistrate
   
33.03   Powers and duties of Town Magistrate
   
33.04   Proceedings of court
   
33.05   Administrative fee schedule; court enhancement fund; jail cost recovery
Statutory reference:
   Establishment and jurisdiction of municipal courts, see A.R.S. § 22-402 et
seq.
§ 33.01 MAGISTRATE COURT ESTABLISHED; JURISDICTION.
   There is hereby established in the town a Magistrate’s Court which shall
have jurisdiction of all violations of this code, and jurisdiction concurrently
with justices of the peace of precincts in which the town is located of
violation of laws of the state committed within the limits of the town.
(1986 Code, § 5-1)
§ 33.02 TOWN MAGISTRATE.
   (A)   The presiding officer of the Magistrate’s Court shall be the Town
Magistrate, who shall be appointed by the Council.
   (B)   The Magistrate shall serve for a term of 2 years with the beginning
and end of the term to be specified at the time of appointment. During such
term, a Magistrate may be removed only for cause.
(1986 Code, § 5-2-1)
§ 33.03 POWERS AND DUTIES OF TOWN MAGISTRATE.
   The powers and duties of the Magistrate shall include:
   (A)   The powers and duties set forth and conferred upon him or her under
the provisions of the state constitution and statutes, this code and the
ordinances and resolutions of the town;
   (B)   The keeping of a docket in which shall be entered each action and the
proceedings of the court therein;
   (C)   The responsibility for fixing and receiving all bonds and bails and
receiving all fines, penalties, fees and other monies as provided by law;
   (D)   Payment of all fees, fines, penalties and other monies collected by
the court to the treasurer;
   (E)   Submitting a monthly report to the Council summarizing court
activities for that month;
   (F)   Preparation of a schedule of traffic violations not involving the
death of a person, listing specific bail for each violation;
   (G)   Designation of a deputy other than a law enforcement officer and a
specific location at which the deputy shall, during the hours when the court is
not open, set the amount of bail in accordance with the foregoing schedule and
collect the bail, or accept proper bail bonds in lieu thereof, for and on
behalf of the court; and
   (H)   Preparation of a schedule of civil traffic violations listing a
specific deposit for each violation. The Magistrate shall designate a person, a
specific location and the hours which such person will be at the location to
accept proper deposits for civil traffic violations for and on behalf of the
court.
(1986 Code, § 5-2-2)
§ 33.04 PROCEEDINGS OF COURT.
   (A)   (1)   The proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with the state
constitution, the applicable state statutes and rules of the state supreme
court pertaining to police courts.
      (2)   The proceedings shall also be conducted in accordance with the
rules of criminal procedure for the Superior Court, unless otherwise
prescribed, and providing this code and resolutions of the town are not in
conflict therewith.
   (B)   The Magistrate court proceedings shall be commenced by complaint under
oath and in the name of the state setting forth the offense charged with and
such particulars of time, place, person and property as to enable the defendant
to understand distinctly the character of the offense complained of and to
answer the complaint.
   (C)   (1)   If the Magistrate is satisfied that the offense complained of
has been committed by the person charged, he or she shall issue a summons or a
warrant of arrest.
      (2)   Before issuing a summons or warrant of arrest on a complaint, the
Magistrate may subpoena and examine witnesses as to the truth of the complaint.
(1986 Code, § 5-3-1)
§ 33.05 ADMINISTRATIVE FEE SCHEDULE; COURT ENHANCEMENT FUND; JAIL COST
RECOVERY.
   (A)   Warrant and suspension fees.
      (1)   Warrant fee. The Magistrate Court may collect a warrant fee of $75
for each warrant the court is required to issue as the result of a failure to
appear, which includes any failure to appear at a scheduled, or otherwise
required court appearance. This fee applies to all forms and types of warrants
and shall be added to the amount set forth in the arrest warrant.
      (2)   Suspension fee. The Colorado City Magistrate Court may collect a
suspension fee of $75 for each suspension of an Arizona driver’s license or
privilege to drive in the State of Arizona which the court is required to issue
as the result of a failure to pay civil sanction, or a default judgment in a
civil traffic matter.
      (3)   Deposit into general fund. All warrant and suspension fees
collected under this section shall be received by the Magistrate Court in a
manner consistent with the Arizona Supreme Court accounting standards, and
shall be conveyed together with a summary explanation to the Town Treasurer for
deposit.
   (B)   Court enhancement fee.
      (1)   Court enhancement fee.
         (a)   The Colorado City Magistrate Court may collect a court
enhancement fee of $10 which shall be assessed in addition to any fine,
sanction or penalty imposed by the court.
         (b)   The court enhancement fee shall be collected after the statutory
priorities of restitution and time payment fees if applicable.
         (c)   The court enhancement fee shall be received by the court in a
manner consistent with the Arizona Supreme Court accounting standards.
      (2)   Court enhancement fund.
         (a)   The court enhancement fund shall be established as a fund
account so designated with the town’s Finance Director for the purpose of
receiving the court enhancement fee.
         (b)   Interest earned on fund monies shall be deposited into the fund.
         (c)   The court enhancement fund shall be used at the sole discretion
of the Magistrate Court to the limit of available account balance, as
appropriated by the Town Council.
         (d)   The Town Magistrate may use court enhancement funds in
conjunction with any other court or courts in any common projects, programs or
uses which may benefit the Magistrate Court’s operations.
   (C)   Jail costs recovery fee.
      (1)   Jail costs recovery fee.
         (a)   The Colorado City Magistrate Court may require any person who is
convicted of a misdemeanor criminal offense and sentenced to a term of
incarceration to reimburse Town of Colorado City for all or any part of the
actual expenses the town has or will incur by reason of the incarceration.
         (b)   The maximum amount ordered for reimbursement under this section
shall not exceed the number of days the misdemeanant is actually incarcerated,
multiplied by the actual costs per day, including any part of a 24-hour period
which shall be considered 1 day and other related costs.
      (2)   Factors to be considered. The Town Magistrate may determine the
amount of incarceration costs to be paid based on the following factors:
         (a)   The per diem per person cost of incarceration incurred by the
town; and
         (b)   The person’s ability to pay all or part of the incarceration
costs.
   (D)   Collection fees. Any defendant who defaults in his or her obligation
for the payment of monies owed or due Colorado City Magistrate Court including,
but not limited to, restitution, fines, surcharges, assessments, penalties,
bond, costs and fees is liable for all costs of collection including attorney
fees and costs and/or any fees and charges assessed by a collection agency that
is licensed pursuant to A.R.S. Title 32, Ch. 9, Art. 2, and that is engaged
legally by contract or otherwise to act on behalf of the Colorado City
Magistrate Court for the purpose of collecting the aforementioned obligations.
All such costs and fees, including legal fees and court costs related to
collection assessed by the collection agency may be added to the sum or sums
due from and chargeable to the defendant.
   (E)   Waiver; suspension; deferral. The Town Magistrate or Associate Town
Magistrate or Hearing Officer may waive, suspend or defer payment of all or
part of any fee upon a determination of economic hardship on the part of the
defendant, or in the interests of justice.
   (F)   Community service conversion. The Magistrate Judge may convert all or
part of any fee to community service time at a rate consistent with the court’s
community service program. Upon approval of the Judge, a court collections
officer may convert all or part of any fee to community service time.
   (G)   Fee imposed. If any fee imposed herein is determined by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be unenforceable to whole or in part, the other fees
imposed herein shall not be affected and shall remain fully enforceable.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 11-15-1999)
CHAPTER 34: TAX CODE
Editor’s Note:
   The Tax Code is set out at length herein. No stylistic changes have been
made, but the following Tax Code has been updated through Ord. 2023-15, passed
7-17-2023, copies of which are on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
SECTION   DESCRIPTION
ARTICLE I - GENERAL CONDITIONS AND DEFINITIONS
1   Words of tense, number and gender; code references.
100   General definitions.
   Assembler
   Broker (Reg.
100.1)
   Business
   Business day
   Casual activity or sale
   Combined taxes
   Commercial property
   Communications channel
   Construction contracting
   Construction contractor
   Delivery (of notice) by the Tax Collector
   Delivery, installation, or other direct customer services (Reg.
100.2)
   Engaging
   Equivalent excise tax
   Federal government
   Food
   Hotel
   Job printing
   Lessee
   Lessor
   License (for use)
   Lodging (lodging space)
   Manufactured buildings
   Manufacturer
   Medical Marijuana
   Mining and metallurgical supplies
   Modifier
   Nonprofit entity
   Occupancy (of real property)
   Out-of-Town sale
   Out-of-State sale
   Owner-builder
   Person
   Prosthetic
   Qualifying community health center
   Qualifying health care organization
   Qualifying hospital
   Receipt (of notice) by the taxpayer
   Remediation
   Rental equipment
   Rental supply
   Repairer
   Resides within the Town
   Restaurant
   Retail sale (sale at retail)
   Retailer (Reg.
100.3)
   Sale
   Solar Daylighting
   Solar Energy Device
   Speculative builder
   Substantially complete
   Supplier
   Tax Collector
   Taxpayer
   Telecommunication service
   Transient
   Utility service
110   Definitions: income-producing capital equipment. (Reg. 110.1)
   (a)   includes, subject to (d):
      (1)   machinery or equipment (Reg. 110.2)
      (2)   mining
      (3)   telecommunications
      (4)   electrical generation or transmission
      (5)   pipes or valves
      (6)   aircraft instruments
      (7)   aircraft machinery, equipment
      (8)   railroad rolling stock
      (9)   oil/gas drilling equipment
      (10)   urban mass transit vehicles
      (11)   utility services
      (12)   groundwater measuring devices
      (13)   research and development
      (14)   (Reserved)
      (15)   liquid, solid or gaseous chemicals
      (16)   cleanrooms
      (17)   soundstage complex
      (18)   satellite television or data transmission service
      (19)   poultry and eggs
      (20)   control of land, water or air pollution
      (21)   television signals
   (b)   ancillary equipment to remove waste products, except (d).
   (c)   repair and replacement parts
   (d)   definition does not include:
      (1)   expendable materials
      (2)   janitorial equipment and hand tools
      (3)   office equipment, furniture, supplies
      (4)   sales/distribution
      (5)   motor vehicles licensed for road use
      (6)   certain materials
      (7)   motors and pumps for drip irrigation
   (e)   aircraft definitions
      (1)   aircraft simulator or component parts
      (2)   other accessories and related equipment defined
115   Definitions: computer software; custom computer programming (Reg
115.1)
   (a)   computer software
   (b)   custom computer programming
120   Definitions: food for home consumption. (Reg.
120.1)
   (a)   (1)   Eligible grocery business
      (2)   Facilities for the consumption of food
      (3)   Food for consumption on the premises
      (4)   Hot prepared food
      (5)   Premises
   (b)   Food for home consumption
ARTICLE II - DETERMINATION OF GROSS INCOME
200   Determination of gross income: in general.
   (a)   Includes:
      (1)   value from sales of property or service
      (2)   total sale or lease price
      (3)   receipts, cash, barter, exchange, reduction of debt, etc.
      (4)   including deposits and deferred payments (Reg.
200.1)
   (b)   Barter, exchange, trade-outs, etc.
   (c)   No deduction for cost, losses, etc.
210   Determination of gross income: transactions between affiliated companies
or persons.
220   Determination of gross income: artificially contrived transactions.
230   Determination of gross income based upon method of reporting.
   (a)   Cash basis
   (b)   Accrual basis
240   Exclusion of cash discounts, returns, refunds, trade-in values, vendor-
issued coupons, and rebates from gross income.
   (a)   (1)   cash discounts
      (2)   returns
      (3)   trade-ins
      (4)   vendor-issued coupons
      (5)   rebates
      (6)   cash rebate on motor vehicles
   (b)   subsequent period reduction may still be excluded if reported as
taxable in prior period.
250   Exclusion of combined tax from gross income; itemization; notice;
limitations.
   (a)   when tax separately collected/charged
      (1)   remittance of all tax collected/charged (Reg.
250.1).
      (2)   itemization
   (b)   when tax has not been separately charged/collected.
260   Exclusion of fees and taxes from gross income; limitations.
   (a)   registration fees, license fees and taxes.
   (b)   F.E.T. on heavy trucks and trailers.
   (c)   certain State excise taxes, fees and surcharges.
   (d)   motor vehicle dealer documentation fees.
265   (Reserved)
266   Exclusion of motor carrier revenues from gross income.
   (a)   motor carrier subject to State Tax
   (b)   lightweight motor vehicle subject to State Tax
   (c)   leasing a motor vehicle subject to State Tax
   (d)   sale of motor vehicle or parts subject to State Tax
270   Exclusion of gross income of persons deemed not engaged in business.
   (a)   Definitions
      (1)   Federally exempt organization
      (2)   Governmental entity
      (3)   Non-licensed business
      (4)   Proprietary club
      (5)   Public educational entity
   (b)   Governmental entities, non-licensed businesses, and public educational
entities do not have taxable gross income except "proprietary activities" of
municipalities (Reg.
270.1)
   (c)   Federally exempt organizations and proprietary clubs do not have
taxable gross income except:
      (1)   proprietary clubs 15% rule on revenue (Reg.
270.2)
      (2)   unrelated business income
      (3)   (Reserved)
   (d)   Sales or leases to (a) taxable unless licensed and paying a tax on
resales/leases income.
   (e)   Franchisees and concessionaires of such do not share their exemption.
   (f)   Purchase by such for own use and storage taxable.
280   (Reserved)
285   (Reserved)
290   (Reserved)
ARTICLE III - LICENSING AND RECORDKEEPING
300   Licensing requirements.
   (a)   Who must apply (Reg.
300.1)
      (1)   all subject to Privilege Tax
      (2)   all subject to Use Tax
      (3)   rental occupancy tax
   (b)   Multiple activities at one location
   (c)   Limitation
305   Special licensing requirements.
   (a)   Partnerships
   (b)   Corporations
   (c)   Multiple locations
   (d)   (Reserved)
310   Licensing: duration of license; transferability; display.
   (a)   Valid until surrendered/cancelled/revoked.
   (b)   Non-transferable between owners or locations, and must be publicly
displayed at business location.
   (c)   Replacement of license treated as new license for purposes of
application and fee.
   (d)   (Reserved)
   (e)   (Reserved)
   (f)   (Reserved)
   (g)   (Reserved)
   (h)   (Reserved)
   (i)   (Reserved)
   (j)   (Reserved)
315   (Reserved)
320   Licensing: cancellation; revocation.
   (a)   Cancellation if inactive.
   (b)   Revoked for failure to comply.
   (c)   Notice and Hearing
   (d)   Reinstatement
330   Operating without a license.
350   Recordkeeping requirements. (Reg.
350.1, Reg.
350.2, Reg.
350.3)
   (a)   Must maintain books and records for limitation period and make
available to Tax Collector during any business day; electronic filing.
   (b)   Tax Collector can specify books and records kept after audit reveals
inadequate recordkeeping.
360   Recordkeeping: claim of exclusion, exemption, deduction, or credit;
documentation; liability. (Reg.
360.1, Reg.
360.2)
   (a)   Claim of exemption must be documented.
   (b)   Vendee’s claim of exemption shifts tax liability to vendee.
370   Inadequate or unsuitable records. If records inadequate, taxpayer must
either:
      (1)   provide other suitable records, or
      (2)   correct/reconstruct records.
ARTICLE IV - PRIVILEGE TAXES
400   Imposition of Privilege Taxes; presumption.
   (a)   Taxes imposed:
      (1)   privilege taxes on gross incomes specified below
      (2)   privilege taxes on rental occupancy
   (b)   Taxes imposed by this Chapter in addition to others.
   (c)   Presumption.
   (d)   Limitation of exemptions, deductions, and credits.
405   Advertising. (Reg.
405.1, Reg.
405.2)
   (a)   Measure of tax; rate; definition of "local advertising".
   (b)   (Reserved)
407   (Reserved)
410   Amusements, exhibitions, and similar activities.
   (a)   Measure of tax; rate.
      (1)   Charges for admission or amusement.
      (2)   Health spas, fitness centers and related activities.
   (b)   Deductions or Exemptions:
      (1)   Income from green fees
      (2)   (Reserved)
      (2)   Ride ticket sales
      (3)   Hotel Income (Sec.
444)
      (4)   Income specifically included in other business activities
      (5)   Income from arrangement of transportation
   (c)   Arrangement of amusement as a service
415   Construction contracting: construction contractors. (Reg.
415.1, Reg.
415.2)
   (a)   Measure of tax; rate.
      (1)   Exclusion of groundwater measuring devices.
      (2)   (Reserved)
      (3)   Exclusion of manufactured buildings.
      (4)   Exclusion of architectural/engineering services.
   (b)   Deductions and exemptions.
      (1)   subcontracting
      (2)   35%
      (3)   purchase of income-producing capital equipment
      (4)   installation of income-producing capital equipment
      (5)   raising poultry; eggs
      (6)   cleanrooms
      (7)   control of land, water or air pollution
      (8)   post-construction termite or pest control
      (9)   lake facility development
      (10)   development fees to offset governmental costs
      (11)   solar energy devices
   (c)   Subcontractors.
      (1)   Working for another contractor.
      (2)   Working for an owner building for sale.
      (3)   Selling new manufactured buildings.
416   Construction contracting: speculative builders. (Reg.
416.1, Reg.
416.2)
   (a)   Measure of tax; rate.
      (1)   sales price at close of escrow
      (2)   improved real property
      (3)   sale
      (4)   partially improved residential real property
   (b)   Exclusions
      (1)   prior value for reconstruction
         (2)   land not deductible
         (3)   (Reserved)
         (4)   stipulations for exclusion of gross income
      (5)   architectural/engineering services
   (c)   Deductions and exemptions.
      (1)   exemptions
      (2)   deductions
      (3)   tax credits
417   Construction contracting: owner-builders who are not speculative
builders.
   (a)   Measure of tax; rate.
      (1)   payments to subcontractors
      (2)   purchases of building materials
   (b)   Architectural/engineering services.
   (c)   Deductions and exemptions.
      (1)   exemptions
      (2)   deductions
      (3)   tax credits
   (d)   Reporting; statute of limitations.
   (e)   (Reserved)
418   (Reserved)
420   (Reserved)
425   Job printing. (Reg.
425.1)
   (a)   Measure of tax; rate.
   (b)   Deductions
      (1)   job printing for resale
      (2)   out-of-Town sales
      (3)   out-of-State sales
      (4)   (Reserved)
      (5)   sales to qualifying hospitals, health centers or health care
organizations
      (6)   (Reserved)
427   Manufactured buildings
   (a)   Measure of tax; rate
   (b)   Sale of used manufactured buildings
   (c)   Furniture, appliances taxed under retail
   (d)   Trade-ins and tax liability
430   Timbering and other extraction.
   (a)   Measure of tax; rate.
      (1)   timbering
      (2)   oil and gas extraction/refining
   (b)   Tax based on location of activity, not location of sale.
   (c)   If shipped out-of-state unsold, tax based on value at time of
shipment.
   (d)   (Reserved)
432   Mining.
   (a)   Measure of tax; rate
   (b)   Rate applied to value of entire product
   (c)   If shipped out-of-state unsold, tax based on value at time of
shipment.
435   Publishing and periodicals distribution. (Reg.
435.1)
   (a)   Measure of tax; rate.
      (1)   publishing in the Town
      (2)   distribution of periodicals not published in the Town
   (b)   Location of publication
   (c)   Subscription income
   (d)   Circulation
   (e)   Allocation of taxes between cities and towns.
      (1)   allocation by circulation in taxing municipalities
      (2)   allocation of balance between locations of publication
   (f)   Sales to qualifying hospitals, health centers or health care
organizations
440   Rental occupancy tax.
444   Hotels.
   (a)   Person.
   (b)   Exclusions:
      (1)   Income from incarcerating prisoners
      (2)   Income specifically included in other business activities
      (3)   Income not subject to tax under this Article
      (4)   Income not subject to tax under Sec.
410, Sec
475
      (5)   Commissions
      (6)   Income from providing telecommunication services
445   Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of real property. (Reg.
445.1, Reg. 445.2, Reg.
445.3)
   (a)   Measure of tax; rate.
      (1)   reimbursements for property tax, repairs, improvements
      (2)   charges for services
      (3)   special case telecommunication services
   (b)   Exemption for utility reimbursement based upon separate meter
   (c)   Exemption for qualifying hospital, health center or health care
organization
   (d)   Exemption for joint pole use charges.
   (e)   Exemption for rental to nonprofit primary health care facilities.
   (f)   (Reserved)
   (g)   (Reserved)
   (h)   (Reserved)
   (i)   (Reserved)
   (j)   Exemption for hotels (See Sec.
12-444).
   (k)   (Reserved)
   (l)   (Reserved)
   (m)   (Reserved)
   (n)   use of apartment by employee
   (o)   Incarcerating prisoners
   (p)   Exemption for hospital, any licensed nursing care institution, or any
kidney dialysis facility.
   (q)   Exemption for patients receiving "personal care" or "directed care",
by any licensed assisted living facility.
   (r)   Income received from rental of “low - income unit” as established
under IRC Sec. 42.
   (s)   Exemption for leases between affiliated corporations; reciprocal
insurers.
446   (Reserved)
447   Rental, leasing, or licensing for use of real property: additional tax
upon transient lodging. (Reg. 447.1)
450   Rental, leasing or licensing for use of tangible personal property. (Reg.
450.1, Reg.
450.2, Reg.
450.3)
   (a)   Measure of tax; rate.
   (b)   Special provisions relating to long-term motor vehicle leases
   (c)   Exemptions
      (1)   rent for re-rent
      (2)   semi-permanently or permanently installed in another taxing city
(Reg.
450.4)
      (3)   motion picture films, etc. to amusement, etc. businesses
      (4)   (A)   prosthetics
         (B)   income-producing capital equipment
         (C)   mining and metallurgical supplies.
      (5)   to a qualifying hospital, health center or health care organization
      (6)   delivery, installation, repair, maintenance charges
      (7)   joint pole use charges
      (8)   (Reserved)
      (9)   aircraft acquired for use outside State
      (10)   alternative fuel vehicles
      (11)   leasing of solar energy devices
452   (Reserved)
455   Restaurants and bars.
   (a)   Measure of tax; rate. (Reg.
455.1)
   (b)   Delivery, set-up, and clean-up charges of off-premises restaurants
   (c)   Sales to qualifying hospitals, health centers or health care
organizations
   (d)   Sales to commercial airlines
   (e)   Sales to public education entities
   (f)   Accessories defined
460   Retail sales: measure of tax; burden of proof; exclusions.
   (a)   Measure of tax; rate (Reg.
460.2, Reg.
460.3, Reg.
460.6)
   (b)   Burden of proof
   (c)   Exclusions
      (1)   stocks, bonds, etc.
      (2)   lottery tickets
      (3)   bullion and monetized bullion (Reg.
460.5)
      (4)   taxable elsewhere in this Chapter (Reg.
460.1)
      (5)   professional services (Reg.
460.4)
   (d)   (Reserved)
   (e)   Seller’s business location takes precedence between cities
   (f)   Tax liability based upon seller’s location
   (g)   prepaid calling cards
465   Retail sales: exemptions.
   (a)   sales for resale (Reg.
465.3)
   (b)   out-of-Town sales or out-of-State sales
   (c)   delivery, installation, or other direct customer services
   (d)   repair labor (Reg.
465.1)
   (e)   sales of warranty contracts (Reg.
465.2)
   (f)   prosthetics
   (g)   income-producing capital equipment
   (h)   rental equipment and rental supplies
   (I)   mining and metallurgical supplies
   (j)   fuels subject to Arizona fuel use tax; natural gas for motor vehicles
   (k)   sales to a licensed construction contractor
   (l)   motor vehicle sales to nonresidents for use outside State
   (m)   component or ingredient parts sold to job printers, manufacturers, or
publishers
   (n)   sales to the Federal government:
      (1)   100% by assembler, manufacturer, modifier, repairer
      (2)   50% otherwise
   (o)   food to restaurants
   (p)   sales to qualifying hospitals, health centers or health care
organizations
   (q)   food for home consumption
   (r)   sales to farmers, ranchers, etc. of:
      (1)   seed and agricultural chemicals
      (2)   animal feed
      (3)   animals for slaughter
      (4)   animals for breeding and production
   (s)   groundwater measuring devices
   (t)   (Reserved)
   (u)   aircraft acquired for use outside the State (Reg.
465.4)
   (v)   sales of food products by producers
   (w)   (Reserved)
   (x)   (Reserved)
   (y)   (Reserved)
   (z)   (Reserved)
   (aa)   personal property used in remediation contracting
   (bb)   printed or electronic materials sold to libraries
   (cc)   food and accessories sold to commercial airlines
   (dd)   wireless telecommunications equipment; commissions
   (ee)   wireless telecommunications equipment; sale for resale
   (ff)   sales of alternative fuel; used oil fuel burners
   (gg)   food and accessories sold to educational facilities
   (hh)   personal hygiene items; hotels
   (ii)   fueling compressor equipment
   (jj)   food and accessories sold to nonprofit charitable organizations
   (kk)   sales of alternative fuel vehicles
   (ll)   solar energy devices
470   Telecommunication services. (Reg.
470.1)
   (a)   Measure of tax; rate
      (1)   telecommunication services definition
      (2)   gross income definition
   (b)   Resale telecommunication services
   (c)   Interstate transmissions
   (d)   (Reserved)
   (e)   (Reserved)
   (f)   prepaid calling cards
   (g)   Internet access services
475   Transporting for hire. (Reg.
475.1)
   (a)   Railroads
   (b)   Pipelines
   (c)   Aircraft (freight only)
   (d)   Motor vehicles, except:
      (1)   income subject to the State Ton-Mile Tax
      (2)   governmentally adopted urban mass transit
      (3)   (Reserved)
      (4)   (Reserved)
   (e)   (Reserved)
   (f)   Deductions or Exemptions:
      (1)   Arrangement of amusement as a service
      (2)   Income specifically included in other business activities
   (g)   Income from arrangement of transportation
480   Utility services.
   (a)   Measure of tax; rate.
      (1)   services to in-Town residents
      (2)   out-of-Town customers
   (b)   Sales of natural gas for generation of electricity deemed retail sales
   (c)   Resale utility services
   (d)   (Reserved)
   (e)   Sales to qualifying hospitals, health centers or health care
organizations
   (f)   Sales of natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas for motor vehicles
   (g)   Contributions received in aid of construction
   (h)   Sales of alternative fuel to used oil fuel burner
485   (Reserved)
ARTICLE V - ADMINISTRATION
500   Administration of this Chapter; rule making.
   (a)   Administration vested in the Tax Collector
   (b)   Tax Collector shall prescribe forms and procedures
   (c)   Town Council approves Regulations
   (d)   Taxpayer bill of rights
   (e)   Uniform guidelines
510   Divulging of information prohibited; exceptions.
   (a)   Divulging information prohibited except as provided here
   (b)   Town Council authorized examination by another U.S. jurisdiction
   (c)   Tax Collector can provide information to another Arizona privilege tax
administration
   (d)   Successors, receivers, trustees, etc.
   (e)   Town Attorney authorized to collection agencies
   (f)   Other Arizona Town when tax paid to wrong city
   (g)   Others involved in allocation of publishing tax
   (h)   By agreement approved by Town Council with another jurisdiction.
515   (Reserved)
516   (Reserved)
517   (Reserved)
520   Reporting and payment of tax.
   (a)   Returns (Reg.
520.1)
   (b)   Payment
   (c)   Requirement of security
   (d)   Method of reporting: "cash basis" or "accrual basis" (Reg.
520.2)
      (1)   all income to be reported by same method
      (2)   special considerations for construction contractors:
         (A)   prime contractors
         (B)   speculative builders
         (C)   other owner-builders
530   When tax due; when delinquent; time for making return; verification of
return; extensions.
   (a)   Report on same date as state sales tax
   (b)   (Reserved)
   (c)   (Reserved)
   (d)   (Reserved)
   (e)   Extensions
540   Interest and civil penalties.
   (a)   (Reserved)
   (b)   (Reserved)
   (c)   (Reserved)
   (d)   (Reserved)
   (e)   (Reserved)
   (f)   (Reserved)
   (g)   (Reserved)
   (h)   (Reserved)
   (I)   (Reserved)
541   (Reserved)
542   Prospective application of new law or interpretation or application of
law.
   (a)   Prohibition of retroactive application of tax
   (b)   New or additional category or type of business
      (1)   applies prospectively only
      (2)   no retroactive assessment based new interpretation or application
   (c)   Includes policies and procedures which differ from established
interpretations
   (d)   (Reserved)
545   Deficiencies; when inaccurate return is filed; when no return is filed;
estimates.
   (a)   Tax Collector may recompute or estimate
      (1)   (Reserved)
      (2)   (Reserved)
   (b)   Estimates; presumption
546   (Reserved)
550   Limitation periods.
   (a)   Deficiency assessments
   (b)   (Reserved)
   (c)   No limitation if no return filed, fraud, operating without license
   (d)   Special provisions relating to owner-builders
555   Tax Collector may examine books and other records; failure to provide
records.
   (a)   Tax Collector can examine books and records
   (b)   (Reserved)
   (c)   (Reserved)
   (d)   Tax Collector may use any generally accepted auditing standards or
procedures
   (e)   Failure to keep or provide adequate records allows Tax Collector can
estimate
   (f)   (Reserved)
556   (Reserved)
560   Erroneous payment of tax; credits and refunds; limitations.
   (a)   Tax Collector may authorize credits and refunds.
   (b)   (Reserved)
   (c)   Information to be included in credit or refund claim.
   (d)   (Reserved)
   (e)   (Reserved)
   (f)   Interest allowed on overpayment of tax per Section
540.
   (g)   Allowance/denial of credit is subject to appeal per Section
570.
   (h)   Claimants shall be subject to the Taxpayer Bill of Rights.
   (I)   (Reserved)
   (j)   Refunds made from Privilege Tax revenue accounts.
565   Payment of tax by incorrect taxpayer or to the incorrect Arizona city or
town.
   (a)   Transfer of tax paid by wrong taxpayer
   (b)   Assignment and waiver requirements
   (c)   Tax paid to wrong city will be remitted to correct city upon signed
assignment and waiver
   (d)   A.R.S. § 42-1452 will govern.
   (e)   "Other city" means State Department of Revenue if city in State
Collection Program.
567   (Reserved)
570   Administrative review; petition for hearing or for redetermination;
finality of order.
   (a)   Informal conference with auditor prior to assessment
   (b)   Administrative review
      (1)   filing a petition
      (2)   (Reserved)
      (3)   (Reserved)
      (4)   (Reserved)
      (5)   hearings
      (6)   (Reserved)
      (7)   (Reserved)
      (8)   (Reserved)
   (c)   (Reserved)
   (d)   (Reserved)
   (e)   Taxpayer bill of rights - applicability
571   Jeopardy assessments. (Reg.
571.1)
   (a)   If jeopardy assessment, Tax Collector will notify taxpayer at time of
assessment, and demand immediate payment
   (b)   Taxpayer must file request for administrative review together with
posting bond or collateral within 10 days
   (c)   (Reserved)
   (d)   (Reserved)
   (e)   (Reserved)
572   (Reserved)
575   Judicial review.
   (a)   Taxpayer’s appeal
   (b)   (Reserved)
   (c)   (Reserved)
   (d)   (Reserved)
   (e)   Burden of proof
   (f)   No estoppel
   (g)   Counterclaims
577   (Reserved)
578   (Reserved)
580   Criminal penalties
   (a)   It is unlawful to knowingly or willfully:
      (1)   fail/refuse to file a return
      (2)   fail/refuse to pay tax when due
      (3)   make false/fraudulent return
      (4)   make false/fraudulent statement to claim tax exemption
      (5)   fail/refuse to permit lawful examination of books or records
      (6)   fail/refuse to remit taxes collected from customer
      (7)   advertise that tax is not a consideration of price
      (8)   fail/refuse to obtain a Privilege License
      (9)   falsify/forge document to obtain an exemption
   (b)   Such acts constitute a Class One Misdemeanor
   (c)   In addition, knowingly swearing to a false statement subject to laws
of perjury
590   Civil actions.
   (a)   Liens
      (1)   Town can file a lien for tax, penalty or interest due
      (2)   Lien recording and filing
      (3)   Filing a lien does not preclude any other collection methods
      (4)   Liens can be released in whole or in part upon payment
   (b)   Actions to recover tax
595   Collection of taxes when there is succession in and/or cessation of
business.
   (a)   This is in addition to any other provisions in the Town Code
   (b)   Taxes due are lien on property
   (c)   Foreclosure or similar transfer of improved real property
      (1)   Special considerations related to the foreclosing creditor
      (2)   Use by the creditor reverts liability to sale of foreclosure bid
price
      (3)   Tax liability based on subsequent sale by the creditor
      (4)   Potential refund in the case of payment by the debtor
      (5)   Creditor must be licensed on date of tax liability
   (d)   Back taxes due are liability of:
      (1)   seller if received Certificate at time of sale
      (2)   buyer otherwise
596   (Reserved)
597   (Reserved)
ARTICLE VI - USE TAX
600   Use tax: definitions.
      Acquire (for Storage or Use)
      Retailer
      Storage (within the Town)
      Use (of tangible personal property)
601   (Reserved)
602   (Reserved)
610   Use tax: imposition of tax; presumption.
   (a)   Imposition of tax
   (b)   Measure of tax; rate
      (1)   cost of goods stored or used in the Town
      (2)   gross income by an out-of-Town retailer who collects use tax
      (3)   parts used in warranty contracts at cost
      (4)   cost of complementary items
      (5)   cost of employee meals
   (c)   Presumption
   (d)   Exclusions
      (1)   stocks, bonds, etc.
      (2)   lottery tickets
      (3)   bullion and monetized bullion
   (e)   (Reserved)
620   Use tax: liability for tax.
   (a)   Any person who uses or stores in the Town tangible personal property
acquired from a retailer
   (b)   Any retailer not located in the Town who is licensed to collect Use
Tax
   (c)   Any agent of a retailer not maintaining a place of business within the
Town who sells or leases tangible personal property within the Town
   (d)   Any purchaser or lessor of tangible personal property within the Town,
who claimed exemption from tax at time of purchase/lease from a retailer
   (e)   Any person using parts to fulfill a warranty contract
630   Use tax: recordkeeping requirements.
640   Use tax: credit for equivalent excise taxes paid to another jurisdiction
650   Use tax: exclusion when acquisition subject to Use Tax is taxed or
taxable elsewhere in this Chapter; limitation.
660   Use tax: exemptions.
   (a)   property brought into the Town by a nonresident for personal use
   (b)   property less than $1000 brought into the Town by a resident for
personal use
   (c)   delivery, installation, or other direct customer services
   (d)   repair services
   (e)   warranty service contracts
   (f)   prosthetics
   (g)   income-producing capital equipment
   (h)   rental equipment and rental supplies
   (I)   mining and metallurgical supplies
   (j)   fuels subject to Arizona fuel use tax
   (k)   building materials used by a construction contractor in construction
contracting
   (l)   sales of motor vehicles to nonresidents for use outside State
   (m)   component or ingredient parts purchased by job printers,
manufacturers, or publishers
   (n)   leases of motion picture film, etc. to an amusement business, etc. to
generate income
   (o)   food served to patrons by restaurants
   (p)   purchases/leases by qualifying hospitals, health centers or health
care organizations
   (q)   food for home consumption
   (r)   purchases by farmers, ranchers, etc. of:
      (1)   seed and agricultural chemicals
      (2)   animal feed
      (3)   animals for slaughter
      (4)   animals for breeding and production
   (s)   groundwater measuring devices
   (t)   (Reserved)
   (u)   aircraft acquired for use outside the State (Reg.
465.4)
   (v)   sales of food products by producers
   (w)   (Reserved)
   (x)   (Reserved)
   (y)   charitable donations
   (z)   (Reserved)
   (aa)   personal property used in remediation contracting
   (bb)   printed or electronic materials sold to libraries
   (cc)   food and accessories sold to commercial airlines
   (dd)   wireless telecommunications equipment; inducements
   (ee)   (Reserved)
   (ff)   sales of alternative fuel; used oil fuel burners
   (gg)   food and accessories sold to educational facilities
   (hh)   personal hygiene items; hotels
   (ii)   fueling compressor equipment
   (jj)   food and accessories sold to nonprofit charitable organizations
   (kk)   sales of alternative fuel vehicles
   (ll)   exemption for district and charter schools
REGULATIONS
   
100.1   Brokers.
   
100.2   Delivery, installation, or other direct customer services.
   
100.3   Retailers.
   
100.4   Sales to Native Americans.
   
100.5   Remediation contracting.
   
115.1   Computer hardware, software, and data services.
   
120.1   Food for home consumption: recordkeeping and reporting requirements.
   
200.1   When deposits are included in gross income.
   
250.1   Excess tax collected.
   
270.1   Proprietary activities of municipalities are not deemed activities of a
governmental entity.
   
270.2   Proprietary clubs.
   
300.1   Who must apply for a license.
   
300.2   (Reserved)
   
310.1   (Reserved)
   
310.2   (Reserved)
   
310.3   (Reserved)
   
350.1   Recordkeeping: income.
   
350.2   Recordkeeping: expenditures.
   
350.3   Recordkeeping: out-of-Town and out-of-State sales.
   
360.1   Proof of exemption: sale for resale; sale, rental, lease, or license of
rental equipment.
   
360.2   Proof of exemption: exemption certificate.
   
405.1   Local advertising examples.
   
405.2   Advertising activity within the Town.
   
407.1   (Reserved)
   
415.1   Distinction between the categories of construction contracting.
   
415.2   Distinction between construction contracting and certain related
activities.
   
415.3   Construction contracting; tax rate effective date.
   
416.1   Speculative builders: homeowner’s bona fide non-business sale of a
family residence.
   
416.2   Reconstruction contracting.
   
425.1   Distinction between job printing and certain related activities.
   
435.1   Distinction between publication of periodicals and certain related
activities.
   
435.2   Advertising income of publishers and distributors of newspapers and
other periodicals.
   
445.1   When the rental, leasing, and licensing of real property is exempt as
"casual."
   
445.3   Rental, leasing, and licensing of real property as lodging: room and
board; furnished lodging.
   
450.1   Distinction between rental, leasing, and licensing for use of tangible
personal property and certain related activities.
   
450.2   Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of tangible personal property:
membership fees; other charges.
   
450.3   Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of equipment with operator.
   
450.4   Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of tangible personal property:
semi-permanently or permanently installed tangible personal property.
   
450.5   Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of tangible personal property:
delivery, installation, repair, and maintenance charges.
   
455.1   Gratuities related to restaurant activity.
   
460.1   Distinction between retail sales and certain other transfers of
tangible personal property.
   
460.2   Retail sales: trading stamp company transactions.
   
460.3   Retail sales: membership fees of retailers.
   
460.4   Retail sales: professional services.
   
460.5   Retail sales: monetized bullion; numismatic value of coins.
   
460.6   Retail sales: consignment sales.
   
465.1   Retail sales: repair services.
   
465.2   Retail sales: warranty, maintenance, and similar service contracts.
   
465.3   Retail sales: sale of containers, paper products, and labels.
   
465.4   Retail sales: aircraft acquired for use outside the state.
   
470.1   Telecommunication services.
   
475.1   Distinction between transporting for hire and certain related
activities.
   
520.1   (Reserved)
   
520.2   Change of method of reporting.
   
555.1   (Reserved)
   
571.1   Collection of tax in jeopardy.
CHAPTER 12 - PRIVILEGE AND EXCISE TAXES
Article I - General Conditions and Definitions
Sec. 12-1. Words of tense, number and gender; code references.
   (a)   For the purposes of this Chapter, all words of tense, number, and
gender shall comply with A.R.S. § 1-214 as amended.
   (b)   For the purposes of this Chapter, all code references, unless
specified otherwise, shall:
      (1)   refer to this Town Code.
      (2)   be deemed to include all amendments to such code references.
Sec. 12-100. General definitions.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions apply:
   “Assembler” means a person who unites or combines products, wares, or
articles of manufacture so as to produce a change in form or substance of such
items without changing or altering component parts.
   “Broker” means any person engaged or continuing in business who acts for
another for a consideration in the conduct of a business activity taxable under
this Chapter, and who receives for his principal all or part of the gross
income from the taxable activity.
   “Business” means all activities or acts, personal or corporate, engaged in
and caused to be engaged in with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage,
either direct or indirect, but not casual activities or sales.
   “Business Day” means any day of the week when the Tax Collector’s office is
open for the public to conduct the Tax Collector’s business.
   “Casual Activity or Sale” means a transaction of an isolated nature made by
a person who neither represents himself to be nor is engaged in a business
subject to a tax imposed by this Chapter. However, no sale, rental, license for
use, or lease transaction concerning real property nor any activity entered
into by a business taxable by this Chapter shall be treated, or be exempt, as
casual. This definition shall include sales of used capital assets, provided
that the volume and frequency of such sales do not indicate that the seller
regularly engages in selling such property.
   “Combined Taxes” means the sum of all applicable Arizona Transaction
Privilege and Use Taxes; all applicable transportation taxes imposed upon gross
income by this County as authorized by Article III, Chapter 6, Title 42,
Arizona Revised Statutes; and all applicable taxes imposed by this Chapter.
   “Commercial Property” is any real property, or portion of such property,
used for any purpose other than lodging or lodging space, including structures
built for lodging but used otherwise, such as model homes, apartments used as
offices, etc.
   “Communications Channel” means any line, wire, cable, microwave, radio
signal, light beam, telephone, telegraph, or any other electromagnetic means of
moving a message.
   “Construction Contracting” refers to the activity of a construction
contractor.
   “Construction Contractor” means a person who undertakes to or offers to
undertake to, or purports to have the capacity to undertake to, or submits a
bid to, or does himself or by or through others, construct, alter, repair, add
to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck, or demolish any building, highway,
road, railroad, excavation, or other structure, project, development, or
improvement to real property, or to do any part thereof. “Construction
contractor” includes subcontractors, specialty contractors, prime contractors,
and any person receiving consideration for the general supervision and/or
coordination of such a construction project except for remediation contracting.
This definition shall govern without regard to whether or not the construction
contractor is acting in fulfillment of a contract.
   “Delivery (of Notice) by the Tax Collector” means “receipt (of notice) by
the taxpayer”.
   “Delivery, Installation, or Other Direct Customer Services” means services
or labor, excluding repair labor, provided by a taxpayer to or for his customer
at the time of transfer of tangible personal property; provided further that
the charge for such labor or service is separately billed to the customer and
maintained separately in the taxpayer’s books and records.
   “Engaging”, when used with reference to engaging or continuing in business,
includes the exercise of corporate or franchise powers.
   “Equivalent Excise Tax” means either:
      (1)   a Privilege or Use Tax levied by another Arizona municipality upon
the transaction in question, and paid either to such Arizona municipality
directly or to the vendor; or
      (2)   an excise tax levied by a political subdivision of a state other
than Arizona upon the transaction in question, and paid either to such
jurisdiction directly or to the vendor; or
      (3)   an excise tax levied by a Native American Government organized
under the laws of the federal government upon the transaction in question, and
paid either to such jurisdiction directly or to the vendor.
   “Federal Government” means the United States Government, its departments and
agencies; but not including national banks or federally chartered or insured
banks, savings and loan institutions, or credit unions.
   “Food” means any items intended for human consumption as defined by rules
and regulations adopted by the Department of Revenue, State of Arizona,
pursuant to A.R.S. § 42-5106. Under no circumstances shall “food” include
alcoholic beverages or tobacco, or food items purchased for use in conversion
to any form of alcohol by distillation, fermentation, brewing, or other
process. Under no circumstances shall “food” include an edible product,
beverage, or ingredient infused, mixed, or in any way combined with medical
marijuana or an active ingredient of medical marijuana.
   “Hotel” means any public or private hotel, inn, hostelry, tourist home,
house, motel, rooming house, apartment house, trailer, or other lodging place
within the Town offering lodging, wherein the owner thereof, for compensation,
furnishes lodging to any transient, except foster homes, rest homes, sheltered
care homes, nursing homes, or primary health care facilities.
   “Jet Fuel” means jet fuel as defined in A.R.S. § 42-5351.
   “Job Printing” means the activity of copying or reproducing an article by
any means, process, or method.
   “Job printing” includes engraving of printing plates, embossing, copying,
micrographics, and photo reproduction.
   “Lessee” includes the equivalent person in a rental or licensing agreement
for all purposes of this Chapter. “Lessor” includes the equivalent person in a
rental or licensing agreement for all purposes of this Chapter.
   “Licensing (for Use)” means any agreement between the user (“licensee”) and
the owner or the owner’s agent (“licensor”) for the use of the licensor’s
property whereby the licensor receives consideration, where such agreement does
not qualify as a “sale” or “lease” or “rental” agreement.
   “Lodging (Lodging Space)” means any room or apartment in a hotel or any
other provider of rooms, trailer spaces, or other residential dwelling spaces;
or the furnishings or services and accommodations accompanying the use and
possession of said dwelling space, including storage or parking space for the
property of said tenant.
   “Manufactured Buildings” means a manufactured home, mobile home or factory
built building, as defined in A.R.S. § 41-2142.
   “Manufacturer” means a person engaged or continuing in the business of
fabricating, producing, or manufacturing products, wares, or articles for use
from other forms of tangible personal property, imparting to such new forms,
qualities, properties, and combinations.
   “Medical Marijuana” means “marijuana” used for a “medical use” as those
terms as defined in A.R.S. § 36-2801.
   “Mining and Metallurgical Supplies” means all tangible personal property
acquired by persons engaged in activities defined in Section
12-432 for such use. This definition shall not include:
      (1)   janitorial equipment and supplies.
      (2)   office equipment, office furniture, and office supplies.
      (3)   motor vehicles licensed for use upon the highways of the State.
   “Modifier” means a person who reworks, changes, or adds to products, wares,
or articles of manufacture.
   “Nonprofit Entity” means any entity organized and operated exclusively for
charitable purposes, or operated by the Federal Government, the State, or any
political subdivision of the State.
   “Occupancy (of Real Property)” means any occupancy or use, or any right to
occupy or use, real property including any improvements, rights, or interests
in such property.
   “Out-of-Town Sale” means the sale of tangible personal property and job
printing if all of the following occur:
      (1)   transference of title and possession occur without the Town; and
      (2)   the stock from which such personal property was taken was not
within the corporate limits of the Town; and
      (3)   the order is received at a permanent business location of the
seller located outside the Town; which location is used for the substantial and
regular conduct of such business sales activity. In no event shall the place of
business of the buyer be determinative of the situs of the receipt of the
order.
      For the purpose of this definition it does not matter that all other
indicia of business occur within the Town, including, but not limited to,
accounting, invoicing, payments, centralized purchasing, and supply to out-of-
Town storehouses and out-of-Town retail branch outlets from a primary
storehouse within the Town.
   “Out-of-State Sale” means the sale of tangible personal property and job
printing if all of the following occur:
      (1)   The order is placed from without the State of Arizona; and
            (2)   the property is delivered to the buyer at a location outside
the State; and
      (3)   the property is purchased for use outside the State.
   “Owner-Builder” means an owner or lessor of real property who, by himself or
by or through others, constructs or has constructed or reconstructs or has
reconstructed any improvement to real property.
   “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, broker, the Federal
Government, this State, or any political subdivision or agency of this State.
For the purposes of this Chapter, a person shall be considered a distinct and
separate person from any general or limited partnership or joint venture or
other association with which such person is affiliated. A subsidiary
corporation shall be considered a separate person from its parent corporation
for purposes of taxation of transactions with its parent corporation.
   “Prosthetic” means any of the following tangible personal property if such
items are prescribed or recommended by a licensed podiatrist, chiropractor,
dentist, physician or surgeon, naturopath, optometrist, osteopathic physician
or surgeon, psychologist, hearing aid dispenser, physician assistant, nurse
practitioner or veterinarian:
      (1)   any man-made device for support or replacement of a part of the
body, or to increase acuity of one of the senses. Such items include:
prescription eyeglasses; contact lenses; hearing aids; artificial limbs or
teeth; neck, back, arm, leg, or similar braces.
      (2)   insulin, insulin syringes, and glucose test strips sold with or
without a prescription.
      (3)   hospital beds, crutches, wheelchairs, similar home health aids, or
corrective shoes.
      (4)   drugs or medicine, including oxygen.
      (5)   equipment used to generate, monitor, or provide health support
systems, such as respiratory equipment, oxygen concentrator, dialysis machine.
      (6)   durable medical equipment which has a federal health care financing
administration common procedure code, is designated reimbursable by Medicare,
can withstand repeated use, is primarily and customarily used to serve a
medical purpose, is generally not useful to a person in the absence of illness
or injury and is appropriate for use in the home.
      (7)   under no circumstances shall “prosthetic” include medical marijuana
regardless of whether it is sold or dispersed pursuant to a prescription,
recommendation, or written certification by any authorized person.
   “Qualifying Community Health Center”
      (1)   means an entity that is recognized as nonprofit under Section 501
(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code, that is a community-based,
primary care clinic that has a community-based board of directors and that is
either:
         (a)   the sole provider of primary care in the community.
         (b)   a nonhospital affiliated clinic that is located in a federally
designated medically underserved area in this State.
      (2)   includes clinics that are being constructed as qualifying community
health centers.
   “Qualifying Health Care Organization” means an entity that is recognized as
nonprofit under Section 501(c) of the United States Internal Revenue Code and
that uses, saves or invests at least eighty percent (80%) of all monies that it
receives from all sources each year only for health and medical related
educational and charitable services, as documented by annual financial audits
prepared by an independent certified public accountant, performed according to
generally accepted accounting standards and filed annually with the Arizona
Department of Revenue. Monies that are used, saved or invested to lease,
purchase or construct a facility for health and medical related education and
charitable services are included in the eighty percent (80%) requirement.
   “Qualifying Hospital” means any of the following:
      (1)   a licensed hospital which is organized and operated exclusively for
charitable purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit
of any private shareholder or individual.
      (2)   a licensed nursing care institution or a licensed residential care
institution or a residential care facility operated in conjunction with a
licensed nursing care institution or a licensed kidney dialysis center, which
provides medical services, nursing services or health related services and is
not used or held for profit.
      (3)   a hospital, nursing care institution or residential care
institution which is operated by the federal government, this State or a
political subdivision of this State.
      (4)   a facility that is under construction and that on completion will
be a facility under subdivision (1), (2) or (3) of this paragraph.
   “Receipt (of Notice) by the Taxpayer” means the earlier of actual receipt or
the first attempted delivery by certified United States mail to the taxpayer’s
address of record with the Tax Collector.
   “Remediation” means those actions that are reasonable, necessary, cost-
effective and technically feasible in the event of the release or threat of
release of hazardous substances into the environment such that the waters of
the State are or may be affected, such actions as may be necessary to monitor,
assess and evaluate such release or threat of release, actions of remediation,
removal or disposal of hazardous substances or taking such other actions as may
be necessary to prevent, minimize or mitigate damage to the public health or
welfare or to the waters of the State which may otherwise result from a release
or threat of release of a hazardous substance that will or may affect the
waters of the State. Remediation activities include the use of biostimulation
with indigenous microbes and bioaugmentation using microbes that are
nonpathogenic, nonopportunistic and that are naturally occurring. Remediation
activities may include community information and participation costs and
providing an alternative drinking water supply.
   “Rental Equipment” means tangible personal property sold, rented, leased, or
licensed to customers to the extent that the item is actually used by the
customer for rental, lease, or license to others; provided that:
      (1)   the vendee is regularly engaged in the business of renting,
leasing, or licensing such property for a consideration; and
      (2)   the item so claimed as “rental equipment” is not used by the person
claiming the exemption for any purpose other than rental, lease, or license for
compensation, to an extent greater than fifteen percent (15%) of its actual
use.
   “Rental Supply” means an expendable or nonexpendable repair or replacement
part sold to become part of “rental equipment”, provided that:
      (1)   the documentation relating to each purchased item so claimed
specifically itemizes to the vendor the actual item of “rental equipment” to
which the purchased item is intended to be attached as a repair or replacement
part; and
      (2)   the vendee is regularly engaged in the business of renting,
leasing, or licensing such property for a consideration; and
      (3)   the item so claimed as “rental equipment” is not used by the person
claiming the exemption for any purpose other than rental, lease, or license for
compensation, to an extent greater than fifteen percent (15%) of its actual
use.
   “Repairer” means a person who restores or renews products, wares, or
articles of manufacture.
   “Resides within the Town” means in cases other than individuals, whose legal
addresses are determinative of residence, the engaging, continuing, or
conducting of regular business activity within the Town.
   “Restaurant” means any business activity where articles of food, drink, or
condiment are customarily prepared or served to patrons for consumption on or
off the premises, also including bars, cocktail lounges, the dining rooms of
hotels, and all caterers. For the purposes of this Chapter, a “fast food”
business, which includes street vendors and mobile vendors selling in public
areas or at entertainment or sports or similar events, who prepares or sells
food or drink for consumption on or off the premises is considered a
“restaurant”, and not a “retailer”.
   “Retail Sale (Sale at Retail)” means the sale of tangible personal property,
except the sale of tangible personal property to a person regularly engaged in
the business of selling such property.
   “Retailer” means any person engaged or continuing in the business of sales
of tangible personal property at retail.
   “Sale” means any transfer of title or possession, or both, exchange, barter,
conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, including
consignment transactions and auctions, of property for a consideration. “Sale”
includes any transaction whereby the possession of such property is transferred
but the seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price.
“Sale” also includes the fabrication of tangible personal property for
consumers who, in whole or in part, furnish either directly or indirectly the
materials used in such fabrication work.
   “Solar Daylighting” means a device that is specifically designed to capture
and redirect the visible portion of the solar beam, while controlling the
infrared portion, for use in illuminating interior business spaces in lieu of
artificial lighting.
   “Solar Energy Device” means a system or series of mechanisms designed
primarily to provide heating, to provide cooling, to produce electrical power,
to produce mechanical power, to provide solar daylighting or to provide any
combination of the foregoing by means of collecting and transferring solar
generated energy into such uses either by active or passive means, including
wind generator systems that produce electricity. Solar energy systems may also
have the capability of storing solar energy for future use. Passive systems
shall clearly be designed as a solar energy device, such as a trombe wall, and
not merely as a part of a normal structure, such as a window.
   “Speculative Builder” means either:
      (1)   an owner-builder who sells or contracts to sell, at anytime,
improved real property (as provided in Section
12-416) consisting of:
         A)   custom, model, or inventory homes, regardless of the stage of
completion of such homes; or
         B)   improved residential or commercial lots without a structure; or
      (2)   an owner-builder who sells or contracts to sell improved real
property, other than improved real property specified in subsection (1) above:
         A)   prior to completion; or
         B)   before the expiration of twenty-four (24) months after the
improvements of the real property sold are substantially complete.
   “Substantially Complete” means the construction contracting or
reconstruction contracting:
      (1)   has passed final inspection or its equivalent; or
      (2)   certificate of occupancy or its equivalent has been issued; or
      (3)   is ready for immediate occupancy or use.
   “Supplier” means any person who rents, leases, licenses, or makes sales of
tangible personal property within the Town, either directly to the consumer or
customer or to wholesalers, jobbers, fabricators, manufacturers, modifiers,
assemblers, repairers, or those engaged in the business of providing services
which involve the use, sale, rental, lease, or license of tangible personal
property.
   “Tax Collector” means the Town Council or his designee or agent for all
purposes under this Chapter.
   “Taxpayer” means any person liable for any tax under this Chapter.
   “Telecommunication Service” means any service or activity connected with the
transmission or relay of sound, visual image, data, information, images, or
material over a communications channel or any combination of communications
channels.
   “Transient” means any person who either at the person’s own expense or at
the expense of another obtains lodging space or the use of lodging space on a
daily or weekly basis, or on any other basis for less than thirty (30)
consecutive days.
   “Utility Service” means the producing, providing, or furnishing of
electricity, electric lights, current, power, gas (natural or artificial), or
water to consumers or ratepayers.
(Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed 9-12-2011)
Sec. 12-110. Definitions: Income-producing capital equipment.
   (a)   The following tangible personal property, other than items excluded in
subsection (d) below, shall be deemed “income-producing capital equipment” for
the purposes of this Chapter:
      (1)   machinery or equipment used directly in manufacturing, processing,
fabricating, job printing, refining or metallurgical operations. The terms
“manufacturing”, “processing”, “fabricating”, “job printing”, “refining”, and
“metallurgical” as used in this paragraph refer to and include those operations
commonly understood within their ordinary meaning. “Metallurgical operations”
includes leaching, milling, precipitating, smelting and refining.
      (2)   mining machinery, or equipment, used directly in the process of
extracting ores or minerals from the earth for commercial purposes, including
equipment required to prepare the materials for extraction and handling,
loading or transporting such extracted material to the surface. “Mining”
includes underground, surface and open pit operations for extracting ores and
minerals.
      (3)   tangible personal property, sold to persons engaged in business
classified under the telecommunications classification, consisting of central
office switching equipment; switchboards; private branch exchange equipment;
microwave radio equipment, and carrier equipment including optical fiber,
coaxial cable, and other transmission media which are components of carrier
systems.
      (4)   machinery, equipment, or transmission lines used directly in
producing or transmitting electrical power, but not including distribution.
Transformers and control equipment used at transmission substation sites
constitute equipment used in producing or transmitting electrical power.
      (5)   pipes or valves four inches (4") in diameter or larger and related
equipment, used to transport oil, natural gas, artificial gas, water, or coal
slurry. For the purpose of this section, related equipment includes: compressor
units, regulators, machinery and equipment, fittings, seals and any other parts
that are used in operating the pipes or valves.
      (6)   aircraft, navigational and communication instruments, and other
accessories and related equipment sold to:
         (A)   a person holding a federal certificate of public convenience and
necessity or foreign air carrier permit for air transportation for use as or in
conjunction with or becoming a part of aircraft to be used to transport
persons, property or United States mail in intrastate, interstate or foreign
commerce.
         (B)   any foreign government for use by such government outside of
this State.
         (C)   persons who are not residents of this State and who will not use
such property in this State other than in removing such property from this
State. This subdivision also applies to corporations that are not incorporated
in this State, regardless of maintaining a place of business in this State, if
the principal corporate office is located outside this State and the property
will not be used in this State other than in removing the property from this
State.
      (7)   machinery, tools, equipment and related supplies used or consumed
directly in repairing, remodeling or maintaining aircraft, aircraft engines or
aircraft component parts by or on behalf of a certificated or licensed carrier
of persons or property.
      (8)   railroad rolling stock, rails, ties and signal control equipment
used directly to transport persons or property.
      (9)   machinery or equipment used directly to drill for oil or gas or
used directly in the process of extracting oil or gas from the earth for
commercial purposes.
      (10)   buses or other urban mass transit vehicles which are used directly
to transport persons or property for hire or pursuant to a governmentally
adopted and controlled urban mass transportation program and which are sold to
bus companies holding a federal certificate of convenience and necessity or
operated by a city, town or other governmental entity or by any person
contracting with such governmental entity as part of a governmentally adopted
and controlled program to provide urban mass transportation.
      (11)   metering, monitoring, receiving, and transmitting equipment
acquired by persons engaged in the business of providing utility services or
telecommunications services; but only to the extent that such equipment is to
be used by the customers of such persons and such persons separately charge or
bill their customers for use of such equipment.
      (12)   groundwater measuring devices required under A.R.S. § 45-604.
      (13)   machinery or equipment used in research and development. In this
paragraph, “research and development” means basic and applied research in the
sciences and engineering, and designing, developing or testing prototypes,
processes or new products, including research and development of computer
software that is embedded in or an integral part of the prototype or new
product or that is required for machinery or equipment otherwise exempt under
this Section to function effectively. Research and development do not include
manufacturing quality control, routine consumer product testing, market
research, sales promotion, sales service, research in social sciences or
psychology, computer software research that is not included in the definition
of research and development, or other nontechnological activities or technical
services.
      (14)   (Reserved)
      (15)   included in income producing capital equipment are liquid, solid
or gaseous chemicals used in manufacturing, processing, fabricating, mining,
refining, metallurgical operations, research and development or job printing,
if using or consuming the chemicals, alone or as part of an integrated system
of chemicals, involving direct contact with the materials from which the
product is produced for the purpose of causing or permitting a chemical or
physical change to occur in the materials as part of the production process.
This subsection does not include chemicals that are used or consumed in
activities such as packaging, storage or transportation but does not affect any
deduction for such chemicals that is otherwise provided by this Code. Chemicals
meeting the requirements of this subsection are deemed not to be expendable
under subsection (d) of this Section.
      (16)   cleanrooms that are used for manufacturing, processing,
fabrication or research and development, as defined in paragraph (13) of this
subsection, of semiconductor products. For purposes of this paragraph,
“cleanroom” means all property that comprises or creates an environment where
humidity, temperature, particulate matter and contamination are precisely
controlled within specified parameters, without regard to whether the property
is actually contained within that environment or whether any of the property is
affixed to or incorporated into real property. Cleanroom:
         (A)   includes the integrated systems, fixtures, piping, movable
partitions, lighting and all property that is necessary or adapted to reduce
contamination or to control airflow, temperature, humidity, chemical purity or
other environmental conditions or manufacturing tolerances, as well as the
production machinery and equipment operating in conjunction with the cleanroom
environment.
         (B)   does not include the building or other permanent, nonremovable
component of the building that houses the cleanroom environment.
      (17)   machinery and equipment that are purchased by or on behalf of the
owners of a soundstage complex and primarily used for motion picture,
multimedia or interactive video production in the complex. This paragraph
applies only if the initial construction of the soundstage complex begins after
June 30, 1996 and before January 1, 2002 and the machinery and equipment are
purchased before the expiration of five years after the start of initial
construction. For purposes of this paragraph:
         (A)   “motion picture, multimedia or interactive video production”
includes products for theatrical and television release, educational
presentations, electronic retailing, documentaries, music videos, industrial
films, cd-rom, video game production, commercial advertising and television
episode production and other genres that are introduced through developing
technology.
         (B)   “soundstage complex” means a facility of multiple stages
including production offices, construction shops and related areas, prop and
costume shops, storage areas, parking for production vehicles and areas that
are leased to businesses that complement the production needs and orientation
of the overall facility.
      (18)   tangible personal property that is used by either of the following
to receive, store, convert, produce, generate, decode, encode, control or
transmit telecommunications information:
         (A)   any direct broadcast satellite television or data transmission
service that operates pursuant to 47 Code of Federal Regulations parts 25 and
100.
         (B)   any satellite television or data transmission facility, if both
of the following conditions are met:
            (I)   over two-thirds of the transmissions, measured in megabytes,
transmitted by the facility during the test period were transmitted to or on
behalf of one or more direct broadcast satellite television or data
transmission services that operate pursuant to 47 Code of Federal Regulations
parts 25 and 100.
            (ii)   over two-thirds of the transmissions, measured in megabytes,
transmitted by or on behalf of those direct broadcast television or data
transmission services during the test period were transmitted by the facility
to or on behalf of those services.
         For purposes of subdivision (B) of this paragraph, “test period” means
the three hundred sixty-five day period beginning on the later of the date on
which the tangible personal property is purchased or the date on which the
direct broadcast satellite television or data transmission service first
transmits information to its customers.
      (19)   machinery and equipment that is used directly in the feeding of
poultry, the environmental control of housing for poultry, the movement of eggs
within a production and packaging facility or the sorting or cooling of eggs.
This exemption does not apply to vehicles used for transporting eggs.
      (20)   machinery or equipment, including related structural components,
that is employed in connection with manufacturing, processing, fabricating, job
printing, refining, mining, natural gas pipelines, metallurgical operations,
telecommunications, producing or transmitting electricity or research and
development that is used directly to meet or exceed rules or regulations
adopted by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, the United States
Environmental Protection Agency, the United States Nuclear Regulatory
Commission, the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality or a political
subdivision of this state to prevent, monitor, control or reduce land, water or
air pollution.
      (21)   machinery or equipment that enables a television station to
originate and broadcast or to receive and broadcast digital television signals
and that was purchased to facilitate compliance with the Telecommunications Act
of 1996 (P. L. 104-104; 110 Stat. 56; 47 United States Code Section 336) and
the Federal Communications Commission Order issued April 21, 1997, 47 Code of
Federal Regulations Part 73. This paragraph does not exempt any of the
following:
         (A)   repair or replacement parts purchased for the machinery or
equipment described in this paragraph.
         (B)   machinery or equipment purchased to replace machinery or
equipment for which an exemption was previously claimed and taken under this
paragraph.
         (C)   any machinery or equipment purchased after the television
station has ceased analog broadcasting, or purchased after November 1, 2009,
whichever occurs first.
   (b)   The term “income-producing capital equipment” shall further include
ancillary machinery and equipment used for the treatment of waste products
created by the business activities which are allowed to purchase “income-
producing capital equipment” defined in subsection (a) above.
   (c)   The term “income-producing capital equipment” shall further include
repair and replacement parts, other than the items in subsection (d) below,
where the property is acquired to become an integral part of another item
itemized in subsections (a) or (b) above.
   (d)   The tangible personal property defined as income-producing capital
equipment in this Section shall not include:
      (1)   expendable materials. For purposes of this paragraph, expendable
materials do not include any of the categories of tangible personal property
specified in subsections (a), (b) or (c) of this Section regardless of the cost
or useful life of that property.
      (2)   janitorial equipment and hand tools.
      (3)   office equipment, furniture, and supplies.
      (4)   tangible personal property used in selling or distributing
activities.
      (5)   motor vehicles required to be licensed by the State of Arizona,
except buses or other urban mass transit vehicles specifically exempted
pursuant to subsection (a)(10) above without regard to the use of such motor
vehicles.
      (6)   shops, buildings, docks, depots, and all other materials of
whatever kind or character not specifically included as exempt.
      (7)   motors and pumps used in drip irrigation systems.
   (e)   For the purposes of this Section:
      (1)   “aircraft” includes:
         (A)   an airplane flight simulator that is approved by the Federal
Aviation Administration for use as a Phase II or higher flight simulator under
Appendix H, 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121.
         (B)   tangible personal property that is permanently affixed or
attached as a component part of an aircraft that is owned or operated by a
certificated or licensed carrier of persons or property.
      (2)   “other accessories and related equipment” includes aircraft
accessories and equipment such as ground service equipment that physically
contact aircraft at some point during the overall carrier operation.
Sec. 12-115. Definitions: computer software; custom computer programming.
   (a)   “Computer Software” means any computer program, part of such a
program, or any sequence of instructions for automatic data processing
equipment. Computer software which is not “custom computer programming” is
deemed to be tangible personal property for the purposes of this Chapter,
regardless of the method by which title, possession, or right to use the
software is transferred to the user.
   (b)   “Custom Computer Programming” means any computer software which is
written or prepared exclusively for a customer and includes those services
represented by separately stated charges for the modification of existing
prewritten programs when the modifications are written or prepared exclusively
for a customer.
      (1)   The term does not include a prewritten program which is held or
existing for general or repeated sale, lease, or license, even if the program
was initially developed on a custom basis for in-house, or for a single
customer’s, use.
      (2)   Modification to an existing prewritten program to meet the
customer’s needs is custom computer programming only to the extent of the
modification, and only to the extent that the actual amount charged for the
modification is separately stated on invoices, statements, and other billing
documents supplied to the customer.
Sec. 12-120. Definitions: food for home consumption.
   (a)   For the purposes of this Section only, the following definitions shall
be applicable:
      (1)   “Eligible grocery business” means an establishment whose sales of
food are such that it is eligible to participate in the food stamp program
established by the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (P.L. 95-113; 91 Stat. 958.7 U.S.C.
Section 2011 et seq.), according to regulations in effect on January 1, 1979.
An establishment is deemed eligible to participate in the Food Stamp Program if
it is authorized to participate in the program by the United States Department
of Agriculture Food and Nutrition Service Field Office on the effective date of
this Section, or if, prior to a reporting period for which the return is filed,
such retailer proves to the satisfaction of the Tax Collector that the
establishment, based on the nature of the retailer’s food sales, could be
eligible to participate in the food stamp program established by the Food Stamp
Act of 1977 according to regulations in effect on January 1, 1979.
      (2)   “Facilities for the consumption of food” means tables, chairs,
benches, booths, stools, counters, and similar conveniences, trays, glasses,
dishes, or other tableware and parking areas for the convenience of in-car
consumption of food in or on the premises on which the retailer conducts
business.
      (3)   “Food for consumption on the premises” means any of the following:
         (A)   “Hot prepared food” as defined below.
         (B)   Hot or cold sandwiches.
         (C)   Food served by an attendant to be eaten at tables, chairs,
benches, booths, stools, counters, and similar conveniences and within parking
areas for the convenience of in-car consumption of food.
         (D)   Food served with trays, glasses, dishes, or other tableware.
         (E)   Beverages sold in cups, glasses, or open containers.
         (F)   Food sold by caterers.
         (G)   Food sold within the premises of theatres, movies, operas, shows
of any type or nature, exhibitions, concerts, carnivals, circuses, amusement
parks, fairs, races, contests, games, athletic events, rodeos, billiard and
pool parlors, bowling alleys, public dances, dance halls, boxing, wrestling and
other matches, and any business which charges admission, entrance, or cover
fees for exhibition, amusement, entertainment, or instruction.
         (H)   Any items contained in subsections (a)(3)(A) through (G) above
even though they are sold on a “take-out” or “to go” basis, and whether or not
the item is packaged, wrapped, or is actually taken from the premises.
      (4)   “Hot prepared food” means those products, items, or ingredients of
food which are prepared and intended for consumption in a heated condition.
“Hot prepared food” includes a combination of hot and cold food items or
ingredients if a single price has been established.
      (5)   “Premises” means the total space and facilities in or on which a
vendor conducts business and which are owned or controlled, in whole or in
part, by a vendor or which are made available for the use of customers of the
vendor or group of vendors, including any building or part of a building,
parking lot, or grounds.
   (b)   “Food for home consumption” means all food, except food for
consumption on the premises, if sold by any of the following:
      (1)   An eligible grocery business.
      (2)   A person who conducts a business whose primary business is not the
sale of food but who sells food which is displayed, packaged, and sold in a
similar manner as an eligible grocery business.
      (3)   A person who sells food and does not provide or make available any
facilities for the consumption of food on the premises.
      (4)   A person who conducts a delicatessen business either from a counter
which is separate from the place and cash register where taxable sales are made
or from a counter which has two cash registers and which are used to record
taxable and tax exempt sales, or a retailer who conducts a delicatessen
business who uses a cash register which has at least two tax computing keys
which are used to record taxable and tax exempt sales.
      (5)   (Reserved)
      (6)   Vending machines and other types of automatic retailers.
      (7)   A person’s sales of food, drink and condiment for consumption
within the premises of any prison, jail or other institution under the
jurisdiction of the State Department of Corrections, the Department of Public
Safety, the Department of Juvenile Corrections or a county sheriff.
Article II - Determination of Gross Income
Sec. 12-200. Determination of gross income: in general.
   (a)   Gross income includes:
      (1)   the value proceeding or accruing from the sale of property, the
providing of service, or both.
      (2)   the total amount of the sale, lease, license for use, or rental
price at the time of such sale, rental, lease, or license.
      (3)   all receipts, cash, credits, barter, exchange, reduction of or
forgiveness of indebtedness, and property of every kind or nature derived from
a sale, lease, license for use, rental, or other taxable activity.
      (4)   all other receipts whether payment is advanced prior to,
contemporaneous with, or deferred in whole or in part subsequent to the
activity or transaction.
   (b)   Barter, exchange, trade-outs, or similar transactions are includable
in gross income at the fair market value of the service rendered or property
transferred, whichever is higher, as they represent consideration given for
consideration received.
   (c)   No deduction or exclusion is allowed from gross income on account of
the cost of the property sold, the time value of money, expense of any kind or
nature, losses, materials used, labor or service performed, interest paid, or
credits granted.
Sec. 12-210. Determination of gross income: transactions between affiliated
companies or persons.
   In transactions between affiliated companies or persons, or in other
circumstances where the relationship between the parties is such that the gross
income from the transaction is not indicative of the market value of the
subject matter of the transaction, the Tax Collector shall determine the
“market value” upon which the Town Privilege and Use Taxes shall be levied.
“Market value” shall correspond as nearly as possible to the gross income from
similar transactions of like quality or character by other taxpayers where no
common interest exists between the parties, but otherwise under similar
circumstances and conditions.
Sec. 12-220. Determination of gross income: artificially contrived
transactions.
   The Tax Collector may examine any transaction, reported or unreported, if,
in his opinion, there has been or may be an evasion of the taxes imposed by
this Chapter and to estimate the amount subject to tax in cases where such
evasion has occurred. The Tax Collector shall disregard any transaction which
has been undertaken in an artificial manner in order to evade the taxes imposed
by this Chapter.
Sec. 12-230. Determination of gross income based upon method of reporting.
   The method of reporting chosen by a taxpayer, as provided in Section
12-520, necessitates the following adjustments to gross income for all purposes
under this Chapter:
   (a)   Cash basis - When a person elects to report and pay taxes on a cash
basis, gross income for the reporting period shall include:
      (1)   the total amounts received on “paid in full” transactions, against
which are allowed all applicable deductions and exclusions; and
      (2)   all amounts received on accounts receivable, conditional sales
contract, or other similar transactions, against which no deductions and no
exclusions from gross income are allowed. Interest on finance contracts may be
deducted if separately itemized on all books and records.
   (b)   Accrual basis - When a person elects to report and pay taxes on an
accrual basis, gross income shall include all gross income for the applicable
period regardless of whether receipts are for cash, credit, conditional, or
partially deferred transactions, and regardless of whether or not any security
document or instrument is sold, assigned, or otherwise transferred to another.
Persons reporting on the accrual basis may deduct bad debts, provided that:
      (1)   the amount deducted for the bad debt must be deducted from gross
income of the month in which the actual charge-off was made, and only to the
extent that such amount was actually charged-off, and also only to the extent
that such amount is or was included as taxable gross income; and
      (2)   if any amount is subsequently collected on such charged-off
account, it shall be included in gross income for the month in which it was
collected, without deduction for expense of collection.
Sec. 12-240. Exclusion of cash discounts, returns, refunds, trade-in values,
vendor-issued coupons, and rebates from gross income.
   (a)   The following items are not included in gross income:
      (1)   Cash discounts allowed by the vendor for timely payment, but only
discounts allowed against taxable gross income.
      (2)   The value of property returned by customers to the extent of the
amount actually refunded either in cash or by credit and the amount refunded
was included in taxable gross income.
      (3)   The trade-in allowance for tangible personal property accepted as
payment, not to exceed the full sales price for any tangible personal property
sold, when the full sales price is included in taxable gross income. Trade-in
allowances are not allowed for manufactured buildings taxable under Section
12-427.
      (4)   When coupons issued by a vendor are later accepted by the vendor as
a discount against the transaction, the discount may be excluded from gross
income as a cash discount. Amounts credited or refunded by a vendor for
redemption of coupons issued by any person other than the vendor may not be
excluded from gross income.
      (5)   Rebates issued by the vendor to a customer as a discount against
the transaction may be excluded from gross income as a cash discount. Rebates
issued by a person other than the vendor may not be excluded from gross income,
even when the vendee assigns his right to the rebate to the vendor.
      (6)   In computing the tax base, gross proceeds of sales or gross income
does not include a manufacturer’s cash rebate on the sales price of a motor
vehicle if the buyer assigns the buyer’s right in the rebate to the retailer.
   (b)   If the amount specified in subsection (a) above is credited by a
vendor subsequent to the reporting period in which the original transaction
occurs, such amount may be excluded from the taxable gross income of that
subsequent reporting period, but only to the extent that the excludable amount
was reported as taxable gross income in that prior reporting period.
Sec. 12-250. Exclusion of combined taxes from gross income; itemization;
notice; limitations.
   (a)   When tax is separately charged and/or collected. The total amount of
gross income shall be exclusive of combined taxes only when the person upon
whom the tax is imposed shall establish to the satisfaction of the Tax
Collector that such tax has been added to the total price of the transaction.
The taxpayer must provide to his customer and also keep a reliable record of
the actual tax charged or collected, shown by cash register tapes, sales
tickets, or other accurate record, separating net transaction price and
combined tax. If at any time the Tax Collector cannot ascertain from the
records kept by the taxpayer the total or amounts billed or collected on
account of combined taxes, the claimed taxes collected may not be excluded from
gross income, unless such records are completed and/or clarified to the
satisfaction of the Tax Collector.
      (1)   Remittance of all tax charged and/or collected. When an added
charge is made to cover Town (or combined) Privilege and Use Taxes, the person
upon whom the tax is imposed shall pay the full amount of the Town taxes due,
whether collected by him or not, and in the event he collects more than the
amount due he shall remit the excess to the Tax Collector. In the event the Tax
Collector cannot ascertain from the records kept by the taxpayer the total or
amounts of taxes collected by him, and the Tax Collector is satisfied that the
taxpayer has collected taxes in an amount in excess of the tax assessed under
this Chapter, the Tax Collector may determine the amount collected and collect
the tax so determined in the manner provided in this Chapter.
      (2)   Itemization. A taxpayer, in order to be entitled to exclude from
his gross income any amounts paid to him by customers for combined taxes passed
on to the customer, must prove that he has provided his customer with a written
record of the transaction showing at a minimum the price before the tax, the
combined taxes, and the total cost. This shall be addition to the record
required to be kept under subsection (a) above.
   (b)   When tax has been neither separately charged nor separately collected.
When the person upon whom the tax is imposed shall establish by means of
invoices, sales tickets, or other reliable evidence, that no added charge was
made to cover combined taxes, the taxpayer may exclude tax collected from such
income by dividing such taxable gross income by 1.00 plus a decimal figure
representing the effective combined tax rate expressed as a fraction of 1.00.
Sec. 12-260. Exclusion of fees and taxes from gross income; limitations.
   (a)   There shall be excluded from gross income of vendors of motor vehicles
those motor vehicle registration fees, license fees and taxes, and lieu taxes
imposed pursuant to Title 28, Arizona Revised Statutes in connection with the
initial purchase of a motor vehicle, but only to the extent that such taxes or
fees or both have been separately itemized and collected from the purchaser of
the motor vehicle by the vendor, actually remitted to the proper registering,
licensing, and taxing authorities, and the provisions of Article III, regarding
recordkeeping, are met. For the purpose of the exclusion provided by this
subsection only, the terms vendor and vendee shall also apply to a lessor and
lessee respectively, of a motor vehicle if, in addition to all other
requirements of this subsection, the lease agreement specifically requires the
lessee to pay such fees or taxes, and such amounts are separately itemized in
the documentation provided to the lessee.
   (b)   There shall be excluded from gross income of vendors at retail of
heavy trucks and trailers, the amount attributable to Federal Excise Taxes
imposed by 26 U.S.C. § 4051, but only to the extent that the provisions of
Article III, relating to recordkeeping, have been met.
   (c)   There shall be excluded from gross income the following fees, taxes,
and lieu taxes, but only to the extent that such taxes or fees or both have
been separately itemized and collected from the purchaser by the vendor,
actually remitted to the proper registering, licensing, and taxing authorities,
and the provisions of Article III, regarding recordkeeping, are met:
      (1)   emergency telecommunication services excise tax imposed pursuant to
A.R.S. § 42-5252. “Emergency telecommunication services” means
telecommunication services or systems that use number 911 or a similarly
designated telephone number for emergency calls;
      (2)   the telecommunication devices for the deaf and the severely hearing
and speech impaired excise tax imposed pursuant to A.R.S. § 42-5252;
      (3)   federal excise taxes on communications services as imposed by 26
U.S.C. § 4251;
      (4)   car rental surcharge imposed pursuant to A.R.S. § 48-4234;
      (5)   federal excise taxes on passenger vehicles as imposed by 26 U.S.C.
§ 4001(.01);
      (6)   waste tire disposal fees, imposed pursuant to A.R.S. § 44-1302.
   (d)   There shall be excluded from gross income of vendors of motor vehicles
dealer documentation fees, but only to the extent that such fees have been
separately itemized and collected from the purchaser of the motor vehicle by
the vendor.
Sec. 12-265. (Reserved)
Sec. 12-266. Exclusion of motor carrier revenues from gross income.
   There shall be excluded from gross income the gross proceeds of sale or
gross income derived from any of the following:
   (a)   a motor carrier’s use on the public highways in this State if the
motor carrier is subject to a fee prescribed in A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 15,
Article 4 or A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 16, Article 4.
   (b)   Leasing, renting or licensing a motor vehicle subject to and upon
which the fee has been paid under A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 16.
   (c)   The sale of a motor vehicle and any repair and replacement parts and
tangible personal property becoming a part of such motor vehicle, to a motor
carrier who is subject to a fee prescribed in A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 16 and
who is engaged in the business of leasing, renting or licensing such property.
   (d)   for the purposes of these exclusions, “motor carrier” includes a motor
vehicle weighing 26,000 pounds or more, a lightweight motor vehicle which
weighs 12,001 pounds to 26,000 pounds and a light motor vehicle weighing 12,000
pounds or less, which pay the fee prescribed in A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 15 or
A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 16.
Sec. 12-270. Exclusion of gross income of persons deemed not engaged in
business.
   (a)   For the purposes of this Section, the following definitions shall
apply:
      (1)   “Federally Exempt Organization” means an organization which has
received a determination of exemption, or qualifies for such exemption, under
26 U.S.C. Section 501(c) and rules and regulations of the Commissioner of
Internal Revenue pertaining to same, but not including a “governmental entity”,
“non-licensed business”, or “public educational entity”.
      (2)   “Governmental Entity” means the Federal Government, the State of
Arizona, any other state, or any political subdivision, department, or agency
of any of the foregoing; provided further that persons contracting with such a
governmental entity to operate any part of a governmentally adopted and
controlled program to provide urban mass transportation shall be deemed a
governmental entity in all activities such person performs when engaged in said
contract.
      (3)   “Non-Licensed Business” means any person conducting any business
activity for gain or profit, whether or not actually realized, which person is
not required to be licensed for the conduct or transaction of activities
subject to the tax imposed under this Chapter.
      (4)   “Proprietary Club” means any club which has qualified or would
otherwise qualify as an exempt club under the provisions of 26 U.S.C. Section
501(c)(7), (8), and (9), notwithstanding the fact that some or all of the
members may own a proprietary interest in the property and assets of the club.
      (5)   “Public Educational Entity” means any educational entity operated
pursuant to any provisions of Title 15, Arizona Revised Statutes.
   (b)   Transactions which, if conducted by any other person, would produce
gross income subject to tax under this Chapter shall not be subject to the
imposition of such tax if conducted entirely by a public educational entity;
governmental entity, except “proprietary activities” of municipalities as
provided by Regulation; or non-licensed business.
   (c)   Transactions which, if conducted by any other person, would produce
gross income subject to the tax under this Chapter shall not be subject to the
imposition of such tax if conducted entirely by a federally exempt organization
or proprietary club with the following exceptions:
      (1)   Transactions involving proprietary clubs and organizations exempt
under 26 U.S.C. Section 501(c)(7), (8), and (9), where the gross revenue of the
activity received from persons other than members and bona fide guests of
members is in an amount in excess of fifteen percent (15%) of total gross
revenue, as prescribed by Regulation. In the event this fifteen percent (15%)
limit is exceeded, the entire gross income of such entity shall be subject to
the applicable tax.
      (2)   Gross income from unrelated business income as that term is defined
in 26 U.S.C. Section 512, including all statutory definitions and
determinations, the rules and regulations of the Commissioner of Internal
Revenue, and his administrative interpretations and guidelines.
      (3)   (Reserved)
   (d)   Except as may be provided elsewhere in this Chapter, transactions
where customers are exempt organizations, proprietary clubs, public educational
entities, governmental entities, or non-licensed businesses shall be deemed
taxable transactions for the purpose of the imposition of taxes under this
Chapter, notwithstanding that property so acquired may in fact be resold or
leased by the acquiring person to others. In the case of sales, rentals,
leases, or licenses to proprietary clubs or exempt organizations, the vendor
may be relieved from the responsibility for reporting and paying tax on such
income only by obtaining from its vendee a verified statement that includes:
      (1)   a statement that when the property so acquired is resold, rented,
leased, or licensed, that the otherwise exempt vendee chooses, or is required,
to pay Town Privilege Tax or an equivalent excise tax on its gross income from
such transactions and does in fact file returns on same; and
      (2)   the Privilege License number of the otherwise exempt vendee; and
      (3)   such other information as the Tax Collector may require.
   (e)   Franchisees or concessionaires operating businesses for or on behalf
of any exempt organization, governmental entity, public educational entity,
proprietary club, or non-licensed business shall not be considered to be such
an exempt organization, club, entity, or non-licensed business, but shall be
deemed to be a taxpayer subject to the provisions of this Chapter, except as
provided in the definition of governmental entity, regarding urban mass
transit.
   (f)   In any case, if a federally exempt organization, proprietary club, or
non-licensed business rents, leases, licenses, or purchases any tangible
personal property for its own storage or use, and no Town Privilege or Use Tax
or equivalent excise tax has been paid on such transaction, said organization,
club, or business shall be liable for the Use Tax upon such acquisitions or use
of such property.
Sec. 12-280. (Reserved)
Sec. 12-285. (Reserved)
Sec. 12-290. (Reserved)
Article III - Licensing and Recordkeeping
Sec. 12-300. Licensing requirements.
   (a)   The following persons shall make application to the Tax Collector for
a Privilege License, accompanied by a non-refundable fee of two dollars
($2.00), and no person shall engage or continue in business or engage in such
activities until he shall have such a license:
      (1)   every person desiring to engage or continue in business activities
within the Town upon which a Privilege Tax is imposed by this Chapter.
      (2)   every person, engaging or continuing in business within the Town,
storing or using tangible personal property in this Town upon which a Use Tax
is imposed by this Chapter.
      (3)   every person required to report and pay a tax upon Rental
Occupancy, as imposed by Section
12-440.
   (b)   A person engaged in more than one activity subject to Town Privilege
and Use Taxes at any one business location is not required to obtain a separate
license for each activity; provided that, at the time such person makes
application for a license, he shall list on such application each category of
activity in which he is engaged. The licensee shall inform the Tax Collector of
any changes in his business activities, location, or mailing address within
thirty (30) days.
   (c)   Limitation. The issuance of a Privilege License by the Tax Collector
shall in no way be construed as permission to operate a business activity in
violation of any other law or regulation to which such activity may be subject.
Sec. 12-305. Special licensing requirements.
   (a)   Partnerships. Application for a Privilege License for a partnership
engaging or continuing in business in the Town shall provide, as a minimum, the
names and addresses of all general partners. Licenses issued to persons engaged
in business as partners, limited or general, shall be in the name of the
partnership.
   (b)   Corporations. Application for a Privilege License for a corporation
engaging or continuing in business in the Town shall provide, as a minimum, the
names and addresses of both the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial
Officer of the corporation. Licenses issued to persons engaged in business as
corporations shall be in the name of the corporation.
   (c)   Multiple Locations or Multiple Business Names. A person engaged in or
conducting one or more businesses at two (2) or more locations or under two (2)
or more business names shall procure a license for each such location or
business name. A “location” is a place of a separate business establishment.
   (d)   (Reserved)
Sec. 12-310. Licensing: duration of license; transferability; display.
   (a)   Except as provided in Section
12-320, the Privilege License shall be valid until request for cancellation
and/or surrender of the license by the licensee or expiration through cessation
by the licensee of the business activity for which it was issued.
   (b)   The Privilege License shall be nontransferable between owners or
locations, and shall be on display to the public in the licensee’s place of
business.
   (c)   Any licensee who permits his license to expire through cancellation as
provided in Section
12-320, by his request for cancellation, by surrender of the license, or by the
cessation of the business activity for which the license was issued, and who
thereafter applies for license, shall be granted a new license as an original
applicant and shall pay the current license fee. Any licensee who loses or
misplaces his Privilege License which is still in effect shall be charged the
current license fee for each reissuance of a license.
   (d)   (Reserved)
   (e)   (Reserved)
   (f)   (Reserved)
   (g)   (Reserved)
   (h)   (Reserved)
   (I)   (Reserved)
   (j)   (Reserved)
Sec. 12-315. (Reserved)
Sec. 12-320. Licensing: cancellation; revocation.
   (a)   Cancellation. The Tax Collector shall be authorized to cancel the Town
Privilege License of any licensee as “inactive” if the taxpayer, required to
report monthly to the Town, has neither filed any return nor remitted to the
Town any taxes imposed by this Chapter for a period of six (6) consecutive
months; or, if required to report quarterly, has neither filed any return nor
remitted any taxes imposed by this Chapter for two (2) consecutive quarters;
or, if required to report annually, has neither filed any return nor remitted
any taxes imposed by this Chapter when such annual report and tax are due to be
filed with and remitted to the Tax Collector.
   (b)   Revocation. If any licensee fails to pay any tax, interest, penalty,
fee, or sum required to be paid to the Town under this Chapter, or if such
licensee fails to comply with any other provisions of this Chapter, the Tax
Collector shall be authorized to revoke the Town Privilege License of said
licensee.
   (c)   Notice and Hearing. The Tax Collector shall deliver notice to such
licensee of cancellation or revocation of the Privilege License. If within
twenty (20) days the licensee so notified requests a hearing, he shall be
granted a hearing before the Tax Collector.
   (d)   After cancellation or revocation of a taxpayer’s license, the taxpayer
shall not be relicensed until all reports have been filed; all fees, taxes,
interest, and penalties due have been paid; and he is in compliance with the
provisions of this Chapter.
Sec. 12-330. Operating without a license.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who is required by this Chapter to
obtain a Privilege License to engage in or continue in business within the Town
without a license. The Tax Collector shall assess any delinquencies in tax,
interest, and penalties which may apply against such person upon any
transactions subject to the taxes imposed by this Chapter.
Sec. 12-350. Recordkeeping requirements.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of every person subject to the tax imposed by
this Chapter to keep and preserve suitable records and such other books and
accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax for which he is
liable under this Chapter. The books and records must contain, at a minimum,
such detail and summary information as may be required by Regulation; or when
records are maintained within an electronic data processing (EDP) system, the
requirements established by the Arizona Department of Revenue for privilege tax
filings will be accepted. It shall be the duty of every person to keep and
preserve such books and records for a period equal to the applicable limitation
period for assessment of tax, and all such books and records shall be open for
inspection by the Tax Collector during any business day.
   (b)   The Tax Collector may direct, by letter, a specific taxpayer to keep
specific other books, records, and documents. Such letter directive shall
apply:
      (1)   only for future reporting periods, and
      (2)   only by express determination of the Tax Collector that such
specific recordkeeping is necessary due to the inability of the Town to conduct
an adequate examination of the past activities of the taxpayer, which inability
resulted from inaccurate or inadequate books, records, or documentation
maintained by the taxpayer.
Sec. 12-360. Recordkeeping: claim of exclusion, exemption, deduction, or
credit; documentation; liability.
   (a)   All deductions, exclusions, exemptions and credits provided in this
Chapter are conditional upon adequate proof and documentation of such as may be
required under A.R.S. § 42-5022 or by this Chapter or Regulation.
   (b)   Any person who claims and receives an exemption, deduction, exclusion,
or credit to which he is not entitled under this Chapter, shall be subject to,
liable for, and pay the tax on the transaction as if the vendor subject to the
tax had passed the burden of the payment of the tax to the person wrongfully
claiming the exemption. A person who wrongfully claimed such exemption shall be
treated as if he is delinquent in the payment of the tax and shall be subject
to interest and penalties upon such delinquency. However, if the tax is
collected from the vendor on such transaction it shall not again be collected
from the person claiming the exemption, or if collected from the person
claiming the exemption it shall not also be collected from the vendor.
Sec. 12-370. Inadequate or unsuitable records.
   In the event the records provided by the taxpayer are considered by the Tax
Collector to be inadequate or unsuitable to determine the amount of the tax for
which such taxpayer is liable under the provisions of this Chapter, it is the
responsibility of the taxpayer either:
   (1)   to provide such other records required by this Chapter or Regulation;
or
   (2)   to correct or to reconstruct his records, to the satisfaction of the
Tax Collector.
Article IV - Privilege Taxes
Sec. 12-400. Imposition of Privilege Taxes; presumption.
   (a)   There are hereby levied and imposed, subject to all other provisions
of this Chapter, the following Privilege Taxes for the purpose of raising
revenue to be used in defraying the necessary expenses of the Town, such taxes
to be collected by the Tax Collector:
      (1)   a Privilege Tax upon persons on account of their business
activities, to the extent provided elsewhere in this Article, to be measured by
the gross income of persons, whether derived from residents of the Town or not,
or whether derived from within the Town or from without.
      (2)   a Privilege Tax upon certain persons for the privilege of occupancy
of real property, in accordance with the provisions of Section
12-440.
   (b)   Taxes imposed by this Chapter are in addition to others. Except as
specifically designated elsewhere in this Chapter, each of the taxes imposed by
this Chapter shall be in addition to all other licenses, fees, and taxes levied
by law, including other taxes imposed by this Chapter.
   (c)   Presumption. For the purpose of proper administration of this Chapter
and to prevent evasion of the taxes imposed by this Chapter, it shall be
presumed that all gross income is subject to the tax until the contrary is
established by the taxpayer.
   (d)   Limitation of exemptions, deductions, and credits allowed against the
measure of taxes imposed by this Chapter. All exemptions, deductions, and
credits set forth in this Chapter shall be limited to the specific activity or
transaction described and not extended to include any other activity or
transaction subject to the tax.
Sec. 12-405. Advertising.
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the
gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or
continuing in the business of “local advertising” by billboards, direct mail,
radio, television, or by any other means. However, commission and fees retained
by an advertising agency shall not be includable in gross income from “local
advertising”. All delivery or disseminating of information directly to the
public or any portion thereof for a consideration shall be considered “Local
Advertising”, except the following:
      (1)   the advertising of a product or service which is sold or provided
both within and without the State by more than one “commonly designated
business entity” within the State, and in which the advertisement names either
no “commonly designated business entity” within the State or more than one
“commonly designated business entity”. “Commonly Designated Business Entity”
means any person selling or providing any product or service to its customers
under a common business name or style, even though there may be more than one
legal entity conducting business functions using the same or substantially the
same business name or style by virtue of a franchise, license, or similar
agreement.
      (2)   the advertising of a facility or of a service or activity in which
neither the facility nor a business site carrying on such service or activity
is located within the State.
      (3)   the advertising of a product which may only be purchased from an
out-of-State supplier.
      (4)   political advertising for United States Presidential and Vice
Presidential candidates only.
      (5)   advertising by means of product purchase coupons redeemable at any
retail establishment carrying such product but not product coupons redeemable
only at a single commonly designated business entity.
      (6)   advertising transportation services where a substantial portion of
the transportation activity of the business entity advertised involves
interstate or foreign carriage.
   (b)   (Reserved)
(Am. Ord. 2015-05, passed 12-30-2015)
Sec. 12-407. (Reserved)
Sec. 12-410. Amusements, exhibitions, and similar activities.
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to seven percent (7%) of the
gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or
continuing in the business of providing amusement that begins in the Town or
takes place entirely within the Town, which includes the following type or
nature of businesses:
      (1)   operating or conducting theaters, movies, operas, shows of any type
or nature, exhibitions, concerts, carnivals, circuses, amusement parks,
menageries, fairs, races, contests, games, billiard or pool parlors, bowling
alleys, skating rinks, tennis courts, golf courses, video games, pinball
machines, public dances, dance halls, sports events, jukeboxes, batting and
driving ranges, animal rides, or any other business charging admission for
exhibition, amusement, or entertainment.
      (2)   health spas, fitness centers, dance studios, or other persons who
charge for the use of premises for sports, athletic, or other health-related
activities or instruction, whether on a per-event use or for long-term usage,
such as membership fees.
   (b)   Deductions or exemptions. The gross proceeds of sales or gross income
derived from the following sources is exempt from the tax imposed by this
Section:
      (1)   (Reserved)
      (2)   Amounts retained by the Arizona Exposition and State Fair Board
from ride ticket sales at the annual Arizona State Fair.
      (3)   Income received from a hotel business subject to tax under Section
12-444, if all of the following apply:
         (A)   The hotel business receives gross income from a customer for the
specific business activity otherwise subject to amusement tax.
         (B)   The consideration received by the hotel business is equal to or
greater than the amount to be deducted under this subsection.
         (C)   The hotel business has provided an exemption certificate to the
person engaging in business under this section.
      (4)   Income that is specifically included as the gross income of a
business activity upon which another Section of this Article imposes a tax,
that is separately stated to the customer and is taxable to the person engaged
in that classification not to exceed consideration paid to the person
conducting the activity.
      (5)   Income from arranging transportation connected to amusement
activity that is separately stated to the customer, not to exceed consideration
paid to the transportation business.
   (c)   The tax imposed by this Section shall not include arranging an
amusement activity as a service to a person’s customers if that person is not
otherwise engaged in the business of operating or conducting an amusement
themselves or through others. This exception does not apply to businesses that
operate or conduct amusements pursuant to customer orders and send the billings
and receive the payments associated with that activity, including when the
amusement is performed by third party independent contractors. For the purposes
of this paragraph, “arranging” includes billing for or collecting amusement
charges from a person’s customers on behalf of the persons providing the
amusement.
(Am. Ord. 2015-05, passed 12-30-2015)
Sec. 12-415. Construction contracting: construction contractors.
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the
gross income from the business upon every construction contractor engaging or
continuing in the business activity of construction contracting within the
Town.
      (1)   However, gross income from construction contracting shall not
include charges related to groundwater measuring devices required by A.R.S. §
45-604.
      (2)   (Reserved)
      (3)   gross income from construction contracting shall not include gross
income from the sale of manufactured buildings taxable under Section
12-427.
      (4)   for taxable periods beginning from and after July 1, 2008, the
portion of gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the actual
direct costs of providing architectural or engineering services that are
incorporated in a contract is not subject to tax under this Section. For the
purposes of this subsection, “direct costs” means the portion of the actual
costs that are directly expended in providing architectural or engineering
services.
   (b)   Deductions and exemptions.
      (1)   Gross income derived from acting as a “subcontractor” shall be
exempt from the tax imposed by this Section.
      (2)   All construction contracting gross income subject to the tax and
not deductible herein shall be allowed a deduction of thirty-five percent
(35%).
      (3)   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the
purchase of machinery, equipment or other tangible personal property that is
exempt from or deductible from privilege or use tax under:
         (A)   Section
12-465, subsections (g) and (p)
         (B)   Section
12-660, subsections (g) and (p) shall be exempt or deductible, respectively,
from the tax imposed by this Section.
      (4)   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from a
contract entered into for the installation, assembly, repair or maintenance of
income-producing capital equipment, as defined in Section
12-110, that is deducted from the retail classification pursuant to Section
12-465(g) that does not become a permanent attachment to a building, highway,
road, railroad, excavation or manufactured building or other structure,
project, development or improvement shall be exempt from the tax imposed by
this Section. If the ownership of the realty is separate from the ownership of
the income-producing capital equipment, the determination as to permanent
attachment shall be made as if the ownership was the same. The deduction
provided in this paragraph does not include gross proceeds of sales or gross
income from that portion of any contracting activity which consists of the
development of, or modification to, real property in order to facilitate the
installation, assembly, repair, maintenance or removal of the income-producing
capital equipment. For purposes of this paragraph, “permanent attachment” means
at least one of the following:
         (A)   to be incorporated into real property.
         (B)   to become so affixed to real property that it becomes part of
the real property.
         (C)   to be so attached to real property that removal would cause
substantial damage to the real property from which it is removed.
      (5)   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income received from a
contract for the construction of an environmentally controlled facility for the
raising of poultry for the production of eggs and the sorting, or cooling and
packaging of eggs shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this Section.
      (6)   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from
the installation, assembly, repair or maintenance of cleanrooms that are
deducted from the tax base of the retail classification pursuant to Section
12-465, subsection (g) shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this Section.
      (7)   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from a
contract entered into with a person who is engaged in the commercial production
of livestock, livestock products or agricultural, horticultural, viticultural
or floricultural crops or products in this State for the construction,
alteration, repair, improvement, movement, wrecking or demolition or addition
to or subtraction from any building, highway, road, excavation, manufactured
building or other structure, project, development or improvement used directly
and primarily to prevent, monitor, control or reduce air, water or land
pollution shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this Section.
      (8)   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income received from a post
construction contract to perform post-construction treatment of real property
for termite and general pest control, including wood destroying organisms,
shall be exempt from tax imposed under this Section.
      (9)   Through December 31, 2009, the gross proceeds of sales or gross
income received from a contract for constructing any lake facility development
in a commercial enhancement reuse district that is designated pursuant to
A.R.S. § 9-499.08 if the contractor maintains the following records in a form
satisfactory to the Arizona Department of Revenue and to the Town:
         (A)   the certificate of qualification of the lake facility
development issued by the Town pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-499.08, subsection D.
         (B)   all state and local transaction privilege tax returns for the
period of time during which the contractor received gross proceeds of sales or
gross income from a contract to construct a lake facility development in a
designated commercial enhancement reuse district, showing the amount exempted
from state and local taxation.
         (C)   any other information considered to be necessary.
      (10)   Any amount attributable to development fees that are incurred in
relation to the construction, development or improvement of real property and
paid by the taxpayer as defined in the model city tax code or by a contractor
providing services to the taxpayer. For the purposes of this paragraph:
         (A)   the attributable amount shall not exceed the value of the
development fees actually imposed.
         (B)   the attributable amount is equal to the total amount of
development fees paid by the taxpayer or by a contractor providing services to
the taxpayer and the total development fees credited in exchange for the
construction of, contribution to or dedication of real property for providing
public infrastructure, public safety or other public services necessary to the
development. The real property must be the subject of the development fees.
         (C)   "development fees" means fees imposed to offset capital costs of
providing public infrastructure, public safety or other public services to a
development and authorized pursuant to Section 9-463.05, Section 11-1102 or
Title 48 regardless of the jurisdiction to which the fees are paid.
      (11)   For taxable periods beginning from and after July 1, 2008 and
ending before January 1, 2017, the gross proceeds of sales or gross income
derived from a contract to provide and install a solar energy device. The
contractor shall register with the department of revenue as a solar energy
contractor. By registering, the contractor acknowledges that it will make its
books and records relating to sales of solar energy devices available to the
department of revenue and the city, as applicable, for examination.
   (c)   “Subcontractor” means a construction contractor performing work for
either:
      (1)   a construction contractor who has provided the subcontractor with a
written declaration that he is liable for the tax for the project and has
provided the subcontractor his Town Privilege License number.
      (2)   an owner-builder who has provided the subcontractor with a written
declaration that:
         (A)   the owner-builder is improving the property for sale; and
         (B)   the owner-builder is liable for the tax for such construction
contracting activity; and
         (C)   the owner-builder has provided the contractor his Town Privilege
License number.
      (3)   a person selling new manufactured buildings who has provided the
subcontractor with a written declaration that he is liable for the tax for the
site preparation and set-up; and provided the subcontractor his Town Privilege
License number.
Subcontractor also includes a construction contractor performing work for
another subcontractor as defined above.
(Am. Ord. 2009-04, passed 9-14-2009; Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed 9-12-2011)
Sec. 12-416. Construction contracting: speculative builders.
   (a)   The tax shall be equal to two percent (2%) of the gross income from
the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in business as a
speculative builder within the Town.
      (1)   The gross income of a speculative builder considered taxable shall
include the total selling price from the sale of improved real property at the
time of closing of escrow or transfer of title.
      (2)   “Improved Real Property” means any real property:
         (A)   upon which a structure has been constructed; or
         (B)   where improvements have been made to land containing no
structure (such as paving or landscaping); or
         (C)   which has been reconstructed as provided by Regulation; or
         (D)   where water, power, and streets have been constructed to the
property line.
      (3)   “Sale of Improved Real Property” includes any form of transaction,
whether characterized as a lease or otherwise, which in substance is a transfer
of title of, or equitable ownership in, improved real property and includes any
lease of the property for a term of thirty (30) years or more (with all options
for renewal being included as a part of the term). In the case of multiple unit
projects, “sale” refers to the sale of the entire project or to the sale of any
individual parcel or unit.
      (4)   “Partially Improved Residential Real Property”, as used in this
Section, means any improved real property, as defined in subsection (a)(2)
above, being developed for sale to individual homeowners, where the
construction of the residence upon such property is not substantially complete
at the time of the sale.
   (b)   Exclusions.
      (1)   In cases involving reconstruction contracting, the speculative
builder may exclude from gross income the prior value allowed for
reconstruction contracting in determining his taxable gross income, as provided
by Regulation.
      (2)   Neither the cost nor the fair market value of the land which
constitutes part of the improved real property sold may be excluded or deducted
from gross income subject to the tax imposed by this Section.
      (3)   (Reserved)
      (4)   A speculative builder may exclude gross income from the sale of
partially improved residential real property as defined in (a)(4) above to
another speculative builder only if all of the following conditions are
satisfied:
         (A)   The speculative builder purchasing the partially improved
residential real property has a valid Town privilege license for construction
contracting as a speculative builder; and
         (B)   At the time of the transaction, the purchaser provides the
seller with a properly completed written declaration that the purchaser assumes
liability for and will pay all privilege taxes which would otherwise be due the
Town at the time of sale of the partially improved residential real property;
and
         (C)   The seller also:
            (I)   maintains proper records of such transactions in a manner
similar to the requirements provided in this chapter relating to sales for
resale; and
            (ii)   retains a copy of the written declaration provided by the
buyer for the transaction; and
            (iii)   is properly licensed with the Town as a speculative builder
and provides the Town with the written declaration attached to the Town
privilege tax return where he claims the exclusion.
      (5)   For taxable periods beginning from and after July 1, 2008, the
portion of gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the actual
direct costs of providing architectural or engineering services that are
incorporated in a contract is not subject to tax under this Section. For the
purposes of this subsection, “direct costs” means the portion of the actual
costs that are directly expended in providing architectural or engineering
services.
   (c)   Tax liability for speculative builders occurs at close of escrow or
transfer of title, whichever occurs earlier, and is subject to the following
provisions, relating to exemptions, deductions and tax credits:
      (1)   Exemptions.
         (A)   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the
purchase of machinery, equipment or other tangible personal property that is
exempt from or deductible from privilege or use tax under:
            (I)   Section
12-465, subsections (g) and (p)
            (ii)   Section
12-660, subsections (g) and (p) shall be exempt or deductible, respectively,
from the tax imposed by this Section.
         (B)   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income received from a
contract for the construction of an environmentally controlled facility for the
raising of poultry for the production of eggs and the sorting, or cooling and
packaging of eggs shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this Section.
         (C)   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from
the installation, assembly, repair or maintenance of cleanrooms that are
deducted from the tax base of the retail classification pursuant to Section
12-465, subsection (g) shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this section.
         (D)   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from
a contract entered into with a person who is engaged in the commercial
production of livestock, livestock products or agricultural, horticultural,
viticultural or floricultural crops or products in this state for the
construction, alteration, repair, improvement, movement, wrecking or demolition
or addition to or subtraction from any building, highway, road, excavation,
manufactured building or other structure, project, development or improvement
used directly and primarily to prevent, monitor, control or reduce air, water
or land pollution shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this Section.
         (E)   Any amount attributable to development fees that are incurred in
relation to the construction, development or improvement of real property and
paid by the taxpayer as defined in the model city tax code or by a contractor
providing services to the taxpayer shall be exempt from the tax imposed under
this section. For the purposes of this paragraph:
            (i)   the attributable amount shall not exceed the value of the
development fees actually imposed.
            (ii)   the attributable amount is equal to the total amount of
development fees paid by the taxpayer or by a contractor providing services to
the taxpayer and the total development fees credited in exchange for the
construction of, contribution to or dedication of real property for providing
public infrastructure, public safety or other public services necessary to the
development. The real property must be the subject of the development fees.
            (iii)   "development fees" means fees imposed to offset capital
costs of providing public infrastructure, public safety or other public
services to a development and authorized pursuant to Section 9-463.05, Section
11-1102 or Title 48 regardless of the jurisdiction to which the fees are paid.
      (2)   Deductions.
         (A)   All amounts subject to the tax shall be allowed a deduction in
the amount of thirty-five percent (35%).
         (B)   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from
a contract entered into for the installation, assembly, repair or maintenance
of income-producing capital equipment, as defined in Section
12-110, that is deducted from the retail classification pursuant to Section
12-465(g), that does not become a permanent attachment to a building, highway,
road, railroad, excavation or manufactured building or other structure,
project, development or improvement shall be exempt from the tax imposed by
this Section. If the ownership of the realty is separate from the ownership of
the income-producing capital equipment, the determination as to permanent
attachment shall be made as if the ownership was the same. The deduction
provided in this paragraph does not include gross proceeds of sales or gross
income from that portion of any contracting activity which consists of the
development of, or modification to, real property in order to facilitate the
installation, assembly, repair, maintenance or removal of the income-producing
capital equipment. For purposes of this paragraph, “permanent attachment” means
at least one of the following:
            (i)   to be incorporated into real property.
            (ii)   to become so affixed to real property that it becomes part
of the real property.
            (iii)   to be so attached to real property that removal would cause
substantial damage to the real property from which it is removed.
      (C)   For taxable periods beginning from and after July 1, 2008 and
ending before January 1, 2017, the gross proceeds of sales or gross income
derived from a contract to provide and install a solar energy device. The
contractor shall register with the department of revenue as a solar energy
contractor. By registering, the contractor acknowledges that it will make its
books and records relating to sales of solar energy devices available to the
department of revenue and the city, as applicable, for examination.
      (3)   Tax credits. The following tax credits are available to owner-
builders or speculative builders, not to exceed the tax liability against which
such credits apply, provided such credits are documented to the satisfaction of
the tax collector:
         (A)   A tax credit equal to the amount of town privilege or use tax,
or the equivalent excise tax, paid directly to a taxing jurisdiction or as a
separately itemized charge paid directly to the vendor with respect to the
tangible personal property incorporated into the said structure or improvement
to real property undertaken by the owner-builder or speculative builder.
         (B)   A tax credit equal to the amount of privilege taxes paid to this
Town, or charged separately to the speculative builder, by a construction
contractor, on the gross income derived by said person from the construction of
any improvement to the real property.
         (C)   No credits provided herein may be claimed until such time that
the gross income against which said credits apply is reported.
(Am. Ord. 2009-04, passed 9-14-2009; Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed 9-12-2011)
Sec. 12-417. Construction contracting: owner-builders who are not speculative
builders.
   (a)   At the expiration of twenty-four (24) months after improvement to the
property is substantially complete, the tax liability for an owner-builder who
is not a speculative builder shall be at an amount equal to two percent (2%)
of:
      (1)   the gross income from the activity of construction contracting upon
the real property in question which was realized by those construction
contractors to whom the owner-builder provided written declaration that they
were not responsible for the taxes as prescribed in Subsection
12-415(c)(2); and
      (2)   the purchase of tangible personal property for incorporation into
any improvement to real property, computed on the sales price.
   (b)   For taxable periods beginning from and after July 1, 2008, the portion
of gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the actual direct
costs of providing architectural or engineering services that are incorporated
in a contract is not subject to tax under this Section. For the purposes of
this subsection, “direct costs” means the portion of the actual costs that are
directly expended in providing architectural or engineering services.
   (c)   The tax liability of this Section is subject to the following
provisions, relating to exemptions, deductions and tax credits:
      (1)   Exemptions.
         (A)   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the
purchase of machinery, equipment or other tangible personal property that is
exempt from or deductible from privilege or use tax under:
            (I)   Section
12-465, subsections (g) and (p)
            (ii)   Section
12-660, subsections (g) and (p)
         shall be exempt or deductible, respectively, from the tax imposed by
this Section.
         (B)   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income received from a
contract for the construction of an environmentally controlled facility for the
raising of poultry for the production of eggs and the sorting, or cooling and
packaging of eggs shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this Section.
         (C)   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from
the installation, assembly, repair or maintenance of cleanrooms that are
deducted from the tax base of the retail classification pursuant to Section
12-465, subsection (g) shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this Section.
         (D)   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from
a contract entered into with a person who is engaged in the commercial
production of livestock, livestock products or agricultural, horticultural,
viticultural or floricultural crops or products in this state for the
construction, alteration, repair, improvement, movement, wrecking or demolition
or addition to or subtraction from any building, highway, road, excavation,
manufactured building or other structure, project, development or improvement
used directly and primarily to prevent, monitor, control or reduce air, water
or land pollution shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this Section.
         (E)   Any amount attributable to development fees that are incurred in
relation to the construction, development or improvement of real property and
paid by the taxpayer as defined in the model city tax code or by a contractor
providing services to the taxpayer shall be exempt from the tax imposed under
this section. For the purposes of this paragraph:
            (i)   the attributable amount shall not exceed the value of the
development fees actually imposed.
            (ii)   the attributable amount is equal to the total amount of
development fees paid by the taxpayer or by a contractor providing services to
the taxpayer and the total development fees credited in exchange for the
construction of, contribution to or dedication of real property for providing
public infrastructure, public safety or other public services necessary to the
development. The real property must be the subject of the development fees.
            (iii)   "development fees" means fees imposed to offset capital
costs of providing public infrastructure, public safety or other public
services to a development and authorized pursuant to Section 9-463.05, Section
11-1102 or Title 48 regardless of the jurisdiction to which the fees are paid.
      (2)   Deductions.
         (A)   All amounts subject to the tax shall be allowed a deduction in
the amount of thirty-five percent (35%).
         (B)   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from
a contract entered into for the installation, assembly, repair or maintenance
of income-producing capital equipment, as defined in Section
12-110, that is deducted from the retail classification pursuant to Section
12-465(g), that does not become a permanent attachment to a building, highway,
road, railroad, excavation or manufactured building or other structure,
project, development or improvement shall be exempt from the tax imposed by
this Section. If the ownership of the realty is separate from the ownership of
the income-producing capital equipment, the determination as to permanent
attachment shall be made as if the ownership was the same. The deduction
provided in this paragraph does not include gross proceeds of sales or gross
income from that portion of any contracting activity which consists of the
development of, or modification to, real property in order to facilitate the
installation, assembly, repair, maintenance or removal of the income-producing
capital equipment. For purposes of this paragraph, “permanent attachment” means
at least one of the following:
            (I)   to be incorporated into real property.
            (ii)   to become so affixed to real property that it becomes part
of the real property.
            (iii)   to be so attached to real property that removal would cause
substantial damage to the real property from which it is removed.
         (C)   For taxable periods beginning from and after July 1, 2008 and
ending before January 1, 2017, the gross proceeds of sales or gross income
derived from a contract to provide and install a solar energy device. The
contractor shall register with the department of revenue as a solar energy
contractor. By registering, the contractor acknowledges that it will make its
books and records relating to sales of solar energy devices available to the
department of revenue and the city, as applicable, for examination.
      (3)   Tax credits. The following tax credits are available to owner-
builders and speculative builders, not to exceed the tax liability against
which such credits apply, provided such credits are documented to the
satisfaction of the tax collector:
         (A)   A tax credit equal to the amount of town privilege or use tax,
or the equivalent excise tax, paid directly to a taxing jurisdiction or as a
separately itemized charge paid directly to the vendor with respect to the
tangible personal property incorporated into the said structure or improvement
to real property undertaken by the owner-builder or speculative builder.
         (B)   A tax credit equal to the amount of privilege taxes paid to this
Town, or charged separately to the speculative builder, by a construction
contractor, on the gross income derived by said person from the construction of
any improvement to the real property.
         (C)   No credits provided herein may be claimed until such time that
the gross income against which said credits apply is reported.
   (d)   The limitation period for the assessment of taxes imposed by this
Section is measured based upon when such liability is reportable, that is, in
the reporting period that encompasses the twenty-fifth (25th) month after said
unit or project was substantially complete. Interest and penalties, as provided
in Section
12-540, will be based on reportable date.
   (e)   (Reserved)
(Am. Ord. 2009-04, passed 9-14-2009; Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed 9-12-2011)
Sec. 12-418. (Reserved)
Sec. 12-420. (Reserved)
Sec. 12-425. Job printing.
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the
gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or
continuing in the business of job printing, which includes engraving of
printing plates, embossing, copying, micrographics, and photo reproduction.
   (b)   The tax imposed by this Section shall not apply to:
      (1)   job printing purchased for the purpose of resale by the purchaser
in the form supplied by the job printer.
      (2)   out-of-Town sales.
      (3)   out-of-State sales.
      (4)   (Reserved)
      (5)   sales of job printing to a qualifying hospital, qualifying
community health center or a qualifying health care organization, except when
the property sold is for use in activities resulting in gross income from
unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 512.
      (6)   (Reserved)
Sec. 12-427. Manufactured buildings.
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the
gross income, including site preparation, moving to the site, and/or set-up,
upon every person engaging or continuing in the business activity of selling
manufactured buildings within the Town. Such business activity is deemed to
occur at the business location of the seller where the purchaser first entered
into the contract to purchase the manufactured building.
   (b)   Sales of used manufactured buildings are not taxable.
   (c)   The sale prices of furniture, furnishings, fixtures, appliances, and
attachments that are not incorporated as component parts of or attached to a
manufactured building are exempt from the tax imposed by this Section. Sales of
such items are subject to the tax under Section
12-460.
   (d)   Under this Section, a trade-in will not be allowed for the purpose of
reducing the tax liability.
Sec. 12-430. Timbering and other extraction.
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the
gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or
continuing in the following businesses:
      (1)   felling, producing, or preparing timber or any product of the
forest for sale, profit, or commercial use.
      (2)   extracting, refining, or producing any oil or natural gas for sale,
profit, or commercial use.
   (b)   The rate specified in subsection (a) above shall be applied to the
value of the entire product extracted, refined, produced, or prepared for sale,
profit, or commercial use, when such activity occurs within the Town,
regardless of the place of sale of the product or the fact that delivery may be
made to a point without the Town or without the State.
   (c)   If any person engaging in any business classified in this Section
ships or transports products, or any part thereof, out of the State without
making sale of such products, or ships his products outside of the State in an
unfinished condition, the value of the products or articles in the condition or
form in which they existed when transported out-of-State and before they enter
interstate commerce shall be the basis for assessment of the tax imposed by
this Section.
   (d)   (Reserved)
Sec. 12-432. Mining.
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to one tenth of one percent
(.1 %), not to exceed one tenth of one percent, of the gross income from the
business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of
mining, smelting, or producing for sale, profit, or commercial use any copper,
gold, silver, or other mineral product, compound, or combination of mineral
products; but not including the extraction, removal, or production of sand,
gravel, or rock from the ground for sale, profit, or commercial use.
   (b)   The rate specified in subsection (a) above shall be applied to the
value of the entire product mined, smelted or produced for sale, profit, or
commercial use, when such activity occurs within the town, regardless of the
place of sale of the product or the fact that delivery may be made to a point
without the Town or without the State.
   (c)   If any person engaging in any business classified in this Section
ships or transports products, or any part thereof, out of the State without
making sale of such products, or ships his products outside of the State in an
unfinished condition, the value of the products or articles in the condition or
form in which they existed when transported out-of-State and before they enter
interstate commerce shall be the basis for assessment of the tax imposed by
this Section.
Sec. 12-435. Publishing and periodicals distribution.
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the
gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or
continuing in the business activity of:
      (1)   publication of newspapers, magazines, or other periodicals when
published within the Town, measured by the gross income derived from notices,
subscriptions, and local advertising as defined in Section
12-405. In cases where the location of publication is both within and without
this State, gross income subject to the tax shall refer only to gross income
derived from residents of this State or generated by permanent business
locations within this State.
      (2)   distribution or delivery within the Town of newspapers, magazines,
or other periodicals not published within the Town, measured by the gross
income derived from subscriptions.
   (b)   “Location of Publication” is determined by:
      (1)   location of the editorial offices of the publisher, when the
physical printing is not performed by the publisher; or
      (2)   location of either the editorial offices or the printing
facilities, if the publisher performs his own physical printing.
   (c)   “Subscription income” shall include all circulation revenue of the
publisher except amounts retained by or credited to carriers or other vendors
as compensation for delivery within the State by such carriers or vendors, and
further except sales of published items, directly or through distributors, for
the purpose of resale, to retailers subject to the Privilege Tax on such
resale.
   (d)   “Circulation”, for the purpose of measurement of gross income subject
to the tax, shall be considered to occur at the place of delivery of the
published items to the subscriber or intended reader irrespective of the
location of the physical facilities or personnel of the publisher. However,
delivery by the United States mails shall be considered to have occurred at the
location of publication.
   (e)   Allocation of taxes between cities and towns. In cases where
publication or distribution occurs in more than one city or town, the
measurement of gross income subject to tax by the Town shall include:
      (1)   that portion of the gross income from publication which reflects
the ratio of circulation within this Town to circulation in all incorporated
cities and towns in this State having substantially similar provisions; plus
      (2)   only when publication occurs within the Town, that portion of the
remaining gross income from publication which reflects the ratio of circulation
within this Town to the total circulation of all incorporated cities or towns
in this State within which cities the taxpayer maintains a location of
publication.
   (f)   The tax imposed by this Section shall not apply to sales of
newspapers, magazines or other periodicals to a qualifying hospital, qualifying
community health center or a qualifying health care organization, except when
the property sold is for use in activities resulting in gross income from
unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 512.
Sec. 12-440. Rental Occupancy.
   (a)   For the purposes of this Section only, the following definitions shall
apply:
      (1)   "Landlord" means any lessor of real property under a pre-existing
lease.
      (2)   "Pre-existing Lease" means any written lease, license for use, or
rental agreement entered into prior to December 1, 1967; except for the
following:
         (A)   any bilateral amendment to such written agreement which was
entered into subsequent to December 1, 1967, wherein the length of the term or
the size of the premises affected is changed or both.
         (B)   any such agreement for lodging or lodging space.
      (3)   "Rent" means all consideration paid by the tenant to his landlord
or to another in payment of or diminution of his own or his landlord's
obligation in connection with the real property occupied by the tenant, whether
or not such occupancy is designated as a rent, lease or license for use of real
property.
      (4)   "Tenant" means any lessee of real property under a pre-existing
lease.
   (b)   The tax rate shall be at an amount of two percent (2%) of the gross
rent paid by a tenant, to the extent of his occupancy of real property in this
City under a pre-existing lease, upon such tenant, for the privilege of such
occupancy, subject to the provisions of this Section.
   (c)   Exclusions. The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   occupancy by a tenant which the constitution or laws of the United
States or of the State of Arizona prohibit the City from taxing.
      (2)   occupancy by a tenant of a landlord which the constitution or laws
of the United States or of the State of Arizona prohibit the City from taxing.
      (3)   occupancy of lodging or lodging space.
      (4)   occupancy of real property under other than a pre-existing lease.
   (d)   Duty of Landlords. Every landlord of a tenant subject to the tax:
      (1)   shall collect the tax imposed by this Section from the tenant
liable for the tax at the same time as and together with the tenant's periodic
or other payment of rent. The tax required to be collected shall constitute a
debt owed by the landlord to the City.
      (2)   shall be considered a taxpayer subject to all licensing,
recordkeeping, and reporting requirements of this Chapter.
   (e)   Duty of Tenants. Every tenant liable for the tax:
      (1)   shall, in any instance in which the tax has not been collected by
his landlord, remit such tax to the Tax Collector, and in such case, be subject
to all licensing and reporting requirements of this Chapter.
      (2)   shall maintain, and provide upon request, books and records
sufficient for the Tax Collector to determine the tax liability of such tenant.
   (f)   Interest and civil penalties shall be the liability of the landlord
collecting and remitting the tax; provided, however, that if the landlord can
present clear and convincing evidence that the delinquency was caused by the
tenant, then said interest and penalties shall be the liability of the tenant.
   (g)   Extension of rights of appeal to include tenants and landlords.
      (1)   Any landlord or tenant may avail himself of the provisions of
Sections
12-570 through
12-575, relating to appeals, and, except as modified hereunder, all provisions
of said Sections shall apply.
      (2)   For the purposes of preserving appeal rights, an assessment against
a landlord may be protested and appealed by any tenant paying or liable to pay
the tax for the occupancy included in such assessment.
      (3)   Payment of the tax herein imposed to a landlord by a tenant shall
be deemed payment of the tax for the tenant for the purposes of allowing a
protest to be initiated under Sections
12-570 through
12-575.
      (4)   The filing of a protest petition by a tenant shall not relieve the
landlord of his obligation to report and remit the protested tax, or any
subsequent periodic payments of tax governed by the initial protest.
   (h)   Refunds. Any refunds of taxes authorized by this Chapter shall be made
to the tenant. Any refunds of interest and civil penalties authorized by this
Chapter shall be made to the person liable for such, as provided in subsection
(f) above.
Sec. 12-444. Hotels.
   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to seven percent (7%) of the gross
income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in
the business of operating a hotel charging for lodging and/or lodging space
furnished to any:
   (a)   Person.
   (b)   Exclusions. The tax imposed by this Section shall not include:
      (1)   Income derived from incarcerating or detaining prisoners who are
under the jurisdiction of the United States, this State or any other state or a
political subdivision of this State or of any other state in a privately
operated prison, jail or detention facility.
      (2)   Gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is properly included
in another business activity under this Article and that is taxable to the
person engaged in that business activity, but the gross proceeds of sales or
gross income to be deducted shall not exceed the consideration paid to the
person conducting the activity.
      (3)   Gross proceeds of sales or gross income from transactions or
activities that are not limited to transients and that would not be taxable if
engaged in by a person not subject to tax under this Article.
      (4)   Gross proceeds of sales or gross income from transactions or
activities that are not limited to transients and that would not be taxable if
engaged in by a person subject to taxation under Section
12-410 or Section
12-475 due to an exclusion, exemption or deduction.
      (5)   Gross proceeds of sales or gross income from commissions received
from a person providing services or property to the customers of the hotel.
However, such commissions may be subject to tax under Section
12-445 or Section
12-450 as rental, leasing or licensing for use of real or tangible personal
property.
      (6)   Income from providing telephone, fax or Internet services to
customers at an additional charge, that is separately stated to the customer
and is separately maintained in the hotel’s books and records. However, such
gross proceeds of sales or gross income may be subject to tax under Section
12-470 as telecommunication services.
(Am. Ord. 2015-05, passed 12-30-2015)
Sec. 12-445. Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of real property.
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to zero percent (0%) of the
gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or
continuing in the business of leasing or renting real property located within
the Town for a consideration, to the tenant in actual possession, or the
licensing for use of real property to the final licensee located within the
Town for a consideration including any improvements, rights, or interest in
such property; provided further that:
      (1)   Payments made by the lessee to, or on behalf of, the lessor for
property taxes, repairs, or improvements are considered to be part of the
taxable gross income.
      (2)   Charges for such items as telecommunications, utilities, pet fees,
or maintenance are considered to be part of the taxable gross income.
      (3)   However, if the lessor engages in telecommunication activity, as
evidenced by installing individual metering equipment and by billing each
tenant based upon actual usage, such activity is taxable under Section
12-470.
   (b)   If individual utility meters have been installed for each tenant and
the lessor separately charges each single tenant for the exact billing from the
utility company, such charges are exempt.
   (c)   Charges by a qualifying hospital, qualifying community health center
or a qualifying health care organization to patients of such facilities for use
of rooms or other real property during the course of their treatment by such
facilities are exempt.
   (d)   Charges for joint pole usage by a person engaged in the business of
providing or furnishing utility or telecommunication services to another person
engaged in the business of providing or furnishing utility or telecommunication
services are exempt from the tax imposed by this Section.
   (e)   Exempt from the tax imposed by this Section is gross income derived
from the rental, leasing, or licensing for use of real property to a qualifying
hospital, qualifying community health center or a qualifying health care
organization, except when the property so rented, leased, or licensed is for
use in activities resulting in gross income from unrelated business income as
that term is defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 512.
   (f)   (Reserved)
   (g)   (Reserved)
   (h)   (Reserved)
   (i)   (Reserved)
   (j)   Exempt from the tax imposed by this Section is gross income derived
from the activities taxable under Section
12-444 of this code.
   (k)   (Reserved)
   (l)   (Reserved)
   (m)   (Reserved)
   (n)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
12-200(b), the fair market value of one (1) apartment, in an apartment complex
provided rent free to an employee of the apartment complex is not subject to
the tax imposed by this Section. For an apartment complex with more than fifty
(50) units, an additional apartment provided rent free to an employee for every
additional fifty (50) units is not subject to the tax imposed by this Section.
   (o)   Income derived from incarcerating or detaining prisoners who are under
the jurisdiction of the United States, this State or any other state or a
political subdivision of this State or of any other state in a privately
operated prison, jail or detention facility is exempt from the tax imposed by
this Section.
   (p)   Charges by any hospital, any licensed nursing care institution, or any
kidney dialysis facility to patients of such facilities for the use of rooms or
other real property during the course of their treatment by such facilities are
exempt.
   (q)   Charges to patients receiving “personal care” or “directed care”, by
any licensed assisted living facility, licensed assisted living center or
licensed assisted living home as defined and licensed pursuant to Chapter 4
Title 36 Arizona Revised Statutes and Title 9 of the Arizona Administrative
Code are exempt.
   (r)   Income received from the rental of any “low-income unit” as
established under Section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code, including the low-
income housing credit provided by IRC Section 42, to the extent that the
collection of tax on rental income causes the “gross rent” defined by IRC
Section 42 to exceed the income limitation for the low-income unit is exempt.
This exemption also applies to income received from the rental of individual
rental units subject to statutory or regulatory “low-income unit” rent
restrictions similar to IRC § 42 to the extent that the collection of tax from
the tenant causes the rental receipts to exceed a rent restriction for the low-
income unit. This subsection also applies to rent received by a person other
than the owner or lessor of the low-income unit, including a broker. This
subsection does not apply unless a taxpayer maintains the documentation to
support the qualification of a unit as a low-income unit, the “gross rent”
limitation for the unit and the rent received from that unit.
   (s)   The gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from a commercial
lease in which a reciprocal insurer or a corporation leases real property to an
affiliated corporation. For the purposes of this paragraph:
      (1)   “Affiliated Corporation” means a corporation that meets one of the
following conditions:
         (A)   the corporation owns or controls at least eighty percent of the
lessor.
         (B)   the corporation is at least eighty percent owned or controlled
by the lessor.
         (C)   the corporation is at least eighty percent owned or controlled
by a corporation that also owns or controls at least eighty percent of the
lessor.
         (D)   the corporation is at least eighty percent owned or controlled
by a corporation that is at least eighty percent owned or controlled by a
reciprocal insurer.
      (2)   For the purposes of subsection (1), ownership and control are
determined by reference to the voting shares of a corporation.
      (3)   “Reciprocal Insurer” has the same meaning as prescribed in A.R.S. §
20-762.
(Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed 9-12-2011)
Sec. 12-446. (Reserved)
Sec. 12-447. Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of real property:
additional tax upon transient lodging.
   In addition to the taxes levied as provided in Section
12-444, there is hereby levied and shall be collected an additional tax in an
amount equal to seven percent (7%) of the gross income from the business
activity of any hotel engaging or continuing within the Town in the business of
charging for lodging and/or lodging space furnished to any transient.
(Am. Ord. 2015-05, passed 12-30-2015)
Sec. 12-450. Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of tangible personal
property.
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the
gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or
continuing in the business of leasing, licensing for use, or renting tangible
personal property for a consideration, including that which is semi-permanently
or permanently installed within the Town as provided by Regulation.
   (b)   Special provisions relating to long-term motor vehicle leases. A lease
transaction involving a motor vehicle for a minimum period of twenty-four (24)
months shall be considered to have occurred at the location of the motor
vehicle dealership, rather than the location of the place of business of the
lessor, even if the lessor’s interest in the lease and its proceeds are sold,
transferred, or otherwise assigned to a lease financing institution; provided
further that the city or town where such motor vehicle dealership is located
levies a Privilege Tax or an equivalent excise tax upon the transaction.
   (c)   Gross income derived from the following transactions shall be exempt
from Privilege Taxes imposed by this Section:
      (1)   rental, leasing, or licensing for use of tangible personal property
to persons engaged or continuing in the business of leasing, licensing for use,
or rental of such property.
      (2)   rental, leasing, or licensing for use of tangible personal property
that is semi-permanently or permanently installed within another city or town
that levies an equivalent excise tax on the transaction.
      (3)   rental, leasing, or licensing for use of film, tape, or slides to a
theater or other person taxed under Section
12-410, or to a radio station, television station, or subscription television
system.
      (4)   rental, leasing, or licensing for use of the following:
         (A)   prosthetics.
         (B)   income-producing capital equipment.
         (C)   mining and metallurgical supplies.
      These exemptions include the rental, leasing, or licensing for use of
tangible personal property which, if it had been purchased instead of leased,
rented, or licensed by the lessee or licensee, would qualify as income-
producing capital equipment or mining and metallurgical supplies.
      (5)   rental, leasing, or licensing for use of tangible personal property
to a qualifying hospital, qualifying community health center or a qualifying
health care organization, except when the property so rented, leased, or
licensed is for use in activities resulting in gross income from unrelated
business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 512 or rental,
leasing, or licensing for use of tangible personal property in this State by a
nonprofit charitable organization that has qualified under Section 501(c)(3) of
the United States Internal Revenue Code and that engages in and uses such
property exclusively for training, job placement or rehabilitation programs or
testing for mentally or physically handicapped persons.
      (6)   separately billed charges for delivery, installation, repair, and/
or maintenance as provided by Regulation.
      (7)   charges for joint pole usage by a person engaged in the business of
providing or furnishing utility or telecommunication services to another person
engaged in the business of providing or furnishing utility or telecommunication
services.
      (8)   (Reserved)
      (9)   rental, leasing, or licensing of aircraft that would qualify as
aircraft acquired for use outside the State, as prescribed by Regulation, if
such rental, leasing, or licensing had been a sale.
      (10)   rental, leasing or licensing for use an alternative fuel vehicle
if such vehicle was manufactured as a diesel fuel vehicle and converted to
operate on alternative fuel and equipment that is installed in a conventional
diesel fuel motor vehicle to convert the vehicle to operate on an alternative
fuel, as defined in A.R.S. § 1-215.
      (11)   rental, leasing, and licensing for use of solar energy devices,
for taxable periods beginning from and after July 1, 2008. The lessor shall
register with the Department of Revenue as a solar energy retailer. By
registering, the lessor acknowledges that it will make its books and records
relating to leases of solar energy devices available to the Department of
Revenue and Town, as applicable, for examination.
(Am. Ord. 2009-04, passed 9-14-2009)
Sec. 12-452. (Reserved)
Sec. 12-455. Restaurants and Bars.
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to seven percent (7%) of the
gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or
continuing in the business of preparing or serving food or beverage in a bar,
cocktail lounge, restaurant, or similar establishment where articles of food or
drink are prepared or served for consumption on or off the premises, including
also the activity of catering. Cover charges and minimum charges must be
included in the gross income of this business activity.
   (b)   Caterers and other taxpayers subject to the tax who deliver food and/
or serve such food off premises shall also be allowed to exclude separately
charged delivery, set-up, and clean-up charges, provided that the charges are
also maintained separately in the books and records. When a taxpayer delivers
food and/or serves such food off premises, his regular business location shall
still be deemed the location of the transaction for the purposes of the tax
imposed by this Section.
   (c)   The tax imposed by this Section shall not apply to sales to a
qualifying hospital, qualifying community health center or a qualifying health
care organization, except when sold for use in activities resulting in gross
income from unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C.
Section 512.
   (d)   The tax imposed by this Section shall not apply to sales of food,
beverages, condiments and accessories used for serving food and beverages to a
commercial airline, as defined in A.R.S. § 42-5061(A)49, that serves the food
and beverages to its passengers, without additional charge, for consumption in
flight.
   (e)   The tax imposed by this Section shall not apply to sales of prepared
food, beverages, condiments or accessories to a public educational entity,
pursuant to any of the provisions of Title 15, Arizona Revised Statutes, to the
extent such items are to be prepared or served to individuals for consumption
on the premises of a public educational entity during school hours.
   (f)   For the purposes of this Section, “accessories” means paper plates,
plastic eating utensils, napkins, paper cups, drinking straws, paper sacks or
other disposable containers, or other items which facilitate the consumption of
the food.
(Am. Ord. 2015-05, passed 12-30-2015)
Sec. 12-460. Retail sales: measure of tax; burden of proof; exclusions.
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the
gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or
continuing in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail.
   (b)   The burden of proving that a sale of tangible personal property is not
a taxable retail sale shall be upon the person who made the sale.
   (c)   Exclusions. For the purposes of this Chapter, sales of tangible
personal property shall not include:
      (1)   sales of stocks, bonds, options, or other similar materials.
      (2)   sales of lottery tickets or shares pursuant to Article I, Chapter
5, Title 5, Arizona Revised Statutes.
      (3)   sales of platinum, bullion, or monetized bullion, except minted or
manufactured coins transferred or acquired primarily for their numismatic value
as prescribed by Regulation.
      (4)   gross income derived from the transfer of tangible personal
property which is specifically included as the gross income of a business
activity upon which another Section of this Article imposes a tax, shall be
considered gross income of that business activity, and are not includable as
gross income subject to the tax imposed by this Section.
      (5)   sales by professional or personal service occupations where such
sales are inconsequential elements of the service provided.
   (d)   (Reserved)
   (e)   When this Town and another Arizona city or town with an equivalent
excise tax could claim nexus for taxing a retail sale, the city or town where
the permanent business location of the seller at which the order was received
shall be deemed to have precedence, and for the purposes of this Chapter such
city or town has sole and exclusive right to such tax.
   (f)   The appropriate tax liability for any retail sale where the order is
received at a permanent business location of the seller located in this Town or
in an Arizona city or town that levies an equivalent excise tax shall be at the
tax rate of the city or town of such seller’s location.
   (g)   Retail sales of prepaid calling cards or prepaid authorization numbers
for telecommunications services, including sales of reauthorization of a
prepaid card or authorization number, are subject to tax under this Section.
(Am. Ord. 2015-05, passed 12-30-2015)
Sec. 12-462. Food for home consumption.
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the
gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or
continuing in the business of selling food for home consumption at retail.
(Ord. 2023-15, passed 7-17-2023)
Sec. 12-465. Retail sales: exemptions.
   Income derived from the following sources is exempt from the tax imposed by
Section
12-460:
   (a)   sales of tangible personal property to a person regularly engaged in
the business of selling such property.
   (b)   out-of-Town sales or out-of-State sales.
   (c)   charges for delivery, installation, or other direct customer services
as prescribed by Regulation.
   (d)   charges for repair services as prescribed by Regulation, when
separately charged and separately maintained in the books and records of the
taxpayer.
   (e)   sales of warranty, maintenance, and service contracts, when separately
charged and separately maintained in the books and records of the taxpayer.
   (f)   sales of prosthetics.
   (g)   sales of income-producing capital equipment.
   (h)   sales of rental equipment and rental supplies.
   (i)   sales of mining and metallurgical supplies.
   (j)   sales of motor vehicle fuel and use fuel which are subject to a tax
imposed under the provisions of Article I or II, Chapter 16, Title 28, Arizona
Revised Statutes; or sales of use fuel to a holder of a valid single trip use
fuel tax permit issued under A.R.S. § 28-5739, or sales of natural gas or
liquefied petroleum gas used to propel a motor vehicle.
   (k)   sales of tangible personal property to a construction contractor who
holds a valid Privilege Tax License for engaging or continuing in the business
of construction contracting where the tangible personal property sold is
incorporated into any structure or improvement to real property as part of
construction contracting activity.
   (l)   sales of motor vehicles to nonresidents of this State for use outside
this State if the vendor ships or delivers the motor vehicle to a destination
outside this State.
   (m)   sales of tangible personal property which directly enters into and
becomes an ingredient or component part of a product sold in the regular course
of the business of job printing, manufacturing, or publication of newspapers,
magazines, or other periodicals. Tangible personal property which is consumed
or used up in a manufacturing, job printing, publishing, or production process
is not an ingredient nor component part of a product.
   (n)   sales made directly to the Federal government to the extent of:
      (1)   one hundred percent (100%) of the gross income derived from retail
sales made by a manufacturer, modifier, assembler, or repairer.
      (2)   fifty percent (50%) of the gross income derived from retail sales
made by any other person.
   (o)   sales to hotels, bars, restaurants, dining cars, lunchrooms, boarding
houses, or similar establishments of articles consumed as food, drink, or
condiment, whether simple, mixed, or compounded, where such articles are
customarily prepared or served to patrons for consumption on or off the
premises, where the purchaser is properly licensed and paying a tax under
Section
12-455 or the equivalent excise tax upon such income.
   (p)   sales of tangible personal property to a qualifying hospital,
qualifying community health center or a qualifying health care organization,
except when the property sold is for use in activities resulting in gross
income from unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C.
Section 512 or sales of tangible personal property purchased in this State by a
nonprofit charitable organization that has qualified under Section 501(c)(3) of
the United States Internal Revenue Code and that engages in and uses such
property exclusively for training, job placement or rehabilitation programs or
testing for mentally or physically handicapped persons.
   (q)   sales of food for home consumption.
   (r)   sales of the following to persons engaging or continuing in the
business of farming, ranching, or feeding livestock, poultry or ratites:
      (1)   seed, fertilizer, fungicides, seed treating chemicals, and other
similar chemicals.
      (2)   feed for livestock, poultry or ratites, including salt, vitamins,
and other additives to such feed.
      (3)   livestock, poultry or ratites purchased or raised for slaughter,
but not including livestock purchased or raised for production or use, such as
milch cows, breeding bulls, laying hens, riding or work horses.
      (4)   neat animals, horses, asses, sheep, swine, or goats for the purpose
of becoming breeding or production stock, including sales of breedings or
ownership shares in such animals.
   (s)   sales of groundwater measuring devices required by A.R.S. § 45-604.
   (t)   (Reserved)
   (u)   sales of aircraft acquired for use outside the State, as prescribed by
Regulation.
   (v)   sales of food products by producers as provided for by A.R.S. §§ 3-
561, 3-562 and 3-563.
   (w)   (Reserved)
   (x)   (Reserved)
   (y)   (Reserved)
   (z)   (Reserved)
   (aa)   the sale of tangible personal property used in remediation
contracting as defined in Section
12-100 and Regulation
12-100.5.
   (bb)   sales of materials that are purchased by or for publicly funded
libraries including school district libraries, charter school libraries,
community college libraries, state university libraries or federal, state,
county or municipal libraries for use by the public as follows:
      (1)   printed or photographic materials.
      (2)   electronic or digital media materials.
   (cc)   sales of food, beverages, condiments and accessories used for serving
food and beverages to a commercial airline, as defined in A.R.S. § 42-5061(A)
(49), that serves the food and beverages to its passengers, without additional
charge, for consumption in flight. For the purposes of this subsection,
“accessories” means paper plates, plastic eating utensils, napkins, paper cups,
drinking straws, paper sacks or other disposable containers, or other items
which facilitate the consumption of the food.
   (dd)   in computing the tax base in the case of the sale or transfer of
wireless telecommunication equipment as an inducement to a customer to enter
into or continue a contract for telecommunication services that are taxable
under Section
12-470, gross proceeds of sales or gross income does not include any sales
commissions or other compensation received by the retailer as a result of the
customer entering into or continuing a contract for the telecommunications
services.
   (ee)   for the purposes of this Section, a sale of wireless
telecommunication equipment to a person who holds the equipment for sale or
transfer to a customer as an inducement to enter into or continue a contract
for telecommunication services that are taxable under Section
12-470 is considered to be a sale for resale in the regular course of business.
   (ff)   sales of alternative fuel as defined in A.R.S. § 1-215, to a used oil
fuel burner who has received a Department of Environmental Quality permit to
burn used oil or used oil fuel under A.R.S. § 49-426 or § 49-480.
   (gg)   sales of food, beverages, condiments and accessories to a public
educational entity, pursuant to any of the provisions of Title 15, Arizona
Revised Statutes; to the extent such items are to be prepared or served to
individuals for consumption on the premises of a public educational entity
during school hours. For the purposes of this subsection, “accessories” means
paper plates, plastic eating utensils, napkins, paper cups, drinking straws,
paper sacks or other disposable containers, or other items which facilitate the
consumption of the food.
   (hh)   sales of personal hygiene items to a person engaged in the business
of and subject to tax under Section
12-444 of this code if the tangible personal property is furnished without
additional charge to and intended to be consumed by the person during his
occupancy.
   (ii)   For the purposes of this Section, the diversion of gas from a
pipeline by a person engaged in the business of operating a natural or
artificial gas pipeline, for the sole purpose of fueling compressor equipment
to pressurize the pipeline, is not a sale of the gas to the operator of the
pipeline.
   (jj)   Sales of food, beverages, condiments and accessories to a nonprofit
charitable organization that has qualified as an exempt organization under 26
U.S.C Section 501(c)(3) and regularly serves meals to the needy and indigent on
a continuing basis at no cost. For the purposes of this subsection,
“accessories” means paper plates, plastic eating utensils, napkins, paper cups,
drinking straws, paper sacks or other disposable containers, or other items
which facilitate the consumption of the food.
   (kk)   sales of motor vehicles that use alternative fuel was manufactured as
a diesel fuel vehicle and converted to operate on alternative fuel and sales of
equipment that is installed in a conventional diesel fuel motor vehicle to
convert the vehicle to operate on an alternative fuel, as defined in A.R.S. §
1-215.
   (ll)   sales of solar energy devices, for taxable periods beginning from and
after July 1, 2008, the retailer shall register with the department of revenue
as a solar energy retailer. By registering, the retailer acknowledges that it
will make its books and records relating to the sales of solar energy devices
available to the department of revenue and city, as applicable, for
examination.
Sec. 12-470. Telecommunication services.
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to seven percent (7%) of the
gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or
continuing in the business of providing telecommunication services to consumers
within this Town.
      (1)   Telecommunication services shall include:
         (A)   two-way voice, sound, and/or video communication over a
communications channel.
         (B)   one-way voice, sound, and/or video transmission or relay over a
communications channel.
         (C)   facsimile transmissions.
         (D)   providing relay or repeater service.
         (E)   providing computer interface services over a communications
channel.
         (F)   time-sharing activities with a computer accomplished through the
use of a communications channel.
      (2)   Gross income from the business activity of providing
telecommunication services to consumers within this Town shall include:
         (A)   all fees for connection to a telecommunication system.
         (B)   toll charges, charges for transmissions, and charges for other
telecommunications services; provided that such charges relate to transmissions
originating in the Town and terminating in this State.
         (C)   fees charged for access to or subscription to or membership in a
telecommunication system or network.
         (D)   charges for monitoring services relating to a security or
burglar alarm system located within the Town where such system transmits or
receives signals or data over a communications channel.
         (E)   charges for telephone, fax or Internet access services provided
at an additional charge by a hotel business subject to taxation under Section
12-444.
   (b)   Resale telecommunication services. Gross income from sales of
telecommunication services to another provider of telecommunication services
for the purpose of providing the purchaser’s customers with such service shall
be exempt from the tax imposed by this Section; provided, however, that such
purchaser is properly licensed by the Town to engage in such business.
   (c)   Interstate transmissions. Charges by a provider of telecommunication
services for transmissions originating in the Town and terminating outside the
State are exempt from the tax imposed by this Section.
   (d)   (Reserved)
   (e)   (Reserved)
   (f)   Prepaid calling cards. Telecommunications services purchased with a
prepaid calling card that are taxable under Section
12-460 are exempt from the tax imposed under this Section.
   (g)   Internet Access Services - the gross income subject to tax under this
section shall not include sales of internet access services to the person’s
subscribers and customers. For the purposes of this subsection:
      (1)   “Internet” means the computer and telecommunications facilities
that comprise the interconnected worldwide network of networks that employ the
transmission control protocol or internet protocol, or any predecessor or
successor protocol, to communicate information of all kinds by wire or radio.
      (2)   “Internet Access” means a service that enables users to access
content, information, electronic mail or other services over the internet.
Internet access does not include telecommunication services provided by a
common carrier.
(Am. Ord. 2015-05, passed 12-30-2015)
Sec. 12-475. Transporting for hire.
   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the gross
income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in
the business of providing the following forms of transportation for hire from
this Town to another point within the State:
   (a)   Transporting of persons or property by railroad; provided, however,
that the tax imposed by this subsection shall not apply to transporting freight
or property for hire by a railroad operating exclusively in this State if the
transportation comprises a portion of a single shipment of freight or property,
involving more than one railroad, either from a point in this State to a point
outside this State or from a point outside this State to a point in this State.
For purposes of this paragraph, “a single shipment” means the transportation
that begins at the point at which one of the railroads first takes possession
of the freight or property and continues until the point at which one of the
railroads relinquishes possession of the freight or property to a party other
than one of the railroads.
   (b)   transporting of oil or natural or artificial gas through pipe or
conduit.
   (c)   transporting of property by aircraft.
   (d)   transporting of persons or property by motor vehicle, including towing
and the operation of private car lines, as such are defined in Article VII,
Chapter 14, Title 42, Arizona Revised Statutes; provided, however, that the tax
imposed by this subsection shall not apply to:
      (1)   gross income subject to the tax imposed by Article VI, Chapter 9,
Title 28, Arizona Revised Statutes.
      (2)   gross income derived from the operation of a governmentally adopted
and controlled program to provide urban mass transportation.
      (3)   (Reserved)
      (4)   (Reserved)
   (e)   (Reserved)
   (f)   Deductions or exemptions. The gross proceeds of sales or gross income
derived from the following sources is exempt from the tax imposed by this
Section:
      (1)   income that is specifically included as the gross income of a
business activity upon which another Section of Article IV imposes a tax, that
is separately stated to the customer and is taxable to the person engaged in
that classification not to exceed consideration paid to the person conducting
the activity.
      (2)   income from arranging amusement or transportation when the
amusement or transportation is conducted by another person not to exceed
consideration paid to the amusement or transportation business.
   (g)   The tax imposed by this Section shall not include arranging
transportation as a convenience to a person’s customers if that person is not
otherwise engaged in the business of transporting persons, freight or property
for hire. This exception does not apply to businesses that dispatch vehicles
pursuant to customer orders and send the billings and receive the payments
associated with that activity, including when the transportation is performed
by third party independent contractors. For the purposes of this paragraph,
“arranging” includes billing for or collecting transportation charges from a
person’s customers on behalf of the persons providing the transportation.
Sec. 12-480. Utility services.
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the
gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or
continuing in the business of producing, providing, or furnishing utility
services, including electricity, electric lights, current, power, gas (natural
or artificial), or water to:
      (1)   consumers or ratepayers who reside within the Town.
      (2)   consumers or ratepayers of this City, whether within the City or
without, to the extent that this City provides such persons utility services,
excluding consumers or ratepayers who are residents of another city or town
which levies an equivalent excise tax upon this City for providing such utility
services to such persons.
   (b)   Exclusion of certain sales of natural gas to a public utility.
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above, the gross income
derived from the sale of natural gas to a public utility for the purpose of
generation of power to be transferred by the utility to its ratepayers shall be
considered a retail sale of tangible personal property subject to Sections
12-460 and
12-465, and not considered gross income taxable under this Section.
   (c)   Resale utility services. Sales of utility services to another provider
of the same utility services for the purpose of providing such utility services
either to another properly licensed utility provider or directly to such
purchaser’s customers or ratepayers shall be exempt and deductible from the
gross income subject to the tax imposed by this Section, provided that the
purchaser is properly licensed by all applicable taxing jurisdictions to engage
or continue in the business of providing utility services, and further provided
that the seller maintains proper documentation, in a manner similar to that for
sales for resale, of such transactions.
   (d)   (Reserved)
   (e)   The tax imposed by this Section shall not apply to sales of utility
services to a qualifying hospital, qualifying community health center or a
qualifying health care organization, except when sold for use in activities
resulting in gross income from unrelated business income as that term is
defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 512.
   (f)   The tax imposed by this Section shall not apply to sales of natural
gas or liquefied petroleum gas used to propel a motor vehicle.
   (g)   The tax imposed by this Section shall not apply to:
      (1)   revenues received by a municipally owned utility in the form of
fees charged to persons constructing residential, commercial or industrial
developments or connecting residential, commercial or industrial developments
to a municipal utility system or systems if the fees are segregated and used
only for capital expansion, system enlargement or debt service of the utility
system or systems.
      (2)   revenues received by any person or persons owning a utility system
in the form of reimbursement or contribution compensation for property and
equipment installed to provide utility access to, on or across the land of an
actual utility consumer if the property and equipment become the property of
the utility. This exclusion shall not exceed the value of such property and
equipment.
   (h)   The tax imposed by this Section shall not apply to sales of
alternative fuel as defined in A.R.S. § 1-215, to a used oil fuel burner who
has received a Department of Environmental Quality permit to burn used oil or
used oil fuel under A.R.S. § 49-426 or § 49-480.
Sec. 12-485. (Reserved)
Article V - Administration
Sec. 12-500. Administration of this Chapter; rule making.
   (a)   The administration of this Chapter is vested in and exercised by the
Town of Colorado City, and except as otherwise provided, and all payments shall
be made to the Town of Colorado City. The Town may, pursuant to an
intergovernmental agreement, contract with the State of Arizona Department of
Revenue for the administration of the tax. In such cases, “Tax Collector” shall
also mean the Arizona Department of Revenue, when acting as agent in
administering this tax.
   (b)   The Tax Collector shall prescribe the forms and procedures necessary
for the administration of the taxes imposed by this Chapter.
   (c)   Except where such Regulations would conflict with administrative
regulations adopted by the Town Council or with provisions of this Chapter, all
regulations on the Transaction Privilege Tax adopted by the Arizona Department
of Revenue under the authority of A.R.S. § 42-1005 shall be considered
Regulations of this Chapter and enforceable as such.
   (d)   Taxpayers shall be subject to the State taxpayer bill of rights
(A.R.S. §§ 42-2051 et seq.).
   (e)   The unified audit committee shall publish uniform guidelines that
interpret the model city tax code and that apply to all cities and towns that
have adopted the model city tax code as provided by A.R.S. § 42-6005.
      (1)   Prior to finalization of uniform guidelines that interpret the
model city tax code, the unified audit committee shall disseminate draft
guidelines for public comment.
      (2)   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 42-6005(D), when the state statutes and the
model city tax code are the same and where the Arizona Department of Revenue
has issued written guidance, the department’s interpretation is binding on
cities and towns.
Sec. 12-510. Divulging of information prohibited; exceptions allowing
disclosure.
   (a)   Except as specifically provided, it shall be unlawful for any official
or employee of the Town to make known information obtained pursuant to this
Chapter concerning the business financial affairs or operations of any person.
   (b)   The Town Council may authorize an examination of any return or audit
of a specific taxpayer made pursuant to this Chapter by authorized agents of
the Federal Government, the State of Arizona, or any political subdivisions.
   (c)   The Tax Collector may provide to an Arizona county, city, or town any
information concerning any taxes imposed in this Chapter relative to the taxing
ordinances of that county, city, or town.
   (d)   Successors, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, executors,
guardians, administrators, and assignees, if directly interested, may be given
information by the Tax Collector as to the items included in the measure and
amounts of any unpaid tax, interest, and penalties required to be paid.
   (e)   Upon a written direction by the Town Attorney or other legal advisor
to the Town designated by the Town Council, officials or employees of the Town
may divulge the amount and source of income, profits, leases, or expenditures
disclosed in any return or report, and the amount of such delinquent and unpaid
tax, penalty, or interest, to a private collection agency having a written
collection agreement with the Town.
   (f)   The Tax Collector shall provide information to appropriate
representatives of any Arizona city or town to comply with the provisions of
A.R.S. § 42-6003, A.R.S. § 42-6005, and A.R.S. § 42-6056.
   (g)   The Tax Collector may provide information to authorized agents of any
other Arizona governmental agency involving the allocation of taxes imposed by
Section
12-435 upon publishing and distribution of periodicals.
   (h)   The Tax Collector may provide information regarding the enforcement
and collection of taxes imposed by this Chapter to any governmental agency with
which the Town has an agreement.
Sec. 12-515. (Reserved)
Sec. 12-516. (Reserved)
Sec. 12-517. (Reserved)
Sec. 12-520. Reporting and payment of tax.
   (a)   The taxpayer shall be required to use the report form authorized by
the Tax Collector and shall mail or deliver the same, together with remittance
for the amount of tax due, payable to the Town of Colorado City, to the Tax
Collector or any Town representative or agent authorized to receive such
payment. The tax return shall be signed by the taxpayer or his authorized
agent, and such signature shall be evidence that the person signing the return
verifies the accuracy of the information supplied in the return.
   (b)   Payment. If payment is made in any form other than United States legal
tender, the tax obligation shall not be satisfied until the payment has been
honored in funds.
   (c)   Requirement of Security. If a taxpayer has remitted payment in the
form of a check or other form of draw upon a bank or third party and such
remittance has not been honored in funds, the Tax Collector may demand security
for future payments.
   (d)   Method of Reporting. Each taxpayer shall elect to report on either a
cash receipts basis or an accrual basis and shall indicate the choice on the
Privilege License application. A taxpayer shall not change his reporting method
without receiving prior written approval by the Tax Collector.
      (1)   Taxpayers must report all gross income subject to the tax using the
same basis of reporting.
      (2)   Taxes imposed upon construction contracting shall be reported as
follows:
         (A)   Construction contractors shall report on either a progressive
billing (“accrual”) basis or cash receipts basis.
         (B)   Speculative builders shall report the gross income derived from
sale of improved real property at close of escrow or at transfer of title or
possession, whichever occurs earlier.
         (C)   Owner-builders who are not speculative builders shall report
taxable amounts as provided in Section
12-417.
Sec. 12-530. When tax due; when delinquent; verification of return; extensions.
   (a)   Except as otherwise specified in this Section, the taxes levied under
this Chapter shall be due, payable, and delinquent on the dates specified for
the State Transaction Privilege Taxes in A.R.S. § 42-5014. The taxpayer shall
report on the taxes imposed by this Chapter at such frequency to be identical
to the taxpayer’s reporting frequency for the reporting of State Transaction
Privilege Taxes.
   (b)   (Reserved)
   (c)   (Reserved)
   (d)   (Reserved)
   (e)   The Tax Collector may for good cause extend the date for making any
return required under the provisions of this Section as prescribed by A.R.S. §
42-1107.
Sec. 12-540. Interest and civil penalties.
   Any taxpayer who shall have failed to timely pay any taxes imposed by this
Chapter, or file a report for the same in a timely manner, or fail or refuse to
allow examination of records by the Tax Collector, shall be subject to any
interest or civil penalties on such tax in like manner as such interest and
penalties are provided in A.R.S. §§ 42-1123 and 42-1125 for the State
Transaction Privilege Tax.
   (a)   (Reserved)
   (b)   (Reserved)
   (c)   (Reserved)
   (d)   (Reserved)
   (e)   (Reserved)
   (f)   (Reserved)
   (g)   (Reserved)
   (h)   (Reserved)
   (I)   (Reserved)
Sec. 12-541. (Reserved)
Sec. 12-542. Prospective application of new law or interpretation or
application of law.
   (a)   Unless expressly authorized by law, the Tax Collector shall not apply
any newly enacted legislation retroactively or in a manner that will penalize a
taxpayer for complying with prior law.
   (b)   If the Tax Collector adopts a new interpretation or application of any
provision of this Chapter or determines that any provision applies to a new or
additional category or type of business and the change in interpretation or
application is not due to a change in the law:
      (1)   the change in interpretation or application applies prospectively
only unless it is favorable to taxpayers.
      (2)   the Tax Collector shall not assess any tax, penalty or interest
retroactively based on the change in interpretation or application.
   (c)   For purposes of subsection (b), “new interpretation or application”
includes policies and procedures which differ from established interpretations
of this Chapter.
   (d)   (Reserved)
Sec. 12-545. Deficiencies; when inaccurate return is filed; when no return is
filed; estimates.
   (a)   If a taxpayer has failed to file a return or if the Tax Collector is
not satisfied with the return or payment of tax required, the Tax Collector may
redetermine the tax due, plus penalties and interest, and notify the taxpayer,
as provided and prescribed by A.R.S. §§ 42-1108 and 42-1109.
      (1)   (Reserved)
      (2)   (Reserved)
   (b)   Estimates by the Tax Collector. Any estimate made by the Tax Collector
is to be made on a reasonable basis. The existence of another reasonable basis
of estimation does not, in any way, invalidate the Tax Collector’s estimate. It
is the responsibility of the taxpayer to prove that the Tax Collector’s
estimate is not reasonable and correct, by providing sufficient documentation
of the type and form required by this Chapter or satisfactory to the Tax
Collector.
Sec. 12-546. (Reserved)
Sec. 12-550. Limitation periods.
   (a)   Except as provided elsewhere in this Chapter, deficiency assessments
for the taxes imposed by this Chapter must be issued within the limitation
periods prescribed in A.R.S. § 42-1104, and must meet the provisions of A.R.S.
§ 42-1108.
   (b)   (Reserved)
   (c)   In cases of failure to file a return or a false or fraudulent return,
the limitation period shall be as prescribed in A.R.S. § 42-1109.
   (d)   Special provisions relating to owner-builders. The limitation for an
owner-builder subject to the tax as prescribed in Section
12-417 shall be based upon the date such tax liability is reportable or was
reported, as provided in Section
12-417.
Sec. 12-555. Tax Collector may examine books and other records; failure to
provide records.
   (a)   The Tax Collector may require the taxpayer to provide and may examine
any books, records, or other documents of any person who, in the opinion of the
Tax Collector, might be liable for any tax under this Chapter, for any periods
available to him under Section
12-550.
   (b)   (Reserved)
   (c)   (Reserved)
   (d)   The Tax Collector may use any generally accepted auditing procedures,
including sampling techniques, to determine the correct tax liability of any
taxpayer. The Tax Collector shall ensure that the procedures used are in
accordance with generally accepted auditing standards.
   (e)   The fact that the taxpayer has not maintained or provided such books
and records which the Tax Collector considers necessary to determine the tax
liability of any person does not preclude the Tax Collector from making any
assessment. In such cases, the Tax Collector is authorized to use estimates,
projections, or samplings, to determine the correct tax. The provisions of
Section
12-545(b), concerning estimates, shall apply.
   (f)   (Reserved)
Sec. 12-556. (Reserved)
Sec. 12-560. Erroneous payment of tax; credits and refunds; limitations.
   (a)   Except as provided in Section
12-565, the period within which a claim, meeting the requirements of subsection
(c) of this Section, for credit may be filed, or refund allowed or made if no
claim is filed, shall be as provided in A.R.S. §§ 42-1106 and 42-1118. For
purposes of this Section, “claimant” means a taxpayer that has paid a tax
imposed under this article and has submitted a credit or refund claim under
this Section. Except where the taxpayer has granted a customer a power of
attorney to pursue a credit or refund claim on the taxpayer’s behalf, claimant
does not include any customer of such taxpayer, whether or not the claimant
collected the tax from customers by separately stated itemization.
   (b)   (Reserved)
   (c)   A credit or refund claim submitted by a claimant for credit or refund
of any taxes, penalties, or interest paid must be in writing and:
      (1)   Identify the name, address and city tax identification number of
the taxpayer; and
      (2)   Identify the dollar amount of the credit or refund requested; and
      (3)   Identify the specific tax period involved; and
      (4)   Identify the specific grounds upon which the claim is based.
   (d)   (Reserved)
   (e)   (Reserved)
   (f)   Interest shall be allowed on the overpayment of tax for any credit or
refund authorized pursuant to this Section at the rate and in the manner set
forth in Section
12-540(a). Interest shall be calculated from the date the Tax Collector
receives the claimant’s written claim meeting the requirements of subsection
(c) of this Section.
   (g)   The denial of a refund by the Tax Collector is subject to the
provisions of A.R.S. § 42-1119.
   (h)   Claimants shall be subject to the State taxpayer bill of rights
(A.R.S. §§ 42-2051 et seq.), except that reasonable fees and other costs may be
awarded and are not subject to the monetary limitations of A.R.S. § 42-2064 if
the Tax Collector’s position was not substantially justified or was brought for
the purpose of harassing the claimant, frustrating the credit or refund process
or delaying the credit or refund. For the purposes of this Section, “reasonable
fees and other costs” means fees and other costs that are based on prevailing
market rates for the kind and quality of the furnished services, not to exceed
the amounts actually paid for expert witnesses, the cost of any study,
analysis, report, test, project or computer program that is found to be
necessary to prepare the claimant’s case and necessary fees for attorneys or
other representatives.
   (I)   (Reserved)
   (j)   Any refund paid under the provisions of this Section shall be paid
from the Privilege Tax revenue accounts.
Sec. 12-565. Payment of tax by the incorrect taxpayer or to the incorrect
Arizona city or town.
   (a)   When it is determined that taxes have been reported and paid to the
City by the wrong taxpayer, any taxes erroneously paid shall be transferred by
the City to the privilege tax account of the person who actually owes and
should have paid such taxes, provided that the City receives an assignment and
waiver signed by both the person who actually paid the tax and the person who
should have paid the tax.
   (b)   An assignment and waiver provided under this Section, must:
      (1)   identify the name and City privilege license number of the person
who erroneously paid the tax and the person who should have paid the tax.
      (2)   provide that the person who erroneously paid the tax waives any
right such person may have to a refund of the taxes erroneously paid.
      (3)   authorize the City Treasurer to transfer the erroneously paid tax
to the privilege tax account of the person who should have paid the tax.
   (c)   When it is determined that taxes have been reported and paid to the
wrong Arizona city or town, such taxes shall be remitted to the correct city or
town, provided that the city or town to whom the taxes were erroneously paid
receives an assignment and waiver signed by both the person who actually paid
the tax and the person who should have paid the tax. Where the person who
actually paid the tax and the person who should have paid the tax are one and
the same, no assignment and waiver need be provided. The City shall neither pay
nor charge any interest or penalty on any overpayment or underpayment except
such interest and penalty actually paid by the taxpayer relating to such tax.
   (d)   This Section in no way limits or restricts the applicability of any
remedies which may otherwise be available under A.R.S. § 42-6003. The
limitations and procedures set forth in A.R.S. § 42-6003 shall apply to all
payments under this Section.
   (e)   When reference is made in this Section to this City or an Arizona city
or town, and payments made to or requested from this City or an Arizona city or
town, the provisions shall be applicable to the Arizona Department of Revenue
when it is acting for or on behalf of this City or an Arizona city or town.
Sec. 12-567. (Reserved)
Sec. 12-570. Administrative review; petition for hearing or for
redetermination; finality of order.
   (a)   Closing agreements between the Tax Collector and a taxpayer have no
force of law unless made in accordance with the provisions of A.R.S. § 42-1113.
   (b)   Administrative review.
      (1)   Petitions of appeal shall be made to, and hearings shall be
conducted by, the Arizona Department of Revenue, in accordance with the
provisions of A.R.S.§§ 42-1251 et seq., as modified by Section
12-571.
      (2)   (Reserved)
      (3)   (Reserved)
      (4)   (Reserved)
      (5)   Hearings shall be held by the Arizona Department of Revenue in
accordance with the provisions of A.R.S.§§ 42-1251 et seq.. The Department’s
decision may be appealed to the State Board of Tax Appeals, in accordance with
the provisions of A.R.S.§§ 42-1251 et seq..
      (6)   (Reserved)
      (7)   (Reserved)
      (8)   (Reserved)
   (c)   (Reserved)
   (d)   (Reserved)
   (e)   Taxpayers shall be subject to the State taxpayer bill of rights
(A.R.S. § 42-2051 et. seq.).
Sec. 12-571. Jeopardy assessments.
   (a)   If the Tax Collector believes that collection of any amounts imposed
by this Chapter will be jeopardized by delay, he shall issue notice to the
taxpayer in accordance with the provisions of A.R.S. § 42-1111.
   (b)   In cases where such jeopardy notice has been issued, the taxpayer must
meet the provisions of A.R.S. § 42-1111, concerning appeals of jeopardy
assessments, before any request for administrative review shall be honored. Any
bond or collateral that may be required shall meet the provisions of A.R.S. §
42-1102.
   (c)   (Reserved)
   (d)   (Reserved)
   (e)   (Reserved)
Sec. 12-572. (Reserved)
Sec. 12-575. Judicial review.
   (a)   Appeal of a State Board of Tax Appeals decision to the courts is valid
only if all the provisions of A.R.S.§§ 42-1251 et seq. are met.
   (b)   (Reserved)
   (c)   (Reserved)
   (d)   (Reserved)
   (e)   The Town has the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence in
any court proceeding regarding any factual issue relevant to ascertaining the
tax liability of a taxpayer. This subsection does not abrogate any requirement
of this Chapter that requires a taxpayer to substantiate an item of gross
income, exclusion, exemption, deduction, or credit. This subsection applies to
a factual issue if a preponderance of the evidence demonstrates that:
      (1)   the taxpayer asserts a reasonable dispute regarding the issue.
      (2)   the taxpayer has fully cooperated with the tax collector regarding
the issue, including providing within a reasonable period of time, access to
and inspection of all witnesses, information and documents within the
taxpayer’s control, as reasonably requested by the tax collector.
      (3)   the taxpayer has kept and maintained records as required by the
Town.
   (f)   The issuance of an adjusted or corrected assessment or notice of
refund due to the taxpayer, where made by the Tax Collector pursuant to the
decision of the Hearing Officer, shall not be deemed an acquiescence by the
Town or the Tax Collector in said decision, nor shall it constitute a bar or
estoppel to the institution of an action or counterclaim by the Town to recover
any amounts claimed to be due to it by virtue of the original assessment.
   (g)   After the initiation of any action in the appropriate court by either
party, the opposite party may file such counterclaim as would be allowed
pursuant to the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Sec. 12-577. (Reserved)
Sec. 12-578. (Reserved)
Sec. 12-580. Criminal penalties.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or willfully:
      (1)   fail or refuse to make any return required by this Chapter.
      (2)   fail to remit as and when due the full amount of any tax or
additional tax or penalty and interest thereon.
      (3)   make or cause to be made a false or fraudulent return.
      (4)   make or cause to be made a false or fraudulent statement in a
return, in written support of a return, or to demonstrate or support
entitlement to a deduction, exclusion, or credit or to entitle the person to an
allocation or apportionment or receipts subject to tax.
      (5)   fail or refuse to permit any lawful examination of any book,
account, record, or other memorandum by the Tax Collector.
      (6)   fail or refuse to remit any tax collected by such person from his
customer to the Tax Collector before the delinquency date next following such
collection.
      (7)   advertise or hold out to the public in any manner, directly or
indirectly, that any tax imposed by this Chapter, as provided in this Chapter,
is not considered as an element in the price to the consumer.
      (8)   fail or refuse to obtain a Privilege License or to aid or abet
another in any attempt to intentionally refuse to obtain such a license or
evade the license fee.
      (9)   reproduce, forge, falsify, fraudulently obtain or secure, or aid or
abet another in any attempt to reproduce, forge, falsify, or fraudulently
obtain or secure, an exemption from taxes imposed by this Chapter.
   (b)   The violation of any provision of subsection (a) above shall
constitute a Class One Misdemeanor.
   (c)   In addition to the foregoing penalties, any person who shall knowingly
swear to or verify any false or fraudulent statement, with the intent
aforesaid, shall be guilty of the offense of perjury and on conviction thereof
shall be punished in the manner provided by law.
Sec. 12-590. Civil actions.
   (a)   Liens.
      (1)   Any tax, penalty, or interest imposed under this Chapter which has
become final, as provided in this Chapter, shall become a lien when the Town
perfects a notice and claim of lien setting forth the name of the taxpayer, the
amount of the tax, penalty, and interest, the period or periods for which the
same is due, and the date of accrual thereof, the amount of the recording costs
by the county recorder in any county in which the taxpayer owns real property
and the documentation and lien processing fees imposed by the Town council and
further, stating that the Town claims a lien therefor.
      (2)   The notice of claim of lien shall be signed by the tax collector
under his official seal or the official seal of the Town, and, with respect to
real property, shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder of any
county in which the taxpayer owns real property, and, with respect to personal
property shall be filed in the office of the Secretary of State. After the
notice and claim of lien is recorded or filed, the taxes, penalties, interest
and recording costs and lien processing fees referred to above in the amounts
specified therein shall be a lien on all real property of the taxpayer located
in such county where recorded, and all tangible personal property of the
taxpayer within the State, superior to all other liens and assessments recorded
or filed subsequent to the recording or filing of the notice and claim of lien.
      (3)   Every tax and any increases, interest, penalties, and recording
costs and lien processing fees referred to above, shall become from the time
the same is due and payable a personal debt from the person liable to the Town,
but shall be payable to and recoverable by the Tax Collector and which may be
collected in the manner set forth in subsection (b) below.
      (4)   Any lien perfected pursuant to this Section shall, upon payment of
the taxes, penalties, interest, recording costs and lien processing fees
referred to above and lien release fees imposed by the county recorder in any
county in which the lien was recorded, thereby, be released by the Tax
Collector in the same manner as mortgages and judgments are released. The Tax
Collector may, at his sole discretion, release a lien in part, that is, against
only specified property, for partial payment of moneys due the Town.
   (b)   Actions to recover tax. The Arizona Department of Revenue, or any
agent or representative authorized by that Department, may bring action, in the
name of the Town, to recover taxes as provided in A.R.S. § 42-1114.
Sec. 12-595. Collection of taxes when there is succession in and/or cessation
of business.
   (a)   In addition to any remedy provided elsewhere in this Town Code that
may apply, the Tax Collector may apply the provisions of subsections (b)
through (d) below concerning the collection of taxes when there is succession
in and/or cessation of business.
   (b)   The taxes imposed by this Chapter are a lien on the property of any
person subject to this Chapter who sells his business or stock of goods, or
quits his business, if the person fails to make a final return and payment of
the tax within fifteen (15) days after selling or quitting his business.
   (c)   Any person who purchases, or who acquires by foreclosure, by sale
under trust deed or warranty deed in lieu of foreclosure, or by any other
method, improved real property or a portion of improved real property for which
the Privilege Tax imposed by this Chapter has not been paid shall be
responsible for payment of such tax as a speculative builder or owner builder,
as provided in Sections
12-416 and
12-417.
      (1)   Any person who is a creditor or an affiliate of creditor, who
acquires improved real property directly or indirectly from the creditor’s
debtor by any means set forth in this subsection, shall pay the tax based on
the amount received by the creditor or its affiliate in a subsequent sale of
such improved real property to a party unrelated to the creditor, regardless of
when such subsequent sale takes place. Such tax shall be due in the month
following the month in which the sale of the improved real property by the
creditor or its affiliate occurs. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the real
property meets the definition of partially improved residential real property
in Section
12-416(a)(4) and all of the requirements of Section
12-416(b)(4) are met by the parties to the subsequent sale transaction, then
the tax shall not apply to the subsequent sale.
      (2)   In the event a creditor or its affiliates uses the acquired
improved real property for any business purpose, other than operating the
property in the manner in which it was operated, or was intended to be
operated, before the acquisition or in any other manner unrelated to selling
the property, the tax shall be due. The gross income upon which the tax shall
be determined pursuant to Sections
12-416 and
12-417 shall be the fair market value of the improved real property as of the
date of acquisition. The tax shall be due in the month following the month in
which such first business use occurs. When applicable, the credit bid shall be
deemed to be the fair market value of the property as of the date of
acquisition.
      (3)   Once the subsequent sale by the creditor or its affiliate has
occurred and the creditor or its affiliate has paid the tax due from it
pursuant to this subsection, neither the creditor nor its affiliate, nor any
future owner, shall be liable for any outstanding tax, penalties or interest
that may continue to be due from the debtor based on the transfer from the
debtor to the creditor or its affiliate.
      (4)   If the tax liability imposed by either Section
12-416 or Section
12-417 on the transfer of the improved real property to the creditor or its
affiliate, or any part thereof, is paid to the tax collector by the debtor
subsequent to payment of the tax by the creditor or its affiliate, the amount
so paid may constitute a credit, as equitably determined by the tax collector
in good faith, against the tax imposed on the creditor or its affiliate by
either paragraph 1 or paragraph 2 of this subsection.
      (5)   Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, if a
creditor or its affiliate is subject to tax as described in paragraph 1 or
paragraph 2 of this subsection and such creditor or affiliate has not
previously been required to be licensed, such creditor or affiliate shall
become licensed no later than the date on which the tax is due.
   (d)   A person’s successors or assignees shall withhold from the purchase
money an amount sufficient to cover the taxes required to be paid, and interest
or penalties due and payable, until the former owner produces a receipt from
the Tax Collector showing that all Town tax has been paid or a certificate
stating that no amount is due as then shown by the records of the Tax
Collector. The Tax Collector shall respond to a request from the seller for a
certificate within fifteen (15) days by either providing the certificate or a
written notice stating why the certificate cannot be issued.
      (1)   If a subsequent audit shows a deficiency arising before the sale of
the business, the deficiency is an obligation of the seller and does not
constitute a liability against a buyer who has received a certificate from the
Tax Collector.
      (2)   If the purchaser of a business or stock of goods fails to obtain a
certificate as provided by this Section, he is personally liable for payment of
the amount of taxes required to be paid by the former owner on account of the
business so purchased, with interest and penalties accrued by the former owner
or assignees.
(Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed 9-12-2011)
Sec. 12-596. (Reserved)
Sec. 12-597. (Reserved)
Article VI - Use Tax
Sec. 12-600. Use tax: definitions
   For the purposes of this Article only, the following definitions shall
apply, in addition to the definitions provided in Article I:
   “Acquire (for Storage or Use)” means purchase, rent, lease, or license for
storage or use.
   “Retailer” also means any person selling, renting, licensing for use, or
leasing tangible personal property under circumstances which would render such
transactions subject to the taxes imposed in Article IV, if such transactions
had occurred within this Town.
   “Storage (within the Town)” means the keeping or retaining of tangible
personal property at a place within the Town for any purpose, except for those
items acquired specifically and solely for the purpose of sale, rental, lease,
or license for use in the regular course of business or for the purpose of
subsequent use solely outside the Town.
   “Use (of Tangible Personal Property)” means consumption or exercise of any
other right or power over tangible personal property incident to the ownership
thereof except the holding for the sale, rental, lease, or license for use of
such property in the regular course of business.
Sec. 12-601. (Reserved)
Sec. 12-602. (Reserved)
Sec. 12-610. Use tax.
   (a)   The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the
cost of tangible personal property acquired from a retailer, upon every person
storing or using such property in this Town.
(Am. Ord. 2023-15, passed 7-17-2023)
Sec. 12-620. Use tax: liability for tax.
   The following persons shall be deemed liable for the tax imposed by this
Article; and such liability shall not be extinguished until the tax has been
paid to this Town, except that a receipt from a retailer separately charging
the tax imposed by this Chapter is sufficient to relieve the person acquiring
such property from further liability for the tax to which the receipt refers:
   (a)   Any person who acquires tangible personal property from a retailer,
whether or not such retailer is located in this Town, when such person stores
or uses said property within the Town.
   (b)   Any retailer not located within the Town, selling, renting, leasing,
or licensing tangible personal property for storage or use of such property
within the Town, may obtain a License from the Tax Collector and collect the
Use Tax on such transactions. Such retailer shall be liable for the Use Tax to
the extent such Use Tax is collected from his customers.
   (c)   Every agent within the Town of any retailer not maintaining an office
or place of business in this Town, when such person sells, rents, leases, or
licenses tangible personal property for storage or use in this Town shall, at
the time of such transaction, collect and be liable for the tax imposed by this
Article upon the storage or use of the property so transferred, unless such
retailer or agent is liable for an equivalent excise tax upon the transaction.
   (d)   Any person who acquires tangible personal property from a retailer
located in the Town and such person claims to be exempt from the Town Privilege
or Use tax at the time of the transaction, and upon which no Town Privilege Tax
was charged or paid, when such claim is not sustainable.
   (e)   Every person storing or using tangible personal property under the
conditions of a warranty, maintenance, or service contract.
Sec. 12-630. Use tax: recordkeeping requirements.
   All deductions, exclusions, exemptions, and credits provided in this Article
are conditional upon adequate proof of documentation as required by Article III
or elsewhere in this Chapter.
Sec. 12-640. Use tax: credit for equivalent excise taxes paid another
jurisdiction.
   In the event that an equivalent excise tax has been levied and paid upon
tangible personal property which is acquired to be stored or used within this
Town, full credit for any and all such taxes so paid shall be allowed by the
Tax Collector but only to the extent Use Tax is imposed upon that transaction
by this Article.
Sec. 12-650. Use tax: exclusion when acquisition subject to Use Tax is taxed or
taxable elsewhere in this Chapter; limitation.
   The tax levied by this Article does not apply to the storage or use in this
Town of tangible personal property acquired in this Town, the gross income from
the sale, rental, lease, or license of which were included in the measure of
the tax imposed by Article IV of this Chapter; provided, however, that any
person who has acquired tangible personal property from a vendor in this Town
without paying the Town Privilege Tax because of a representation to the vendor
that the property was not subject to such tax, when such claim is not
sustainable, may not claim the exclusion from such Use Tax provided by this
Section.
Sec. 12-660. Use tax: exemptions.
   The storage or use in this Town of the following tangible personal property
is exempt from the Use Tax imposed by this Article:
   (a)   tangible personal property brought into the Town by an individual who
was not a resident of the Town at the time the property was acquired for his
own use, if the first actual use of such property was outside the Town, unless
such property is used in conducting a business in this Town.
   (b)   tangible personal property, the value of which does not exceed the
amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000) per item, acquired by an individual
outside the limits of the Town for his personal use and enjoyment.
   (c)   charges for delivery, installation, or other customer services, as
prescribed by Regulation.
   (d)   charges for repair services, as prescribed by Regulation.
   (e)   separately itemized charges for warranty, maintenance, and service
contracts.
   (f)   prosthetics.
   (g)   income-producing capital equipment.
   (h)   rental equipment and rental supplies.
   (I)   mining and metallurgical supplies.
   (j)   motor vehicle fuel and use fuel which are used upon the highways of
this State and upon which a tax has been imposed under the provisions of
Article I or II, Chapter 16, Title 28, Arizona Revised Statutes.
   (k)   tangible personal property purchased by a construction contractor, but
not an owner-builder, when such person holds a valid Privilege License for
engaging or continuing in the business of construction contracting, and where
the property acquired is incorporated into any structure or improvement to real
property in fulfillment of a construction contract.
   (l)   sales of motor vehicles to nonresidents of this State for use outside
this State if the vendor ships or delivers the motor vehicle to a destination
outside this State.
   (m)   tangible personal property which directly enters into and becomes an
ingredient or component part of a product sold in the regular course of the
business of job printing, manufacturing, or publication of newspapers,
magazines or other periodicals. Tangible personal property which is consumed or
used up in a manufacturing, job printing, publishing, or production process is
not an ingredient nor component part of a product.
   (n)   rental, leasing, or licensing for use of film, tape, or slides by a
theater or other person taxed under Section
12-410, or by a radio station, television station, or subscription television
system.
   (o)   food served to patrons for a consideration by any person engaged in a
business properly licensed and taxed under Section
12-455, but not food consumed by owners, agents, or employees of such business.
   (p)   tangible personal property acquired by a qualifying hospital,
qualifying community health center or a qualifying health care organization,
except when the property is in fact used in activities resulting in gross
income from unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C.
Section 512.
   (q)   food for home consumption.
   (r)   the following tangible personal property purchased by persons engaging
or continuing in the business of farming, ranching, or feeding livestock,
poultry or ratites:
      (1)   seed, fertilizer, fungicides, seed treating chemicals, and other
similar chemicals.
      (2)   feed for livestock, poultry or ratites, including salt, vitamins,
and other additives to such feed.
      (3)   livestock, poultry or ratites purchased or raised for slaughter,
but not including livestock purchased or raised for production or use, such as
milch cows, breeding bulls, laying hens, riding or work horses.
      (4)   neat animals, horses, asses, sheep, swine, or goats acquired for
the purpose of becoming breeding or production stock, including the acquisition
of breedings or ownership shares in such animals.
      This exemption shall not be construed to include machinery, equipment,
fuels, lubricants, pharmaceuticals, repair and replacement parts, or other
items used or consumed in the running, maintenance, or repair of machinery,
equipment, buildings, or structures used or consumed in the business of
farming, ranching, or feeding of livestock, poultry or ratites.
   (s)   groundwater measuring devices required by A.R.S. § 45-604.
   (t)   (Reserved)
   (u)   aircraft acquired for use outside the State, as prescribed by
Regulation.
   (v)   sales of food products by producers as provided for by A.R.S. §§ 3-
561, 3-562 and 3-563.
   (w)   (Reserved)
   (x)   (Reserved)
   (y)   tangible personal property donated to an organization or entity
qualifying as an exempt organization under 26 U.S.C Section 501(c)(3); if and
only if:
      (1)   the donor is engaged or continuing in a business activity subject
to a tax imposed by Article IV; and
      (2)   the donor originally purchased the donated property for resale in
the ordinary course of the donor’s business; and
      (3)   the donor obtained from the donee a letter or other evidence
satisfactory to the Tax Collector of qualification under 26 U.S.C. Section 501
(c)(3) from the Internal Revenue Service or other appropriate federal agency;
and
      (4)   the donor maintains, and provides upon demand, such evidence to the
Tax Collector, in a manner similar to other documentation required under
Article III.
   (z)   (Reserved)
   (aa)   tangible personal property used in remediation contracting as defined
in Section
12-100 and Regulation
12-100.5.
   (bb)   materials that are purchased by or for publicly funded libraries
including school district libraries, charter school libraries, community
college libraries, state university libraries or federal, state, county or
municipal libraries for use by the public as follows:
      (1)   printed or photographic materials.
      (2)   electronic or digital media materials.
   (cc)   food, beverages, condiments and accessories used for serving food and
beverages to a commercial airline, as defined in A.R.S. § 42-5061(A)(49), that
serves the food and beverages to its passengers, without additional charge, for
consumption in flight. For the purposes of this subsection, “accessories” means
paper plates, plastic eating utensils, napkins, paper cups, drinking straws,
paper sacks or other disposable containers, or other items which facilitate the
consumption of the food.
   (dd)   wireless telecommunication equipment that is held for sale or
transfer to a customer as an inducement to enter into or continue a contract
for telecommunication services that are taxable under Section
12-470.
   (ee)   (Reserved)
   (ff)   alternative fuel as defined in A.R.S. § 1-215, by a used oil fuel
burner who has received a Department of Environmental Quality permit to burn
used oil or used oil fuel under A.R.S. § 49-426 or § 49-480.
   (gg)   food, beverages, condiments and accessories purchased by or for a
public educational entity, pursuant to any of the provisions of Title 15,
Arizona Revised Statutes; to the extent such items are to be prepared or served
to individuals for consumption on the premises of a public educational entity
during school hours. For the purposes of this subsection, “accessories” means
paper plates, plastic eating utensils, napkins, paper cups, drinking straws,
paper sacks or other disposable containers, or other items which facilitate the
consumption of the food.
   (hh)   personal hygiene items purchased by a person engaged in the business
of and subject to tax under Section
12-444 of this code if the tangible personal property is furnished without
additional charge to and intended to be consumed by the person during his
occupancy.
   (ii)   The diversion of gas from a pipeline by a person engaged in the
business of operating a natural or artificial gas pipeline, for the sole
purpose of fueling compressor equipment to pressurize the pipeline, is not a
sale of the gas to the operator of the pipeline.
   (jj)   Food, beverages, condiments and accessories purchased by or for a
nonprofit charitable organization that has qualified as an exempt organization
under 26 U.S.C Section 501(c)(3) and regularly serves meals to the needy and
indigent on a continuing basis at no cost. For the purposes of this subsection,
“accessories” means paper plates, plastic eating utensils, napkins, paper cups,
drinking straws, paper sacks or other disposable containers, or other items
which facilitate the consumption of the food.
   (kk)   sales of motor vehicles that use alternative fuel if such vehicle was
manufactured as a diesel fuel vehicle and converted to operate on alternative
fuel and sales of equipment that is installed in a conventional diesel fuel
motor vehicle to convert the vehicle to operate on an alternative fuel, as
defined in A.R.S. § 1-215.
   (ll)   the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property in the
city or town by a school district or charter school.
(Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed 9-12-2011)
REGULATIONS - PRIVILEGE AND EXCISE TAXES
Reg. 12-100.1. Brokers
   (a)   For the purposes of proper administration of this Chapter and to
prevent evasion of taxes imposed, brokers shall be wherever necessary treated
as taxpayers for all purposes, and shall file a return and remit the tax
imposed on the activity on behalf of the principal. No deduction shall be
allowed for any commissions or fees retained by such broker, except as provided
in Section
12-405, relating to advertising commissions.
   (b)   Brokers for vendors. A broker acting for a seller, lessor, or other
similar person deriving gross income in a category upon which this Chapter
imposes a tax shall be liable for such tax, even if his principal would not be
subject to the tax if he conducted such activity in his own behalf, by reason
of the activity being deemed a “casual” one. For example:
      (1)   An auctioneer or other sales agent of tangible personal property is
subject to the tax imposed upon retail sales, even if such sales would be
deemed “casual” if his principal had sold such items himself.
      (2)   A property manager is subject to the tax imposed upon rental,
leasing, or licensing of real property, even if such rental, leasing, or
licensing would be deemed “casual” if his principal managed such real property
himself.
   (c)   Brokers for vendees. A broker acting solely for a buyer, lessee,
tenant, or other similar person who is a party to a transaction which may be
subject to the tax, shall be liable for such tax and for filing a return in
connection with such tax only to the extent his principal is subject to the
tax.
   (d)   The liability of a broker does not relieve the principal of liability
except upon presentation to the Tax Collector of proof of payment of the tax,
and only to the extent of the correct payment. The broker shall be relieved of
the responsibility to file and pay taxes upon the filing and correct payment of
such taxes by the principal.
   (e)   (Reserved)
   (f)   Location of Business. Retail sales by brokers acting for another
person shall be deemed to have occurred at the regular business location of the
broker, in a manner similar to that used to determine “out-of-Town sales”;
provided, however, that an auctioneer is deemed to be engaged in business at
the site of each auction.
Reg. 12-100.2. Delivery, installation, or other direct customer services.
   (a)   “Delivery Charges” exist only when the total charges to the ultimate
customer or consumer include, as separately charged to the ultimate customer,
charges for delivery to the ultimate consumer, whether the place of delivery is
within or without the Town, and when the taxpayer’s books and records show the
separate delivery charges.
      (1)   Identification to the customer or consumer that the listed price
has “delivery included” or other similar expression is insufficient to show the
delivery as a separate charge. Only the separately stated charge for the
delivery shall be deemed a “delivery charge”.
      (2)   Freight in. Charges for delivery from place of production or the
manufacturer to the vendor either directly or through a chain of wholesalers or
jobbers or other middlemen are deemed “freight-in” and are not considered
delivery.
   (b)   “Installation”, as used in this definition, relates only to tangible
personal property. Installation to real property is deemed construction
contracting in this Chapter. Examples of installation relating to tangible
personal property are: installing a radio in an automobile; applying sun
screens on the windows of a boat; installing cabinets, carpeting, or “built-in
appliances” to a camper or motorized recreational vehicle.
   (c)   Repair of tangible personal property is not included in this
definition. See Regulation
12-465.1.
   (d)   “Direct Customer Services” means services other than repair rendered
directly to the customer. Services or labor provided by any person prior to the
transfer of tangible personal property to the customer or consumer are not
included in this definition. In the following examples, the requirements of
subsection (e) below are referred to by the words “identify” or
“identification.”
      (1)   A retailer sells a customer a $100 “plug-in” appliance, with a $25
delivery and installation charge. If the retailer identifies the $25 delivery
and installation charge, it is a charge for direct customer services.
      (2)   A caterer charges his customer $1,000 for the food and drink
served, $300 for setup and site cleanup, and $500 for bartender and waiters. If
all charges are properly identified, only the $300 for set up and cleanup is a
charge for direct customer services, and the $1,500 for food and service is
restauranting gross income.
      (3)   Persons engaged in engraving on wood, metal, stone, etc. or persons
engaged in retouching photographs or paintings may consider such charges for
labor as direct customer services.
      (4)   All charges by a photographer resulting in the sale of a photograph
(sitting charges, developing, making enlargements, retouching, etc.) for
services that occur prior to transfer of tangible personal property are not
direct customer services.
      (5)   An equipment rental company charging $25 for delivery may consider
such delivery charge as a charge for direct customer service only if such
charge is properly identified.
      (6)   Even if identified, charges for labor incurred in the production of
any manufactured article or of a custom-made article (jewelry, artwork,
tailoring, draperies, etc.) are not included in this definition, as such labor
occurs prior to the transfer of property.
   (e)   Recordkeeping requirements.
      (1)   Any person who engages in transactions involving these services
must:
         (A)   Separately bill, invoice, or charge the customer for such
services in a manner by which the customer or consumer may readily identify the
specific dollar amount of the service charge; and
         (B)   Maintain business books and records in a manner in which the
separate charge for such services can be clearly identified, to the
satisfaction of the Tax Collector.
      (2)   Rendering a statement to a customer for a transaction involving
such services and the transfer of tangible personal property which only
indicates the total amount of the charges with words such as “services
included” or “charge includes labor and parts” or similar a expression does not
satisfy the requirements of this subsection.
Reg. 12-100.3. Retailers.
   When in the opinion of the Tax Collector it is necessary for efficient
administration of this Chapter, he may regard any salesman, representative,
peddler, canvasser, or agent of any dealer, distributor, supervisor, or
employer under whom he operates or from whom he obtains tangible personal
property for sale, rental, lease, or license as a retailer for the purposes of
this Chapter, irrespective of whether he is making sales, rentals, leases, or
licenses on his own behalf or on behalf of others. The Tax Collector may also
regard such dealer, distributor, supervisor, or employer as a retailer for the
purposes of this Chapter.
Reg. 12-100.4. Out-of-Town/Out-of-State Sales: Sales to Native Americans.
   Sales to Native Americans or tribal councils by vendors located within the
Town shall be deemed sales within the Town, unless all of the following
conditions exist:
   (1)   the vendor has properly accounted for such sales, in a manner similar
to the recordkeeping requirements for out-of-Town sales; and,
   (2)   all of the following elements of the sale exist:
      (A)   solicitation and placement of the order occurs on the reservation;
and
      (B)   delivery is made to the reservation; and
      (C)   payment originates from the reservation.
Reg. 12-100.5. Remediation Contracting.
   The following activities are considered remediation contracting and are
exempt:
      (1)   excavation, transportation, treatment, and/or disposal of
contaminated soil for purposes of site remediation (rather than
characterization);
      (2)   installation of groundwater extraction and/or injection wells for
purposes of groundwater remediation;
      (3)   installation of pumps and piping into groundwater extraction wells
for remediation purposes;
      (4)   installation of vapor extraction wells for the purpose of soil or
groundwater remediation;
      (5)   construction of remediation systems, such as groundwater treatment
plants, vapor extraction systems, or air injection systems;
      (6)   connection of remediation systems to utilities;
      (7)   abandonment of groundwater or vapor extraction wells;
      (8)   removal/demolition of remediation systems;
      (9)   capping/closure construction activities; and
      (10)   service or handling charges for subcontracted remediation
contracting activities.
Reg. 12-115.1. Computer hardware, software, and data services.
   (a)   Definitions.
      (1)   “Computer Hardware” (also called “computer equipment” or
“peripherals”) is the components and accessories which constitute the physical
computer assembly, including but not limited to: central processing unit,
keyboard, console, monitor, memory unit, disk drive, tape drive or reader,
terminal, printer, plotter, modem, document sorter, optical reader and/or
digitizer, network.
      (2)   “Computer Software” (also called “computer program”) is tangible
personal property, and includes:
         (A)   “Operating Program (Software)” (also called “executive program
(software)”), which is the programming system or technical language upon which
or by means of which the basic operating procedures of the computer are
recorded. The operating program serves as an interface with user applied
programs and allows the user to access the computer’s processing capabilities.
         (B)   “Applied Program (Software)”, which is the programming system or
technical language (including the tape, disk, cards, or other medium upon which
such language or program is recorded) designed either for application in a
specialized use, or upon which or by means of which a plan for the solution of
a particular problem is based. Typically, applied programs can be transferred
from one computer to another via storage media. Examples of applied programs
include: payroll processing, general ledger, sales data, spreadsheet, word
processing, and data management programs.
      (3)   “Storage Medium” is any hard disk, compact disk, floppy disk,
diskette, diskpack, magnetic tape, cards, or other medium used for storage of
information in a form readable by a computer, but not including the memory of
the computer itself.
      (4)   A “Terminal Arrangement” (also called “’on-line’ arrangement”) is
any agreement allowing access to a remote central processing unit through
telecommunications via hardware.
      (5)   A “Computer Services Agreement” (also called “data services
agreement”) is an agreement allowing access to a computer through a third-party
operator.
   (b)   For the purposes of this Chapter, transfer of title and possession of
the following are deemed sales of tangible personal property and any other
transfer of title, possession, or right to use for a consideration of the
following is deemed rental, leasing, or licensing of tangible personal
property:
      (1)   Computer hardware or storage media. Rental, leasing, or licensing
for use of computer hardware or storage media includes the lessee’s use of such
hardware or storage media on the lessor’s premises.
      (2)   Computer software which is not custom computer programming. Such
prewritten (“canned”) programs may be transferred to a customer in the form of
punched cards, magnetic tape, or other storage medium, or by listing the
program instructions on coding sheets. Transfer is deemed to have occurred
whether title to the storage medium upon which the program is recorded, coded,
or punched passes to the customer or the program is recorded, coded, or punched
on storage medium furnished by the customer. Gross income from the transfer of
such prewritten programs includes:
         (A)   the entire amount charged to the customer for the sale, rental,
lease, or license for use of the storage medium or coding sheets on which or
into which the prewritten program has been recorded, coded, or punched.
         (B)   the entire amount charged for the temporary transfer or
possession of a prewritten program to be directly used or to be recorded,
coded, or punched by the customer on the customer’s premises.
         (C)   license fees, royalty fees, or program design fees; any fee
present or future, whether for a period of minimum use or of use for extended
periods, relating to the use of a prewritten program.
         (D)   the entire amount charged for transfer of a prewritten
(“canned”) program by remote telecommunications from the transferor’s place of
business to or through the customer’s computer.
         (E)   any charge for the purchase of a maintenance contract which
entitles the customer to receive storage media on which prewritten program
improvements or error corrections have been recorded or to receive telephone or
on-site consultation services, provided that:
            (I)   if such maintenance contract is not optional with the
customer, then the charges for the maintenance contract, including the
consultation services, are deemed gross income from the transfer of the
prewritten program.
            (ii)   if such maintenance contract is optional with the customer
but the customer does not have the option to purchase the consultation services
separately from the storage media containing the improvements or error
corrections, then the charges for the maintenance contract, including the
consultation services, are deemed gross income from the transfer of the
prewritten program.
            (iii)   if such maintenance contract is optional with the customer
and the customer may purchase the consultation services separately from the
storage media containing the improvements or error corrections, then only the
charges for such improvements or error corrections are deemed gross income from
the transfer of a prewritten program and charges for consultation are deemed to
be charges for professional services.
   (c)   Producing the following by means of computer hardware is deemed to be
the activity of job printing for the purposes of this Chapter:
      (1)   statistical reports, graphs, diagrams, microfilm, microfiche,
photorecordings, or any other information produced or compiled by a computer;
except as provided in subsection (e) below.
      (2)   additional copies of records, reports, manuals, tabulations, etc.
“Additional Copies” are any copies in excess to those produced simultaneously
with the production of the original and on the same printer, whether such
copies are prepared by running the same program, by using multiple printers, by
looping the program, by using different programs to produce the same output, or
by other means.
   (d)   Charges for the use of communications channel in conjunction with a
terminal arrangement or data services agreement are deemed gross income from
the activity of providing telecommunication services.
   (e)   The following transactions are deemed direct customer services,
provided that charges for such services are separately stated and maintained as
provided by Regulation
12-100.2(e):
      (1)   “Custom (Computer) Programming”, which is any computer software
which is written or prepared for a single customer, including those services
represented by separately stated charges for the modification of existing
prewritten programs.
         (A)   Custom computer programming is deemed a professional service
regardless of the form in which the programming is transferred.
         (B)   Custom programming includes such programming performed in
connection with the sale, rental, lease, or license for use of computer
hardware, provided that the charges for such are separately stated from the
charges for the hardware.
         (C)   Custom computer programming includes a program prepared to the
special order of a customer who will use the program to produce copies of the
program for sale, rental, lease, or license. The subsequent sale, rental,
lease, or license of such a program is deemed the sale, rental, lease, or
license of a prewritten program.
      (2)   Training services related to computer hardware or software,
provided further that:
         (A)   the provider of such training services is deemed the ultimate
consumer of all tangible personal property used in training others or provided
to such trainees without separately itemized charge for the materials provided.
         (B)   training deemed a direct customer service does not include:
            (I)   training materials, books, manuals, etc. furnished to
customers for a charge separate from the charge for training services.
            (ii)   training provided to customers without separate charge as
part of the sale, rental, lease, or license of computer hardware or software,
or as part of a terminal arrangement or data services agreement.
      (3)   The use of computer time through the use of a terminal arrangement
or a data service agreement, but not charges for computer hardware located at
the customer’s place of business (for example, the terminal, a printer attached
to the terminal, a modem used to communicate with the remote central processing
unit over a telephone line).
      (4)   Compiling and producing, as part of a terminal arrangement or
computer services agreement, original copies of statistical reports, graphs,
diagrams, microfilm, microfiche, photorecordings, or other information for the
same person who supplied the raw data used to create such reports.
   (f)   The purchase, rental, lease, or license for use of computer hardware,
storage media, or computer software which is not deemed custom programming is
deemed the use or storage of tangible personal property for the purpose of this
Chapter, and the amount which may be subject to Use Tax shall be determined in
the same manner as the determination of the gross income from the sale, rental,
lease, or license for use of such.
Reg. 12-120.1. Food for home consumption: recordkeeping and reporting
requirements.
   (a)   Reporting. Such persons who sell food for home consumption shall, in
conjunction with the return required pursuant to Section
12-520, report to the Tax Collector in a manner prescribed by the Tax Collector
all sales of food for home consumption exempted from taxes imposed by this
Chapter.
   (b)   Recordkeeping.
      (1)   Retailers shall maintain accurate, verifiable, and complete records
of all purchases and sales of tangible personal property in order to verify
exemptions from taxes imposed by this Chapter. A retailer may use any method of
reporting that properly reflects all purchases and sales of food for home
consumption, as well as all purchases and sales of items subject to taxes
imposed by this Chapter, provided that such records are maintained in
accordance with Article III, and regulations of the Tax Collector.
      (2)   Any person who fails to maintain records as provided herein shall
be deemed to have had no sales of food for home consumption, and if upon
request by the Tax Collector, a person cannot demonstrate to the Tax Collector
that such records and reports do properly reflect all sales of food for home
consumption, the Tax Collector may recompute the amount of tax to be paid as
provided in Sections
12-370 and
12-545(b).
Reg. 12-200.1. When deposits are includable in gross income.
   (a)   Refundable deposits shall be includable as gross income of the
taxpayer for the month in which the deposits are forfeited by the lessee.
   (b)   (Reserved)
Reg. 12-250.1. Excess tax collected.
   If a taxpayer collects taxes in excess of the combined tax rate from any
customer in any transaction, all such excess tax shall be paid to the taxing
jurisdictions in proportion to their effective rates. The right of the taxpayer
to charge his customer for his own liability for tax does not allow the
taxpayer to enrich himself at the cost of his customers. Tax paid on an
activity that is not subject to tax or that qualifies for an exemption,
deduction, exclusion or credit is not excess tax collected.
Reg. 12-270.1. Proprietary activities of municipalities are not considered
activities of a governmental entity.
   The following activities, when performed by a municipality, are considered
to be activities of a person engaged in business for the purposes of this
Chapter, and not excludable by reason of Section
12-270:
   (a)   rental, leasing, or licensing for use of real property to other than
another department or agency of the municipality.
   (b)   producing, providing, or furnishing electricity, electric lights,
current, power, gas (natural or artificial), or water to consumers or
ratepayers.
   (c)   sale of tangible personal property to the public, when similar
tangible personal property is available for sale by other persons, as, for
example, at police or surplus auctions.
Reg. 12-270.2. Proprietary clubs.
   (a)   Equity requirements. In order to qualify for exclusion under Section
12-270, a proprietary club must actually be owned by the members. For the
purposes of qualification, a club will be deemed to be member-owned if at least
eighty-five percent (85%) of the equity of the total amount of club-owned
property is owned by bona fide individual members whose membership is
represented in the form of shares, certificates, bonds, or other indicia of
capital interest. A corporation may be considered an individual owner provided
that it owns a membership solely for the benefit of one or more of its
employees and it is not engaged in any business activity connected with the
operation of the club.
   (b)   Gross revenue requirements. In computing gross revenue for the
computation of this fifteen percent (15%) rule of subsection
12-270(c)(1),
      (1)   the following shall be excluded:
         (A)   membership dues.
         (B)   membership fees which relate to the general admission to the
club on a periodic (or perpetual) basis.
         (C)   assessments.
         (D)   special fund raising events, raffles, etc.
         (E)   donations, gifts, or bequests.
         (F)   gate receipts, admissions, and program advertising for not more
than one tournament in any calendar year.
      (2)   the following must be included:
         (A)   green fees, court use fees, and similar charges for the actual
use of a facility or part thereof.
         (B)   pro shop sales if the shop is owned by the club.
         (C)   golf cart rental if the carts are owned by the club.
         (D)   rentals, percentages, or commissions received for permitting the
use of the premises or any portion thereof by a caterer, concessionaire,
professional, or any other person for sales, rental, leasing, licensing,
catering, food or beverage service, or instruction.
         (E)   all receipts from food or beverage sales, room use or rental
charge, corkage and catering charges, and similar receipts.
         (F)   locker and locker room fees and attendants charges if paid to
the club.
         (G)   tournament entry fees other than entry fees for the one annual
tournament exempt under subsection (b)(1)(F) above.
Reg. 12-300.1. Who must apply for a license.
   (a)   For the purposes of determining whether a license is required under
Section
12-300, a person shall be deemed to be “engaged in or continuing in business”
within the Town, if he meets any of the following conditions:
      (1)   He is engaged in any activity subject to the Town’s Privilege Taxes
as principal or broker.
      (2)   He has or maintains within the Town directly, or if a corporation
by a subsidiary, an office, distribution house, sales house, warehouse or other
place of business, or any agent or other representative operating within this
Town under the authority of such person or if a corporation its subsidiary,
irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative
is located here permanently or temporarily or whether such person or subsidiary
is authorized or licensed to do business in this State or this Town.
      (3)   He is soliciting sales, orders, contracts, leases, and other
similar forms of business relationships, within the Town from customers,
consumers, or users located within the Town, by means of salesmen, solicitors,
agents, representatives, brokers, and other similar agents or by means of
catalogs or other advertising, whether such orders are received or accepted
within or without this Town.
      (4)   He is regularly engaged in any activity subject to the Town’s Use
Tax; provided, however, that individuals are not normally required to obtain a
license because they acquire items outside the Town for their own or their
family’s personal use and enjoyment.
      (5)   He is required to report and pay the tax upon Rental Occupancy
imposed by Section
12-440.
   (b)   (Reserved)
Reg. 12-300.2. (Reserved)
Reg. 12-310.1. (Reserved)
Reg. 12-310.2. (Reserved)
Reg. 12-310.3. (Reserved)
Reg. 12-350.1. Recordkeeping: income.
   The minimum records required for persons having gross income subject to, or
exempt or excluded from, tax by this Chapter must show:
   (a)   the gross income of the taxpayer attributable to any activity
occurring in whole or in part in the Town.
   (b)   the gross income taxable under this Chapter, divided into categories
as stated in the official Town tax return.
   (c)   the gross income subject to Arizona Transaction Privilege Taxes,
divided into categories as stated in the official State tax return.
   (d)   the gross income claimed to be exempt, and with respect to each
activity or transaction so claimed:
      (1)   if the transaction is claimed to be exempt as a sale for resale or
as a sale, rental, lease, or license for use of rental equipment:
         (A)   the Town Privilege License number and State Transaction
Privilege Tax License number of the customer (or the equivalent city, if
applicable, and state tax numbers of the city and state where the customer
resides), and
         (B)   the name, business address, and business activity of the
customer, and
         (C)   evidence sufficient to persuade a reasonably prudent businessman
that the transaction is believed to be in good faith a purchase for resale, or
a purchase, rental, lease, or license for use of rental equipment, by the
vendee in the ordinary and regular course of his business activity, as provided
by Regulation.
      (2)   if the transaction is claimed to be exempt for any other reason:
         (A)   the name, business address, and business activity of the
customer, and
         (B)   evidence which would establish the applicability of the
exemption to a reasonably prudent businessman acting in good faith. Ordinary
business documentation which would reasonably indicate the applicability of an
exemption shall be sufficient to relieve the person on whom the tax would
otherwise be imposed from liability therein, if he acts in good faith as
provided by Regulation.
   (e)   with respect to those allowed deductions or exclusions for tax
collected or charges for delivery or other direct customer services, where
applicable, evidence that the deductible income has been separately stated and
shown on the records of the taxpayer and on invoices or receipts provided to
the customer. All other deductions, exemptions, and exclusions shall be
separately shown and substantiated.
   (f)   with respect to special classes and activities, such other books,
records, and documentation as the Tax Collector, by regulation, shall deem
necessary for specific classes of taxpayer by reason of the specialized
business activity of any such class.
   (g)   In all cases, the books and records of the taxpayer shall indicate
both individual transaction amounts and totals for each reporting period for
each category of taxable, exempt, and excluded income defined by this Chapter.
Reg. 12-350.2. Recordkeeping: expenditures.
   The minimum records required for persons having expenditures, costs,
purchases and rental or lease or license expenses subject to, or exempt or
excluded from, tax by this Chapter are:
   (a)   the total price of all goods acquired for use or storage in the Town.
   (b)   the date of acquisition and the name and business address of the
seller or lessor of all goods acquired for use or storage in the Town.
   (c)   documentation of taxes, freight, and direct customer service labor
separately charged and paid for each purchase, rental, lease, or license.
   (d)   the gross price of each acquisition claimed as exempt from tax, and
with respect to each transaction so claimed, sufficient evidence to satisfy the
Tax Collector that the exemption claimed is applicable.
   (e)   as applicable to each taxpayer, documentation sufficient to the Tax
Collector, so that he may ascertain:
      (1)   all construction expenditures and all Privilege and Use Taxes
claimed paid, relating to owner-builders and speculative builders.
      (2)   disbursement of collected gratuities and related payroll
information required of restaurants.
      (3)   (Reserved)
         (A)   (Reserved)
         (B)   (Reserved)
      (4)   the validity of any claims of proof of exemption, as provided by
Regulation.
      (5)   a claimed alternative prior value for reconstruction.
      (6)   all claimed exemptions to the Use Tax imposed by Article VI of this
Chapter.
      (7)   (Reserved)
      (8)   payments of tax to the Arizona Department of Transportation and
computations therefor, when a motor-vehicle transporter claims such the
exemption.
      (9)   payments by tenants subject to the tax upon Rental Occupancy
imposed by Section
12-440.
   (f)   any additional documentation as the Tax Collector, by Regulation,
shall deem necessary for any specific class of taxpayer by reason of the
specialized business activity of specific exemptions afforded to that class of
taxpayer.
   (g)   In all cases, the books and records of the taxpayer shall indicate
both individual transaction amounts and totals for each reporting period for
each category of taxable, exempt, and excluded expenditures as defined by this
Chapter.
Reg. 12-350.3. Recordkeeping: out-of-Town and out-of-State sales.
   (a)   Out-of-Town Sales. Any person engaging or continuing in a business who
claims out-of-Town sales shall maintain and keep accounting records or books
indicating separately the gross income from the sales of tangible personal
property from such out-of-Town branches or locations.
   (b)   Out-of-State Sales. Persons engaged in a business claiming out-of-
State sales shall maintain accounting records or books indicating for each out-
of-State sale the following documentation:
      (1)   documentation of location of the buyer at the time of order
placement; and
      (2)   shipping, delivery, or freight documents showing where the buyer
took delivery; and
      (3)   documentation of intended location of use or storage of the
tangible personal property sold to such buyer.
(Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed 9-12-2011)
Reg. 12-360.1. Proof of exemption: sale for resale; sale, rental, lease, or
license of rental equipment.
   A claim of purchase for resale or of purchase, rental, lease, or license for
rent, lease, or license is valid only if the evidence is sufficient to persuade
a reasonably prudent businessman that the particular item is being acquired for
resale or for rental, lease, or license in the ordinary course of business. The
fact that the acquiring person possesses a Privilege License number, and makes
a verbal claim of “sale for resale or lease” or “lease for re-lease” does not
meet this burden and is insufficient to justify an exemption. The “reasonable
evidence” must be evidence which exists objectively, and not merely in the mind
of the vendor, that the property being acquired is normally sold, rented,
leased, or licensed by the acquiring person in the ordinary course of business.
Failure to obtain such reasonable evidence at the time of the transaction will
be a basis for disallowance of any claimed deduction on returns filed for such
transactions.
Reg. 12-360.2. Proof of exemption: exemption certificate.
   For the purpose of proof of exemption, in transactions other than those in
which the proof is set by standard documentation as detailed in Regulations
12-350.1 and
12-360.1, the minimum acceptable proof and documentation for each transaction
shall be the completion, at the time of the transaction, in all material
respects, of a certificate containing all the information set forth below. For
the purpose of validating the vendor’s claim of exemption, such certificate is
sufficient if executed by any person with apparent authority to act for the
customer, and the information provided validates the claim.
INVALID UNLESS COMPLETED IN FULL
VENDOR’S NAME _______________________          Sales Invoice No.
________________
Customer’s Exemption Claim
Town of Colorado City Privilege License (Sales) Tax
Customer’s Business Name:
______________________________________________________
Customer’s Business Address:
____________________________________________________
Specific Business Activity:
_______________________________________________________
(e.g., if retailer, lessor, or
manufacturer, specify items
______________________________________________________
leased, sold or made, i.e., cars,
computers, clothes, etc.)
________________________________________________________
Customer’s License Nos.   __________      City: ___________________      State:
___________
ITEMS CLAIMED AS EXEMPT FROM TAX
________________________ : All Items on This Invoice or Purchase Order.
or
________________________ : Only Those Items marked with An “E”.
REASON FOR CLAIMED EXEMPTION:
______________________________________ : The items claimed as exempt are sold,
rented, leased, or licensed by the above named customer in the normal course of
its business activity.
or
______________________________________ : The items claimed as exempt are exempt
from the Town of Colorado City Privilege Tax for the following specific reason
(s):
CUSTOMER’S CERTIFICATE
I certify that the above information is accurate to the best of my information
and belief, and that I am authorized by the Customer above to acquire the items
claimed as exempt on a tax-free basis on its behalf. I further understand that
the making of a false or fraudulent claim to obtain a tax exemption is a Class
One Misdemeanor under Town Code Section
12-580.
_____________________________________________      _____________________________
Name                           Date
_____________________________________________
Title
Reg. 12-405.1. Local advertising examples.
   For the purposes of illustration only, and not by way of limitation, the
following are provided as examples of local advertising subject to the tax:
      (1)   retail sales and rental establishments doing business within the
State when only one commonly designated business entity is identified by name
in the advertisement.
      (2)   financial institutions doing business within the State whether part
of a national chain or local business only.
      (3)   sales of real estate located within the State.
      (4)   health care facilities located within the State.
      (5)   hotels, motels, and apartments, whether a national chain or local
so long as the advertisement identifies any location within the State.
      (6)   brokers doing business within the State whether stockbrokers, real
estate brokers, insurance brokers, etc.
      (7)   nonprofit organizations, which even though tax exempt, have an
office, whether national, local, or branch, within the State.
      (8)   political activity, except United States Presidential and Vice
Presidential candidates.
      (9)   restaurants or food service establishments which have one or more
branches, outlets, or franchises within the State even though the local
franchisee or licensee may not be responsible for the placement of the
advertisement.
      (10)   services provided by individuals or entities within the State such
as doctors, lawyers, architects, hairdressers, auto repair shops, counseling
services, utilities, contractors, auction houses, etc.
      (11)   coupons redeemable only at a single commonly designated business
entity within the State.
      (12)   theater, sports, and other entertainment events held at locations
within the State.
Reg. 12-405.2. Advertising activity within the Town.
   (a)   In General. Except as provided elsewhere in this regulation, a person
engaged in advertising activity shall be considered to be doing business
entirely within the Town if all or a major portion of the dissemination
facilities such as broadcasting studios, printing plants, or distribution
centers are located within the Town limits. Remote studios patched to an in-
Town studio and subject to engineering modulation or control at the in-Town
studio are considered studios doing business in the Town.
   (b)   Billboards and other outdoor advertising companies shall be considered
to be doing business within the Town to the extent they have billboards or
similar displays within the Town.
   (c)   Publishers and distributors of newspaper and other periodicals shall
be subject to the tax upon advertising imposed by Section
12-405 and such tax shall be allocated in the manner prescribed by subsection
(e) of Section
12-435.
Reg. 12-407.1. (Reserved)
Reg. 12-415.1. Distinction between the categories of construction contracting.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, transactions involving improvements to, or
sales of, real property are designated into one of the following categories,
and these categorizations shall apply, whether or not a person designates
himself as a contractor, construction manager, developer, or otherwise:
   (a)   A person performing improvements to real property is one of the
following:
      (1)   an “Owner-Builder” when the work is performed by the owner or
lessor or lessee-in-possession. An “owner-builder” may also be a “speculative
builder”.
      (2)   a “Construction Contractor” when performing work for the owner or
lessor or lessee-in-possession of the real property, unless that person has
provided a written declaration stating that:
         (A)   the owner-builder is improving the property for sale; and
         (B)   the owner-builder is liable for the tax for such construction
contracting activity; and
         (C)   the owner-builder has provided the contractor his town Privilege
License number.
      (3)   a “Subcontractor” as provided in Section
12-415 (c).
   (b)   An owner or lessor (“owner-builder”) of improved real property is one
of the following:
      (1)   a “Speculative Builder” as provided in Section
12-100; or
      (2)   an “owner builder who is not a speculative builder” in all other
cases.
   (c)   The terms “owner”, “lessor”, and “lessee-in-possession” shall be
deemed to include any authorized agent for such person.
Reg. 12-415.2. Distinction between construction contracting and certain related
activities.
   (a)   Certain rentals, leases, and licenses for use in connection with
construction contracting. Rental, leasing, or licensing of earthmoving
equipment with an operator shall be deemed construction contracting activity.
Rental, leasing, or licensing of any other tangible personal property (with or
without an operator) or of earthmoving equipment without an operator shall be
deemed rental, leasing, or licensing of tangible personal property. For
example:
      (1)   Rental of a backhoe, bulldozer, or similar earthmoving equipment
with operator is construction contracting. Rental of these items without an
operator is rental of tangible personal property.
      (2)   Rental of scaffolding, temporary fences, or barricades is rental of
tangible personal property.
      (3)   Rental of pumps or cranes is rental of tangible personal property,
whether or not an operator is provided with the equipment rented.
   (b)   Distinction between construction contracting, retail, and certain
direct customer service activities.
      (1)   When an item is attached or installed on real property, it is a
construction contracting activity and any subsequent repair, removal, or
replacement of that item is construction contracting.
      (2)   Items attached or installed on tangible personal property are
retail sales.
      (3)   Transactions where no tangible personal property is attached or
installed are considered direct customer service activities (for example:
carpet cleaning, lawn mowing, landscaping maintenance).
      (4)   Demolition, earth moving, and wrecking activities are considered
construction contracting.
   (c)   Sale of consumable goods incorporated into or applied to real property
is considered a retail sale and not construction contracting. Examples of
consumable goods are lubricants, faucet washers, and air conditioning coolant,
but not paint.
   (d)   Installation or removal of tangible personal property which has
independent functional utility is considered a retail activity.
      (1)   “Tangible personal property which has independent functional
utility” must be able to substantially perform its function(s) without
attachment to real property. “Attachment to real property” must include more
than connection to water, power, gas, communication, or other service.
      (2)   Examples of tangible personal property which has independent
functional utility include artwork, furnishings, “plug-in” kitchen equipment,
or similar items installed by bolts or similar fastenings.
      (3)   Examples of tangible personal property which does not have
independent functional utility include wall-to-wall carpeting, flooring,
wallpaper, kitchen cabinets, or “built-in” dishwashers or ranges.
      (4)   The installation of window coverings (drapes, mini-blinds, etc.) is
always a retail activity.
Reg. 12-415.3. Construction contracting; tax rate effective date.
   A.   In the event of a tax rate change, the rate imposed on gross income
from construction contracting shall be computed based upon the rate in effect
when the contract was executed, subject to the “enactment date” as defined in
this section. Gross income from a contract executed prior to the enactment date
shall not be subject to the tax rate change, provided the contract contains no
provision that entitles the construction contractor to recover the amount of
the tax.
   B.   In the event of a rate increase, in order to qualify for the lower
rate, the construction contractor shall, upon request, provide sufficient
documentation, in a manner and form prescribed by the tax collector, to verify
that a contract was entered into before the enactment date.
   C.   For purposes of this section, “enactment date” shall be:
      (1)   in the event an election is held, the date of election.
      (2)   in the event no election is held, the date of final adoption by the
mayor and council.
      (3)   notwithstanding the above, nothing in this section shall be
construed to prevent the town from establishing a later enactment date.
Reg. 12-416.1. Speculative builders: homeowner’s bona fide non-business sale of
a family residence.
   (a)   A sale of a custom home, regardless of the stage of completion of such
home shall be considered a “homeowner’s bona fide non-business sale” and not
subject to the tax on speculative builders if:
      (1)   the property was actually used as the principal place of family
residence or vacation residence by the immediate family of the seller for the
six (6) months next prior to the offer for sale; and
      (2)   the seller has not sold more than two (2) such residences (or, if
the residence is a vacation residence, two (2) such vacation residences) within
the thirty-six (36) months immediately prior to the offer for sale; and
      (3)   the seller has not licensed, leased, or rented the sold premises
for any period within twenty-four (24) months prior to the offer for sale.
   (b)   In the event that a homeowner of a family residence contracts with a
licensed construction contractor for improvements to a residence, the
construction contracting on a family residence shall be presumed to be for an
owner’s bona fide non-business purpose and all construction contractors shall
be required to report and pay the tax imposed on all such improvements.
   (c)   Purchases by a homeowner of tangible personal property for inclusion
in any construction, alteration, or repair of his residence shall be subject to
tax as retail sales to the ultimate consumer.
   (d)   “Owner” and “Homeowner” as used in this Regulation shall only mean an
individual, and no other entity, association, or representative shall qualify;
except that an administrator, executor, personal representative, or guardian in
guardianship or probate proceedings, for the estate of a deceased or
incompetent person or a minor, may claim “homeowner” status for such person if
such person would have otherwise qualified with respect to the specific
property involved.
Reg. 12-416.2. Reconstruction contracting.
   (a)   “Reconstruction (of Real Property)” shall mean the subdividing of real
property and, in addition, all construction contracting activities performed
upon said real property; provided, however, that each of the following
conditions are met:
      (1)   a structure existed on said real property prior to the
reconstruction activity; and
      (2)   the “prior value” of said structure exceeds fifteen percent (15%)
of the “prior value” of the integrated property (land, improvements, and
structure); and
      (3)   the total cost of all construction contracting activities performed
on said real property in the twenty-four (24) month period prior to the sale of
any part of the real property exceeds fifteen percent (15%) of the “prior
value” of the real property; and
      (4)   the structure which existed on the real property prior to the
reconstruction activity still exists in some form upon the property, and is
included, in whole or in part, in the property sold.
   (b)   Except as provided in subsection (c) below, “prior value” means the
value of the total integrated property, with improvements, as existing
immediately prior to any reconstruction activity. Where, according to Title 42
of the Arizona Revised Statutes, a property’s full cash value for secondary tax
purposes is intended to represent the property’s fair market value, “prior
value” shall be the property’s full cash value for secondary property tax
purposes as determined by the County Assessor in the year immediately preceding
the year in which the reconstruction improvement(s) are or could have been
included in the County Assessor’s valuation. If the County Assessor’s valuation
is contested or appealed, the final determination at either the administrative
or judicial level shall apply. Where, according to Title 42 of the Arizona
Revised Statutes, a property’s full cash value for secondary property tax
purposes is not intended to represent the property’s fair market value, “prior
value” shall be the property’s fair market value prior to the reconstruction
improvement(s).
   (c)   “Alternative Prior Value” shall mean that as an alternative to the
“prior value” defined above, the taxpayer may use his actual cost of the
reconstructed property prior to the reconstruction, provided that evidence of
such cost is presented to the Tax Collector and is determined by the Tax
Collector, in his sole discretion, to be satisfactory. Such evidence shall
consist, at a minimum, of proof of the actual, arms-length acquisition price,
accompanied by a full appraisal of all property involved which appraisal shall
have been performed by a real estate broker or MAI appraiser specifically for
the purpose of assisting in the acquisition and further shall have been
performed on behalf of the seller or a lending institution which has lent at
least sixty-five percent (65%) of the acquisition price. (Only long term
lending - not interim or construction financing will be considered.) This
alternative value shall be used only if the property was acquired by the
reconstruction taxpayer not more than thirty-six (36) months prior to a “sale”
as defined below.
   (d)   A “sale” for the purpose of determining “alternative prior value” or
“reconstruction” only shall be deemed to have occurred as of the date of the
execution of a contract of sale or a deed (joint tenancy or warranty) whichever
is earlier, to a purchaser or grantee of any single residential or other
occupancy unit. In addition to the foregoing, a lease with option to purchase a
single residential unit shall be considered a “sale” at the date of execution
of such lease if said option is exercisable by the lessee in not later than
nine (9) months. Further in the case of cooperative apartments, the sale date
shall be the date of execution of the contract selling (subject or not to
encumbrances, liens or security interests) of a share, or a sufficient number
of shares which entitle the purchaser to the occupancy of a residential unit.
In all cases a person shall include a husband and wife as a community, or any
co -occupants of a single unit as joint tenants.
Reg. 12-425.1. Distinction between job printing and certain related activities.
   (a)   Computerized Printing. Computerized versions of all items which would
be taxable under Section
12-425 if performed without computerized assistance are considered taxable
under that Section, and therefore, are not exempt services.
   (b)   Book publishing. The printing of books shall be deemed job printing.
Sales of books shall be deemed retail sales.
   (c)   Publication of newspapers, magazines, or other periodicals shall not
be considered job printing for the purposes of this Chapter.
Reg. 12-435.1. Distinction between publishing of periodicals and certain
related activities.
   (a)   Book publishing shall not be considered publication of newspapers,
magazines, or other periodicals for purposes of this Chapter. Sales of books
shall be deemed retail sales. The printing of books shall be deemed job
printing.
   (b)   Publication of newspapers, magazines, or other periodicals shall not
be considered job printing for the purposes of this Chapter.
Reg. 12-435.2. Advertising income of publishers and distributors of newspapers
and other periodicals.
   Publishers and distributors of newspapers and other periodicals shall be
subject to the tax upon advertising imposed by Section
12-405 and such tax shall be allocated in the manner prescribed by subsection
(e) of Section
12-435.
Reg. 12-445.1. (Reserved)
Reg. 12-445.3. Rental, leasing, and licensing of real property as lodging: room
and board; furnished lodging.
   (a)   Room and board.
      (1)   Rooming houses, lodges, or other establishments providing both
lodging and meals, shall maintain a record of the separate charges made for the
lodging and the meals.
      (2)   The charge for lodging shall be subject to the tax imposed by
Section
12-444 or Section
12-445. The charge for meals is subject to the tax upon restaurants and bars
prescribed by Section
12-455.
   (b)   Furnished lodging. A person who provides lodging with furnishings
shall be deemed to be only in the business of rental, leasing, and licensing of
lodging, and not in the business of rental, leasing, and licensing of such
furnishings as tangible personal property, unless:
      (1)   Any tenant of any lodging space may choose to rent, lease, or
license such lodging space either furnished or unfurnished; and
      (2)   The lessor separately charges tenants for lodging and for
furnishings; and
      (3)   The lessor separately maintains his gross income from lodging and
from furnishings separately in his accounting books and records.
      If all of the above conditions are met, such person shall report both
sources of income separately to the Town.
Reg. 12-450.1. Distinction between rental, leasing, and licensing for use of
tangible personal property and certain related activities.
   (a)   Certain rentals, leases, and licenses for use in connection with
construction contracting. Rental, leasing, or licensing of earthmoving
equipment with an operator shall be deemed construction contracting activity.
Rental, leasing, or licensing of any other tangible personal property (with or
without an operator) or of earthmoving equipment without an operator shall be
deemed rental, leasing, or licensing of tangible personal property. For
example:
      (1)   Rental of a backhoe, bulldozer, or similar earthmoving equipment
with operator is construction contracting. Rental of these items without an
operator is rental of tangible personal property.
      (2)   Rental of scaffolding, temporary fences, or barricades is rental of
tangible personal property.
      (3)   Rental of pumps or cranes is rental of tangible personal property,
regardless of whether or not an operator is included with the equipment rented.
   (b)   Distinction between equipment rental, leasing, or licensing for use
and transporting for hire. The hiring of mobile equipment (cranes, airplanes,
limousines, etc.) is considered rental, leasing, or licensing of tangible
personal property whenever the charge is for a fixed sum or hourly rate. By
comparison, the activity of a common carrier conveying goods or persons for a
fee based upon distance, and not time, shall be considered transporting for
hire.
Reg. 12-450.2. Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of tangible personal
property: membership fees; other charges.
   (a)   Membership, admission, or other fees charged by any rental club or
limited access lessor are considered part of taxable gross income.
   (b)   Gross income from rental, leasing, or licensing for use of tangible
personal property must include all charges by the lessor to the lessee for
repair, maintenance, or other service upon the tangible personal property
rented, leased, or licensed.
   (c)   Sale of a warranty, maintenance, or service contract as a requirement
of, or in conjunction with, a rental, leasing, or licensing contract is exempt.
Reg. 12-450.3. Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of equipment with
operator.
   In cases where the tangible personal property is rented, leased, or licensed
with an operator provided by the lessor, the charge for the operator shall not
be includable in the gross income from the rental, lease, or license of such
tangible personal property if the charge for the operator and the charge for
the use of the equipment are separately itemized to the lessee and separately
maintained on the books and records of the lessor.
Reg. 12-450.4. Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of tangible personal
property: semi-permanently or permanently installed tangible personal property.
   (a)   The term “semi-permanently or permanently installed” means that the
item of tangible personal property has and is expected to have at the time of
installation a permanent location at the site installed, as under a long-term
lease agreement, except that the person using or applying said property may
eventually replace it because it has become worn out or has become obsolete or
the person ceases to have the right to possession of said property.
   (b)   An item of tangible personal property is deemed permanently installed
if its installation requires alterations to the premises.
   (c)   Examples of “semi-permanently or permanently installed tangible
personal property” include, but are not limited to: computers, duplicating
machines, furniture not of portable design, major appliances, store fixtures.
   (d)   The term does not include mobile transportation equipment or tangible
personal property designed for regular use at different locations or
customarily used at different locations, as under numerous short-term rental,
lease, or license agreements, whether or not such property is in fact so used.
      (1)   For example, use of a mobile crane, trencher, automobile, or other
similar equipment shall be considered a rental, lease, or license transaction
subject to taxation only by the city or town in which such business office of
the lessor is based.
      (2)   Other similar examples include, but are not limited to: camping
equipment, contracting equipment, chain saw, forklift, household items, invalid
needs, janitorial equipment, reducing equipment, furniture of portable design,
trucks or trailers, tools, towbars, sump pumps, arc welders.
   (e)   A rental, lease, or license agreement which specifies that the item in
question shall remain, under the terms of the agreement, located within the
same city or town for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days shall
be sufficient evidence that such rented, leased, or licensed item is
“permanently or semi-permanently installed” in said city or town, except when
the item is mobile transportation equipment or one of the other types of
portable equipment or property described in subsection (d) above.
Reg. 12-450.5 Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of tangible personal
property: delivery, installation, repair, and maintenance charges.
   (a)   Delivery and installation charges in connection with the rental,
leasing, and licensing of tangible personal property are exempt from the tax
imposed by Section
12-450; provided that the provisions of Regulation
12-100.2 have been met.
   (b)   Gross income from the sale of a warranty, maintenance, or similar
service contract in connection with the rental, leasing, and licensing of
tangible personal property shall be exempt.
   (c)   Separately stated charges for repair not included as part of a
warranty, maintenance, or similar service contract relating to the rental,
leasing, or licensing of tangible personal property are exempt from the tax
imposed by Section
12-450; however, such income is subject to the provisions of Sections
12-460 and
12-465, and the provisions of Regulation
12-465.1.
Reg. 12-455.1. Gratuities related to restaurant activity.
   Gratuities charged by or collected by persons subject to the tax imposed by
Section
12-455 may be excluded from gross income if:
   (1)   such charge is separately stated upon the bill, invoice, etc. provided
the customer, and such amounts are maintained separately in the books and
records of the taxpayer; and
   (2)   such gratuities are distributed in total to employees of the taxpayer
in addition to customary and regular wages.
Reg. 12-460.1. Distinction between retail sales and certain other transfers of
tangible personal property.
   (a)   Charges for transfer of tangible personal property included in the
gross income of the business activity of persons engaged in the following
business activities shall be deemed only as gross income from such business
activity and not sales at retail taxed by Section
12-460:
      (1)   tangible personal property incorporated into real property as part
of reconstruction or construction contracting, per Sections
12-415 through
12-418.
      (2)   (Reserved)
      (3)   job printing, per Section
12-425.
      (4)   mining, timbering, and other extraction, but not sales of sand,
gravel, or rock extracted from the ground, per Section
12-430.
      (5)   publication of newspapers, magazines, and other periodicals, per
Section
12-435.
      (6)   rental, leasing, and licensing of real or tangible personal
property, per Sections
12-445 or
12-450.
      (7)   restaurants and bars, per Section
12-455.
      (8)   telecommunications services, per Section
12-470.
      (9)   utility services, per Section
12-480.
   (b)   Distinction between construction contracting, retail, and certain
direct customer service activities.
      (1)   When an item is attached or installed on real property, it is a
construction contracting activity and any subsequent repair, removal, or
replacement of that item is construction contracting.
      (2)   Items attached or installed on tangible personal property are
retail sales.
      (3)   Transactions where no tangible personal property is attached or
installed are considered direct customer service activities (for example:
carpet cleaning, lawn mowing, landscape maintenance).
      (4)   Demolition, earth moving, and wrecking activities are considered
construction contracting.
   (c)   The sale of sand, rock, and gravel extracted from the ground shall be
deemed a sale of tangible personal property and not mining or metallurgical
activity.
   (d)   Sale of consumable goods incorporated into or applied to real property
is considered a retail sale and not construction contracting. Examples of
consumable goods are lubricants, faucet washers, and air conditioning coolant,
but not paint.
   (e)   Installation or removal of tangible personal property which has
independent functional utility is considered a retail activity.
      (1)   “Tangible personal property which has independent functional
utility” must be able to substantially perform its function(s) without
attachment to real property. “Attachment to real property” must include more
than connection to water, power, gas, communication, or other service.
      (2)   Examples of tangible personal property which has independent
functional utility include artwork, furnishings, “plug-in” kitchen equipment,
or similar items installed by bolts or similar fastenings.
      (3)   Examples of tangible personal property which does not have
independent functional utility include wall-to-wall carpeting, flooring,
wallpaper, kitchen cabinets, or “built-in” dishwashers or ranges.
      (4)   The installation of window coverings (drapes, mini-blinds, etc.) is
always a retail activity.
Reg. 12-460.2. Retail sales: trading stamp company transactions.
   A trading stamp transaction is defined as follows: the trading stamp company
issues stamps to a vendor; the vendor then provides them to its customers; and
the customer then exchanges the stamps for merchandise from the trading stamp
company.
   The exchange transaction for the merchandise shall be deemed a retail sale
and the trading stamp company a retailer. All taxes imposed by this Chapter
applicable to retail transactions are therefore applicable to such exchange
transactions.
   The rate of tax shall be the retail rate based upon the retail dollar value
of the redeemed merchandise as expressed in the redemption dollar value per
book of stamps or portion thereof. The tax imposition described herein is in
lieu of any Privilege or Use Tax upon the business of issuing stamps, redeeming
the same, or using or storing property redeemed.
Reg. 12-460.3. Retail sales: membership fees of retailers.
   Membership, admission, or other fees charged by limited access retailers are
considered part of taxable gross income of the business activity of selling
tangible personal property.
Reg. 12-460.4. Retail sales: professional services.
   (a)   “Professional Services” refer to services rendered by such persons as
doctors, lawyers, accountants, architects, etc. for their customers or clients
where the services meet particular needs of a specific client and only apply in
the factual context of the client and the final product has no retail value in
itself. For example, opinion letters, workpapers, reports, etc. are not in a
form which would be subject to retail sales to customers. However, transfer of
items in a form which would be subject to retail sales (e.g., artwork, forms,
manuals, etc.) would not be considered professional services. The issue is one
of fact which must be resolved in each situation.
   (b)   Creative (“idea”) labor and design labor that do not result in
tangible personal property that will be or can be sold are deemed professional
services and, if charged separately and maintained separately in the taxpayer’s
books and records, are not includable in gross income.
   (c)   “Professional services” shall be deemed to include those items of
tangible personal property which are incidental to the services rendered,
provided such tangible personal property is “inconsequential”.
      (1)   Incidental transfers of tangible personal property shall be
regarded as “inconsequential” if,
         (A)   the purchase price of the tangible personal property to the
person rendering the professional services represents less than fifteen percent
(15%) of the charge, billing, or statement rendered to the purchaser in
connection with the transaction, and
         (B)   the tangible personal property transferred is not itself in a
form which is subject to retail sale.
      (2)   In cases where the tangible personal property transferred is deemed
inconsequential, the provider of the tangible personal property so transferred
is deemed the ultimate consumer of such tangible personal property, and subject
to all applicable taxes imposed by this Chapter upon such transfer.
   (d)   Examples:
      (1)   The transfer of paper embodying the result or work product of the
services rendered by an attorney or certified public accountant is regarded as
inconsequential to the charges for professional services.
      (2)   An appraisal report issued by an appraiser, reflecting such
appraiser’s efforts to appraise real estate, is regarded inconsequential.
      (3)   Use of a hair care product on a client’s hair by a barber or
beautician in connection with performing professional services is usually
inconsequential. On the other hand, if the barber or beautician supplies the
customer with a bottle of the product for the client’s use thereafter and
without the professional’s assistance, the transfer of the bottle of hair care
product is deemed not inconsequential.
      (4)   If a mortician properly segregates his professional services from
other taxable activities on his bill (invoice, contract), his gross income
would include only the income derived from the sale of tangible personal
property (casket, cards, flowers, etc.) and rental, leasing, or licensing of
real and tangible personal property. His charges for professional services
(embalming, cosmetic work, etc.) would not be includable in gross income.
Reg. 12-460.5. Retail sales: monetized bullion; numismatic value of coins.
   (a)   “Monetized Bullion” means coins or other forms of money manufactured
or minted from precious metals or other metals and issued as legal tender or a
medium of exchange by or for any government authorized to do so.
   (b)   Any coin shall be considered to have been transferred or acquired
primarily for its “Numismatic value” if the sale or acquisition price:
      (1)   is equal to or greater than twice (2 times) the value of the
metallic content of the coin as of the date of transfer or acquisition; and
      (2)   is equal to or greater than twice (2 times) its face value, in the
case of a coin which, at the time of transfer or acquisition, was legal tender
or a medium of exchange of the government issuing or authorizing its issuance.
Reg. 12-460.6. Retail sales: consignment sales.
   Sales of merchandise acquired on consignment are taxable as retail sales. In
cases where the merchant is acting as an agent on behalf of another dealer,
sales of the consigned merchandise are taxable to the principal, provided the
merchant makes full disclosure to customers that he is acting only as an agent
for the named principal. However, when the principal is not deemed to be a
dealer, such sales are considered to be those of the merchant and are taxable
to him.
Reg. 12-465.1. Retail sales: repair services.
   (a)   Fair market value of parts and labor charges. The Tax Collector may
examine the reporting of all transactions covered by this Section to determine
if an “arms-length” price is charged for the parts and materials. The
applicable tax may not be avoided by pricing a part, which ordinarily sells to
the customer at $10, at $5 and including the difference as “service” or
“labor”. In the absence of satisfactory evidence supplied by the taxpayer as to
industry or business practice, the Tax Collector may use the cost of the part
or materials to the taxpayer marked up by a reasonable profit, to estimate the
gross income subject to tax.
   (b)   (Reserved)
Reg. 12-465.2. Retail sales: warranty, maintenance, and similar service
contracts.
   (a)   Gross income from sales of warranty, maintenance, and service
contracts is exempt from the tax imposed by Section
12-460.
   (b)   Transfers of tangible personal property in connection with a service,
warranty, guaranty, or maintenance agreement between a vendor and a vendee
shall be subject to tax under Section
12-460 only to the extent of gross income received from separately itemized
charges made for the items of property transferred.
   (c)   The gross income derived from a maintenance insurance agreement, which
agreement is entered into between the purchaser and any person other than the
seller is not subject to tax imposed by Section
12-460. If the provider of the maintenance insurance agreement pays for
tangible personal property on behalf of the insured in the performance of the
agreement, such sales are subject to all applicable taxes imposed by this
Chapter.
   (d)   Charges for tangible personal property provided under the terms of a
warranty, maintenance, or service contract exempted under Section
12-465 are subject to tax as retail sales.
   (e)   However, gross income received by a dealer from a manufacturer for
work performed under a manufacturer’s warranty is not taxable under Section
12-460.
Reg. 12-465.3. Retail sales: sale of containers, paper products, and labels.
   (a)   The sale of a container or similar packaging material which contains
personal property and which is transferred to the customer with the sale of the
product is not taxable as a sale for resale. Examples of such nontaxable
containers include but are not limited to:
      (1)   packaging materials sold to a manufacturer of video equipment for
containment of the product during shipment.
      (2)   cellophane-type wrap sold to a meat department or butcher for
containment of the individually wrapped or contained meat.
      (3)   bags used to contain loose fungible goods such as fruits,
vegetables, and other products sold in bulk, where such bags or containers are
used to contain and measure the amount purchased by the customer.
      (4)   shopping bags and similar merchandising bags sold to grocery
stores, department stores or other retailers.
      (5)   gift wrappings and gift boxes sold to department stores or other
retailers.
   (b)   Sales of non-returnable or disposable paper (and similar products such
as plastic or styrofoam) cups, lids, plates, bags, napkins, straws, knives,
forks and other similar food accessories to a restaurant or others taxable
under Section
12-455 for transfer by the restaurant to its customer to contain or facilitate
the consumption of the food, drink or condiment are sales for resale and not
taxable.
   (c)   Where a retailer imposes a charge for gift wrapping and the charge
includes the container, paper, and other appropriate materials, the wrapping
charge shall be considered a sale.
   (d)   Charges for returnable containers, where the charges are imposed on
the customer, are subject to tax at the time of the transaction. A credit may
be taken for the amount of refund after such refund is made.
   (e)   The sale of labels to a purchaser who affixes them to a primary
container is a sale for resale and not taxable. Directional or instructional
material included with products sold are considered to be part of the product
and a sale for resale. However, the sale of items such as price tags, shipping
tags, and advertising matter delivered to the customer in connection with the
retail sale is taxable to the retailer as a retail sale to it, and is not
exempt as a sale for resale.
Reg. 12-465.4. Retail sales: aircraft acquired for use outside the State.
   “Aircraft acquired for use outside the State” means aircraft, navigational
and communication instruments, and other accessories and related equipment sold
to:
   (a)   Any foreign government for use by such government outside of this
State.
   (b)   Persons who are not residents of this State and who will not use such
property in this State other than in removing such property from this State.
This subsection also applies to corporations that are not incorporated in this
State, regardless of maintaining a place of business in this State, if the
principal corporate office is located outside this State and the property will
not be used in this State other than in removing the property from this State.
Reg. 12-470.1. Telecommunication services.
   (a)   Gross income from the business activity of providing telecommunication
services to consumers within this Town shall not include:
      (1)   charges for installation, maintenance, and repair of
telecommunication equipment which are subject to the provisions of Sections
12-415,
12-416, or
12-417 (construction contracting);
12-445 (real property rental);
12-450 (tangible personal property rental); or
12-460 (retail sales); depending upon the nature of the work performed.
      (2)   separately billed advertising charges which are subject to the
provisions of Section
12-405 or
12-435.
   (b)   Mobile equipment. In cases where the customer is being provided
telecommunication services to receiving/transmission equipment designed to be
mobile in nature (for example, mobile telephones, portable hand-held two-way
radios, paging devices, etc.), the provider shall, for the purposes of the tax
imposed by this Section, determine whether such provider’s customers are
“within this Town” as follows:
      (1)   by the billing address of the customer, provided that such address
is a permanent residence or business location of the consumer within the State.
      (2)   in all other cases, the business location of the telecommunications
provider.
Reg. 12-475.1. Distinction between transporting for hire and certain related
activities.
   The hiring of mobile equipment (cranes, airplanes, limousines, etc.) is
deemed rental, leasing, or licensing for use of tangible personal property
whenever the charge is for a fixed sum or hourly rate. By comparison, the
activity of a common carrier conveying goods or persons for a fee based upon
distance, and not time, shall be considered transporting for hire.
Reg. 12-520.1. (Reserved)
Reg. 12-520.2. Change of method of reporting.
   (a)   Any taxpayer electing to change his reporting method shall be
permitted to do so only upon filing a written request to the Tax Collector and
after receiving written approval of the Tax Collector. The approval shall state
the effective date of the change.
   (b)   The Tax Collector may postpone such approval to allow for examination
of the records of the taxpayer and may further require that all tax liability
be satisfied up to the effective date of the change.
   (c)   Failure of the taxpayer to notify the Tax Collector and await approval
before changing the method of reporting will subject the taxpayer to interest
and penalties if his original method of reporting would produce higher taxes
due the Town. When a person makes such change without the consent of the Tax
Collector, the Tax Collector may audit his books and records to verify the tax
liability as of the date of the change.
   (d)   Any taxpayer who has failed to indicate a choice of reporting method
upon the application for a Privilege License shall be deemed to have chosen the
accrual method of reporting.
Reg. 12-555.1. (Reserved)
Reg. 12-571.1. Collection of tax in jeopardy.
   Evidence that collection of tax due is in jeopardy shall include
documentation that:
   (a)   the taxpayer is going out of business.
   (b)   the taxpayer has no Town Privilege License or has no permanent
business location in the State.
   (c)   the taxpayer has failed to timely pay any tax (or penalties and
interest thereon) due to the Town on three (3) or more occasions within the
previous thirty-six (36) calendar months.
   (d)   the taxpayer has remitted payment by check, which has been dishonored.
   (e)   the taxpayer has failed to comply with a formal written request of the
Tax Collector made pursuant to Regulation
12-555.1.
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   SEWER REGULATIONS
      
51.   WATER REGULATIONS
      
52.   UTILITY BILLING
      
53.   GAS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 50: SEWER REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Application for service
   
50.03   Monthly charges and rates
Extension Policy
   
50.15   Plans, specifications and construction
   
50.16   Costs of extension
   
50.17   Ownership
Department and Consumer Responsibilities
   
50.30   Sewer Department responsibilities and liabilities
   
50.31   Consumer responsibility
   
50.32   Interference with Water Department, Sewer Department or Building
Inspector; digging up streets without permit
   
50.33   Unsanitary disposal of excrement prohibited
   
50.34   Private sewer systems
   
50.35   Tampering with equipment prohibited
   
50.36   Permit required
   
50.37   Application
   
50.38   Inspection and approval by Sewer Department or Building Inspector
   
50.39   Records to be kept by Sewer Department
Use of Public Sewers
   
50.50   Prohibited substances
   
50.51   Interceptors required
   
50.52   Authority of Sewer Department
   
50.53   Preliminary treatment
   
50.54   Manholes
   
50.55   Special agreements with industrial concerns
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   B.O.D. (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
5 days at 20°C, expressed in parts per million (p.p.m.) in weight.
   BRANCH SEWER. A sewer which receives sewage from lateral sewers from a
relatively small area.
   BUILDING SEWER or HOUSE SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the
sewer connection or other place of disposal.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
   DEVELOPER. Any person engaged in the organizing and financing of a sewage
collecting system within an area tributing to a trunk sewer of the town sewer
system. Such may be either a subdivider or a legally constituted improvement
district.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food
and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct
from sanitary sewage.
   LATERAL SEWER. A sewer which discharges into a branch or other sewer and has
no other common sewer tributary to it.
   MAIN SEWER. A sewer which receives sewage from 1 or more branch sewers as
tributaries.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch or other body of
surface or ground water.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams
per liter of solution.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. Garbage that has been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than 1/4-inch in any
dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer controlled by public authority.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and
ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. A combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments together with such
ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
   SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing
of sewage.
   SEWER CONNECTION. The connection to the public sewer and the extension
therefrom of the sewer to the property line at the alley or the curb line of
the street, whichever is applicable, depending on the location of the public
sewer.
   SEWER DEPARTMENT. Those officers and agents of the Town of Hildale
supervising sewer operations for the Town of Colorado City.
   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters
and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
   TRUNK SEWER. A sewer which receives sewage from many tributary main sewers
and serves as an outlet for a large territory.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs either continuously
or intermittently.
(1986 Code, § 15-1)
§ 50.02 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   (A)   No sewer connection connecting the town sanitary sewer system to any
consumer shall be made by any person or the town except upon written
application furnished to the town by the occupant of the premises to which
sanitary sewer service is to furnished or his or her authorized agent.
   (B)   A monthly charge will be made for the sanitary sewer connection
according to the rates fixed by the Sewer Department until the service is
discontinued by order of the Sewer Department or written order of the occupant
or his or her authorized agent.
(1986 Code, § 15-2-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.03 MONTHLY CHARGES AND RATES.
   (A)   The initial connect fee and minimum monthly charge as provided by the
Sewer Department shall be made for each sanitary sewer connection regardless of
the location. Water and sewer charges shall be billed on a combined statement.
   (B)   For service to trailer courts, camp grounds, auto courts or multiple
unit dwellings, the minimum monthly charge shall be established by the Sewer
Department.
   (C)   Prior to terminating service for nonpayment of amounts due, the Sewer
Department will give written notice to the consumer and provide an opportunity
for a hearing.
(1986 Code, § 15-2-2)
EXTENSION POLICY
§ 50.15 PLANS, SPECIFICATIONS AND CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   A developer who wishes to extend sewer facilities must employ a civil
engineer to perform the field engineering and prepare detailed plans and
specifications for the sewer extension.
   (B)   The final detailed plans and specifications for the main sewer
extension must be approved by the Arizona State Department of Health Services
and by the Council before construction begins.
   (C)   The design and engineering will be in accordance with the
specifications of the Arizona State Department of Health Services and the town
prior to construction.
   (D)   The construction shall meet the town’s specifications requirements and
approval and will be subject to inspection by the town’s agents during
construction.
   (E)   Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the town agrees to permit
the developer to connect into the Sewer Department’s existing trunk sewer lines
and the main sewer line to be constructed by the developer herein provided.
(1986 Code, § 15-3-1)
§ 50.16 COSTS OF EXTENSION.
   The developer shall pay the costs for utility extension based on the current
extension policy adopted by the Council.
(1986 Code, § 15-3-2)
§ 50.17 OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   The Sewer Department shall have exclusive control of connections to
the proposed main sewer line and upon its completion, the main line shall
become and be the property of the Sewer Department.
   (B)   Except as otherwise herein provided, all provisions of the town code
and ordinances or amendments thereto applicable to sewer services shall apply
to services in the proposed area.
(1986 Code, § 15-3-3)
DEPARTMENT AND CONSUMER RESPONSIBILITIES
§ 50.30 SEWER DEPARTMENT RESPONSIBILITIES AND LIABILITIES.
   (A)   The Sewer Department shall not be responsible for the installation,
maintenance or inspection of the consumer’s service line, piping and apparatus
or for any defects herein.
   (B)   The Sewer Department shall have the right to refuse service, unless
the consumer’s lines or piping are installed in such manner as to prevent cross
connections or backflow.
   (C)   Under normal conditions, the consumer shall be notified of any
anticipated interruption of service.
   (D)   The Sewer Department shall not be responsible for the negligence of
third persons or forces beyond the control of the Sewer Department resulting in
any interruption of service or damage to the property of the consumer.
   (E)   The Sewer Department may refuse service to any prospective consumer
when the capacity of the sewer system will not permit additional loads being
placed thereon.
(1986 Code, § 15-4-1)
§ 50.31 CONSUMER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Building or house sewer connections on the consumer’s premises shall
be so arranged as to provide service to 1 lot. If additional service is
required, it will be considered as a separate and individual account.
   (B)   (1)   The consumer’s house or building service line, sewer connection
and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer, at the
consumer’s expense in a safe and efficient manner and in accordance with the
Sewer Department’s rules and regulations and in full compliance with the
regulations of the State Department of Health Services.
      (2)   Failure to comply with such regulations relieves the town of any
and all liability from injury or damage proximately caused therefrom.
   (C)   The consumer shall safeguard the Sewer Department’s property placed on
the consumer’s premises and shall permit access to it only by the authorized
representatives of the Sewer Department.
   (D)   In the event that any loss or damage to the property of the Sewer
Department or any accident or injury to persons or property is caused by or
results from the negligence or wrongful act of the consumer, his or her agents
or employees, the cost of necessary repairs or replacements shall be paid by
the consumer to the Sewer Department and any liability otherwise resulting
shall be assumed by the consumer. The amount of the loss of damage or the cost
of repairs may be added to the consumer’s bill, and, if not paid, service may
be discontinued by the Sewer Department after providing notice and an
opportunity for a hearing as specified in §
50.03 above.
   (E)   The Sewer Department may discontinue its service for the following
additional reasons:
      (1)   To prevent fraud or abuse; and/or
      (2)   The consumer’s willful disregard of or refusal to comply with this
chapter or other rules as may be adopted by the Council.
   (F)   When service to a consumer shall require the laying of any sewer lines
or the installation of any other town property on, under, across or over the
consumer’s property, the consumer will grant to the town an easement, right-of-
way or license for the installation.
(1986 Code, § 15-4-2)
§ 50.32 INTERFERENCE WITH WATER DEPARTMENT, SEWER DEPARTMENT OR BUILDING
INSPECTOR; DIGGING UP STREETS WITHOUT PERMIT.
   It is unlawful for any person:
   (A)   To interfere in any way with the employees of the Water Department,
Sewer Department or Building Inspector in the discharge of any of their duties,
either in the tapping of any sewer pipe, main or lateral, or in the laying or
connecting of the pipe, main or lateral;
   (B)   To dig up or cause to be dug up any street or alley in the town for
the purpose of connection with the sewer system without first obtaining a
permit from the Sewer Department; or
   (C)   Who, having a permit, to dig up any portion of any street or alley of
the town for the purpose of connecting with the sewer system to fail or neglect
to place the street or alley in its original condition under the supervision of
the Sewer Department and as required by the town code.
(1986 Code, § 15-4-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.33 UNSANITARY DISPOSAL OF EXCREMENT PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to deposit or permit to be deposited in an
unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the town, or in any
area under the jurisdiction of the town, any human or animal excrement or other
objectionable waste.
(1986 Code, § 15-4-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.34 PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Compliance with subchapter. Except as provided in this subchapter, it
is unlawful to construct or maintain within the town any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
sewage.
   (B)   When permitted; sanitation.
      (1)   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available within
the town or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town, the building sewer
shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system, which complies with the
regulations of the State Department of Health Services.
      (2)   The private sewage disposal system shall be constructed, maintained
and operated at all times in a sanitary manner.
   (C)   Discontinuance. Within 1 year after a public sewer becomes available
within 300 feet of any property served by a private sewage disposal system, a
direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private
sewage facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
(1986 Code, § 15-4-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.35 TAMPERING WITH EQUIPMENT PROHIBITED.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the sewage system.
(1986 Code, § 15-4-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.36 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the Sewer Department.
(1986 Code, § 15-4-7) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.37 APPLICATION.
   Upon issuance of a required permit to any person, each and every permit
issued shall be presented by the person to the Sewer Department and application
made for the building connection.
(1986 Code, § 15-4-8)
§ 50.38 INSPECTION AND APPROVAL BY SEWER DEPARTMENT OR BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   No building sewer will be connected to the building connection until it has
been inspected and approved by the Sewer Department or Building Inspector.
(1986 Code, § 15-4-9)
§ 50.39 RECORDS TO BE KEPT BY SEWER DEPARTMENT.
   The Sewer Department shall keep a record of all building connections made,
the purpose for which they are to be used, together with the name of the owner
of the property, his or her agent or representative, and shall furnish the town
with a map which shall be updated periodically.
(1986 Code, § 15-4-10)
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
§ 50.50 PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or
unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Except as provided in this section no person shall discharge or cause
to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes into any
public sewer:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F;
      (2)   Any water or waste which may contain more than 50 parts per million
by weight of fat, oil or grease;
      (3)   Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
      (4)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded;
      (5)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, grits such as brick, cement,
onyx, carbide or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing
obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewer works;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans, or animals, or create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;
      (7)   Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans, or animals, or create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;
      (8)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character
and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle the
materials at the sewage treatment plant; or
      (9)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
(1986 Code, § 15-5-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.51 INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Sewer Department, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes,
sand and other harmful ingredients except such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units.
   (B)   All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Sewer
Department and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection.
   (C)   Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature.
They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily
removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gas tight and
watertight.
   (D)   Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be
maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times.
(1986 Code, § 15-5-2)
§ 50.52 AUTHORITY OF SEWER DEPARTMENT.
   The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having any of
the following characteristics shall be subject to the review and approval of
the Sewer Department:
   (A)   A 5-day biochemical oxygen demand (B.O.D.) greater than 330 parts per
million by weight;
   (B)   Containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended
solids;
   (C)   Containing any quantity of substance having the characteristics
described in §
50.50 above; and
   (D)   Having an average daily flow of greater than 2% of the average daily
sewage flow of the town.
(1986 Code, § 15-5-3)
§ 50.53 PRELIMINARY TREATMENT.
   (A)   Required. Where necessary in the opinion of the Sewer Department, the
owner shall provide, at his or her expense, such preliminary treatment as may
be necessary to:
      (1)   Reduce the B.O.D. to 300 parts per million and the suspended solids
to 350 parts per million by weight;
      (2)   Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the
maximum limits provided for in §
50.52 above; and/or
      (3)   Control the quantities and rates of discharge of the waters or
wastes.
   (B)   Approval. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information
relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for
approval of the Sewer Department and the Arizona State Department of Health
Services. No construction of the facilities shall be commenced until the
approvals are obtained in writing.
   (C)   Maintenance of facilities. Where preliminary treatment facilities are
provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.
(1986 Code, § 15-5-4)
§ 50.54 MANHOLES.
   (A)   When required by the Sewer Department, the owner of any property
served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation and sampling of
wastes. The manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and
shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Sewer Department.
   (B)   The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense and
shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(1986 Code, § 15-5-5)
§ 50.55 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS WITH INDUSTRIAL CONCERNS.
   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the Sewer Department and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the Sewer Department for treatment.
(1986 Code, § 15-5-6)
CHAPTER 51: WATER REGULATIONS
Section
Administration
   
51.01   Management of system
   
51.02   Receipts and deposits
Application for Service
   
51.15   Application for water
   
51.16   Grounds for rejection of application
Deposit
   
51.30   Deposit required
   
51.31   Payment responsibility
Discontinuance of Service
   
51.45   Notice required
   
51.46   Discontinuance under certain conditions
   
51.47   Interruption of service
   
51.48   Liability limited
Consumer Responsibilities
   
51.60   Consumer water facilities
   
51.61   Consumer negligence
   
51.62   Right-of-way
   
51.63   Installation of lines
   
51.64   Protection of town property
   
51.65   Prohibited uses
   
51.66   Sprinkling restrictions
   
51.67   Waste of water
   
51.68   Inspections
   
51.69   Regulations considered part of contract
   
51.70   Extension of water service
Cross Connections and Backflow
   
51.80   Duty to implement
   
51.81   Assessment of hazards
   
51.82   Unprotected cross connections prohibited
   
51.83   Installation required
   
51.84   Right of entry and inspection
   
51.85   Cost of installation and testing
   
51.86   Frequency of testing
   
51.87   Violations
   
51.88   Existing equipment
   
51.89   Conflicts
Water Conservation Program and Policy
   
51.100   Intent and purpose
   
51.101   Implementation of management plan
   
51.102   Water management plan
   
51.103   Emergency restriction
   
51.104   Penalties and surcharges
   
51.105   Exemptions
ADMINISTRATION
§ 51.01 MANAGEMENT OF SYSTEM.
   (A)   The Water Department shall have the immediate control and management
of all things pertaining to the town waterworks system and shall cause to be
performed all acts that may be necessary for the prudent, efficient and
economical management and protection of the waterworks.
   (B)   The Water Department shall have the power to prescribe such other and
further rates, rules and regulations as it may deem necessary.
(1986 Code, § 16-1-1) (Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.02 RECEIPTS AND DEPOSITS.
   The Water Department shall keep a correct account of all receipts, make out
all bills for charges for services including water and material furnished to
consumers, collect the same, and deposit the proceeds so collected to the
credit of the water company, and in accordance with the direction of the Town
Council.
(1986 Code, § 16-1-2) (Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
APPLICATION FOR SERVICE
§ 51.15 APPLICATION FOR WATER.
   (A)   A customer shall make a written application for the use of water to
the Water Department on such forms as the Water Department may prescribe ,
designating the location of the property, stating the purpose for which the
water may be required, identifying the person responsible for the account, and
other information requested. The written application shall be accompanied by
required fees as established by the town.
   (B)   The uniform utility billing ordinance governs reconnection of culinary
service locations.
   (C)   If the property has sewer service available and the opportunity exists
for use (i.e. occupied), the Water Department shall also require a sewer
service charge.
(1986 Code, § 16-2-1) (Am. Ord. 2010-01, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 2015-02,
passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.16 GROUNDS FOR REJECTION OF APPLICATION.
   The Water Department may reject any application for water service for any
good and sufficient reason including the following:
   (A)   Service not available under a standard rate;
   (B)   Proposed service location not adjacent to facilities adequate and
suitable as to capacity and pressure;
   (C)   Property outside of gravity flow limits;
   (D)   Service which involves excessive service expense;
   (E)   Service which may affect the supply to other consumers;
   (F)   When the customer is delinquent in payment of bills incurred for
service previously supplied at any location.
   (G)   Failure to pay any delinquent amounts owing on an existing or prior
account for the same property
(1986 Code, § 16-2-2) (Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
DEPOSIT
§ 51.30 DEPOSIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   A deposit shall be charged for water service before such service
commences to applicants who own property or who rent or lease from a landlord
the premises for which such water service shall be provided.
   (B)   The amount of the deposit shall be set by the Water Department.
(1986 Code, § 16-3-1) (Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.31 PAYMENT RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   The customer of record, as indicated in the Water Department's records
shall be responsible for payment of all charges incurred in connection with the
services furnished, regardless of whether the customer of record or another
party has actually used the service.
   (B)   The Water Department may elect to pursue collection of any outstanding
charges from the owner of the property if the customer of record does not pay
for any outstanding charges. In such a case, ownership of the property or
premises shall be determined by reference to public records maintained by the
Mohave County Recorder's Office. If there is no customer of record, and a
monthly meter reading indicates usage of water at the property or premises, the
owner of the property shall be responsible for paying the water charges due.
Delinquent water charges shall constitute a lien against the property.
   (C)   Water and sewer charges shall be billed on a combined statement as
outlined in
Chapter 52 of this Code.
(1986 Code, § 16-3-2) (Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE
§ 51.45 NOTICE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person who desires to discontinue the use of water shall file
written notice with the Water Department at least 3 working days in advance of
intended termination of service.
   (B)   Responsibility for water consumed extends to the time of departure or
to the time specified for departure, whichever occurs last.
(1986 Code, § 16-4-1) (Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.46 DISCONTINUANCE UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS.
   The Water Department may discontinue water service under any of the
following conditions:
   (A)   To prevent fraud or abuse;
   (B)   Disregard of town rules pertaining to water service. (i.e. cross
connection or backflow);
   (C)   Emergency repairs;
   (D)   Insufficient supply caused by factors outside the control of the town;
   (E)   Legal process;
   (F)   Direction of public authorities;
   (G)   Local emergency requiring emergency measures;
   (H)   Tampering with meter by the consumer; and
   (I)   Default or breach of service agreement including non-payment of bill.
(1986 Code, § 16-4-2) (Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.47 INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE.
   The Water Department shall notify the consumer in advance of any anticipated
interruption of service when such advanced notice is possible. The town shall
not be responsible for any interruption of water service caused by forces
beyond its control.
(1986 Code, § 16-6-1) (Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.48 LIABILITY LIMITED.
   No liability shall attach to the town for any injury or damages that may
result from turning on or shutting off the water in any main, service
connection or pipe; or the restriction of use or discontinuance of any water
service, or any failure of the water supply, regardless of any notice or lack
of notice thereof. The town shall not be held liable, in any respect, for the
condition, defects, failure or use of any pipe, connection, fixture or
appurtenance, not belonging to the town, on any premises, or for loss or damage
resulting therefrom.
(1986 Code, § 16-6-2) (Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
CONSUMER RESPONSIBILITIES
§ 51.60 CONSUMER WATER FACILITIES.
   (A)   The consumer shall have complete responsibility for the installation
maintenance of adequate water facilities on the premises, and the town shall
not in any way be responsible for the installation, maintenance, inspection or
damage of those facilities or damage caused by any defect in the facilities on
the consumer's premises.
   (B)   The facilities shall be maintained by the consumer in full compliance
with any and all rules and regulations of the town in addition to applicable
state statutes.
(1986 Code, § 16-5-1) (Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.61 CONSUMER NEGLIGENCE.
   Any damage to the town water system or injury to Water Department employees
caused by the negligence of any consumer and which requires any repairs,
replacements or damages, the cost of such shall be added to that consumer's
bill, and if such charges are not paid, water service may be discontinued.
(1986 Code, § 16-5-2) (Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.62 RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Each consumer shall provide to the town easements and rights-of-way as are
necessary to provide water service to that consumer.
(1986 Code, § 16-5-3) (Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.63 INSTALLATION OF LINES.
   The Water Department may refuse to provide service unless the lines or
piping are installed on the premises so as to prevent cross-connections or
backflow.
(1986 Code, § 16-5-4) (Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.64 PROTECTION OF TOWN PROPERTY.
   The consumer shall guarantee proper protection for town property placed on
his or her premises and shall permit access to it only to authorized
representatives.
(1986 Code, § 16-5-5) (Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.65 PROHIBITED USES.
   (A)   No occupant or owner of any lot into which water is introduced will be
allowed to supply water to other lots or for use on any other property unless
approved by the town. The Water Department reserves the right to shut off the
supply in such circumstances.
   (B)   Any water service for commercial use shall not be included in a
residential service account and shall have a separate meter and connection.
(1986 Code, § 16-5-6) (Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.66 SPRINKLING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   In case of water shortage or scarcity, the Council may by resolution
place any restrictions which it deems necessary upon the use of water for
irrigation or sprinkling purposes.
   (B)   Sprinkler systems must be constructed or equipped so as to prevent
contaminated water from flowing back into the sprinkler system.
(1986 Code, § 16-5-7) (Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.67 WASTE OF WATER.
   Consumers shall prevent unnecessary waste of water, and keep all water
outlets closed when not in actual use. All water outlets, including those used
in conjunction with hydrants, urinals, water closets, bathtubs and other
fixtures, must not be left running for any purpose other than the use for which
they were intended. In addition to the penalty provided herein for infractions,
the water supply may be turned off where any such waste occurs.
(1986 Code, § 16-5-8) (Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.68 INSPECTIONS.
   Whenever in the judgment of the Water Department it is deemed necessary to
preserve the public health and safety, it may provide for the inspection of
premises or buildings of any water consumer for the purpose of examining the
condition of all pipes, motors, meters and water fixtures, incident to the
supplying of service.
(1986 Code, § 16-5-9) (Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.69 REGULATIONS CONSIDERED PART OF CONTRACT.
   All regulations contained in this chapter and those adopted by the Water
Department shall be considered a part of the contract of every person taking
water from the water department, and every person taking water shall be
considered as having expressly consented to be bound thereby. Consumers outside
the town limits shall, upon application for water service, be required to sign
a statement agreeing to the regulations set forth in this chapter and as may be
adopted by the Water Department.
(1986 Code, § 16-7) (Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.70 EXTENSION OF WATER SERVICE.
   (A)   The customer (developer or property owner) shall pay the costs for
utility extensions based on the current extension policy adopted by the Water
Department. A customer shall be responsible for construction costs associated
with connecting to the water system.
   (B)   A development impact fee if adopted by the town will be required as a
condition for any new water service connection or meter size upgrade.
   (C)   The Water Department shall prescribe the water meter size based on
fixture units served or planned to be served.
(1986 Code, § 16-8) (Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
CROSS CONNECTIONS AND BACKFLOW
§ 51.80 DUTY TO IMPLEMENT.
   (A)   The Colorado City Water Department Superintendent, or his or her duly
authorized agent, shall be charged with implementing the terms of this
subchapter.
   (B)   The city shall use reasonable means to notify customers of the hazards
of cross connections and shall implement a regular schedule of customer
education.
   (C)   The city shall keep reasonable records of cross connection hazards and
the location and test results of backflow prevention assemblies as required by
state and federal agencies.
(Ord. 2001-1, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.81 ASSESSMENT OF HAZARDS.
   The city shall assess each connection for potential backflow hazards:
   (A)   At the time of water connection;
   (B)   On existing services when a building permit is issued which involves
major plumbing changes; and
   (C)   In reviewing its water customer list periodically for potential
hazardous connections.
(Ord. 2001-1, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.82 UNPROTECTED CROSS CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful at any place supplied with water from the
Colorado City Water Department to install or use any physical connection or
arrangement of piping or fixtures which may allow any fluid or substance not
suitable for human consumption to come in contact with potable water in the
Colorado City Water Distribution System, without using a backflow prevention
device or assembly designed and approved for the prevention of the backflow.
   (B)   Any such device or assembly must be approved for installation by the
Colorado City Water Department and in accordance with the city's adopted
Plumbing Code with respect to each application.
(Ord. 2001-1, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.83 INSTALLATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Whenever the city deems that a customer's service connection
contributes a sufficient hazard to the water system, installation of an
approved backflow prevention assembly shall be required on the customer's
service line at or near the property line, immediately inside the building
being served, or at the point of cross connection, depending on the type of
hazard. The type of protective assembly required shall be determined by the
city depending on the degree of hazard existing at the point of cross
connection.
   (B)   Any inter-connection to a non-potable pressurized irrigation system or
private well shall require the installation of an approved reduced-pressure
(RP) backflow assembly. These assemblies shall be protected from freezing and
shall be installed above ground or with a live drain to daylight such that they
cannot be submerged.
   (C)   In accordance with state and federal guidelines, pressurized fire
sprinkler systems which are charged with potable water may not be required to
install backflow prevention assemblies.
   (D)   The customer shall have the right to appeal in writing to the Utility
Board any backflow assembly installation requirement of the Water Department
Superintendent. In the absence of the appeal, the Water Department
Superintendent's decision shall be final.
(Ord. 2001-1, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.84 RIGHT OF ENTRY AND INSPECTION.
   Authorized officers and employees of the city shall have the right to enter,
at all reasonable times, any place which is supplied with water from the city's
culinary water system, for the purpose of conducting a hazard survey or any
other examination or test reasonably necessary to the enforcement of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 2001-1, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.85 COST OF INSTALLATION AND TESTING.
   The customer is responsible for all costs of purchase, installation and
testing of backflow prevention devices or assemblies.
(Ord. 2001-1, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.86 FREQUENCY OF TESTING.
   (A)   Backflow prevention devices or assemblies required by this subchapter
shall be tested not less than once each year by a certified technician.
   (B)   In specific instances where the city deems the hazard to be great
enough, certified inspections may be required more frequently.
   (C)   Backflow prevention assemblies shall also be tested within 10 days
after their initial installation. Test results shall be furnished by the
customer to the city.
(Ord. 2001-1, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.87 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Water service may be discontinued to any user who is found to be in
violation of this subchapter and who fails to take corrective action within 10
days after violation notification, except that water service may be
discontinued immediately if an threat to the water supply exists.
   (B)   Any person who violates the provisions of this subchapter shall be
liable to cover all expenses incurred by the city, including all attorney fees
and court costs.
(Ord. 2001-1, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.88 EXISTING EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   All backflow prevention assemblies existing at the time this
subchapter is adopted but which do not meet the requirements hereof shall be
excluded from the requirements of this subchapter, provided they were approved
for the purpose for which they are being used at the time of installation and
have been properly maintained so as to function in the manner originally
intended.
   (B)   The previously existing assemblies shall still be subject to the
testing requirements of §
51.86 above. Whenever an existing assembly is moved to another location, or
requires more than minimum maintenance, or where it is determined by the city
to constitute a health hazard, the unit shall be replaced by an approved
backflow prevention assembly meeting the requirements of this subchapter and
the Uniform Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 2001-1, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.89 CONFLICTS.
   The decision by a court of competent jurisdiction that any part of this
subchapter is invalid shall not invalidate any other part thereof, except that
the other part is wholly dependent for its operation upon the part declared
invalid.
(Ord. 2001-1, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
WATER CONSERVATION PROGRAM AND POLICY
§ 51.100 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   It shall be the policy of Colorado City to implement the regulations
and restrictions outlined herein to promote the conservation and efficient use
of culinary water.
   (B)   It is in the interest of the public health, safety, and welfare of
Colorado City to require conservation of culinary water resources. It is the
intent of this subchapter to establish measures for essential conservation of
culinary water resources and to provide for equitable distribution of culinary
water supplies. It is further the intent of this subchapter to provide
additional measures for conservation of culinary water resources under
emergency conditions as determined by the Utility Board, the Colorado City
Council or Mayor.
   (C)   It is imperative that culinary water customers within Colorado City
recognize the importance of culinary water conservation in order to extend
existing culinary water supplies and assure sufficient culinary water supply to
preserve the public health and sanitation, and provide fire protection service.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 6-15-2009; Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.101 IMPLEMENTATION OF MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   Colorado City shall encourage efficient use of water resources and
conservation of all water resources on an on-going basis. Colorado City may
provide water conservation information and guidelines to its culinary water
users.
   (B)   Colorado City employees, volunteers, and contracted service providers
shall comply with all culinary water restrictions and conservation guidelines
established by this subchapter.
   (C)   The drought/water management plan will be implemented as follows:
      (1)   The 4-stage management plan will run as determined by the Utility
Board.
      (2)   Each stage of the plan will be noticed to residents by means of
posting in public places including the Town Office and the Colorado City Post
Office.
   (D)   Colorado City shall implement a 4-stage drought/water management plan
as determined by the Utility Board, Colorado City Mayor and Colorado City
Council. The culinary water restrictions do not apply to water use that is not
provided by the town (such as a private irrigation company). The culinary water
use restrictions for Stages 1, 2, 3 or 4 shall become effective when determined
by the Utility Board, and will remain in effect until the Utility Board declare
the water supply is adequate to return to other usage.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 6-15-2009; Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.102 WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   Stage 1: Reduction in water use. Reduction goal: 10%.
      (1)   Inside. Suggested voluntary conservation methods:
         (a)   Fix dripping and leaking faucets and toilets. A leak in the
toilet can waste more than 100 gallons of water a day.
         (b)   Do not let the water run while shaving. Filling the sink basin
when shaving uses 1 gallon of water, letting the water run uses 5 to 10
gallons.
         (c)   Do not flush the toilet unnecessarily. Consider installing
water-saving toilets. Water-saving toilets use 1.6 gallons of water, standard
toilets use 5 to 7 gallons of water each time it is flushed.
         (d)   Take shorter showers or fill bathtub only part way. Long showers
waste 5 to 10 gallons of water every minute.
         (e)   Consider installing low-flow showerheads.
         (f)   Do not run the water while brushing teeth. Turning the water off
while brushing your teeth can save 1.5 to 3.5 gallons of water.
         (g)   Do not run the tap to make water hot or cold. Keep a bottle of
drinking water in the refrigerator so you don't have to run the tap to get a
cool drink of water.
         (h)   Wash only full loads of dishes and laundry. A dishwasher uses
approximately 25 gallons of water; a washing machine uses 30 to 35 gallons of
water per cycle.
         (i)   Consider replacing any appliance that utilizes water with a low-
flow type appliance if such appliance is not already low-flow.
         (j)    Reduce or eliminate the use of the garbage disposal.
         (k)   Wash fruits and vegetables in a basin instead of under running
water.
         (l)   Notify hotel and restaurant patrons of water conservation goals.
         (m)   Serve water at restaurants only upon request.
         (n)   Encourage all hotels, motels, inns and bed and breakfast
establishments to change sheets no more than every 4 days for guests staying
that long, unless necessary or specifically requested by the guest.
         (o)   Adjust temperatures in buildings with water-cooled air
conditioners to require less water.
         (p)   Use of reuse water for construction purposes if it is available.
      (2)   Outside. Suggested voluntary conservation methods.
         (a)   Raise your lawn mower cutting height. Longer grass needs less
water.
         (b)   Delay planting any new grass, sod or other new landscaping.
         (c)   Do not fill swimming pools. If possible, cover the swimming
pool, an uncovered pool will lose 900 to 3,000 gallons of water a month to
evaporation, a covered pool losses 300 to 1,000 gallons a month.
         (d)   Use mulch around shrubs and garden plants to save soil moisture.
         (e)   Use a hose with a shut off nozzle if washing cars at home or
wash at a facility that recycles water. Washing the car with the hose running
uses 100 to 200 gallons of water.
         (f)   Sweep sidewalks and steps rather than hosing.
         (g)   Aerate turf areas.
         (h)   Know your plants water requirements and apply only the amount
required for good plant health.
         (i)   Monitor ET data. Know how much moisture is lost to
evapotranspiration (ET) as this is what needs to be replaced back into the soil
for good plant health.
         (j)    Monitor soil moisture to determine if watering is needed.
         (k)   Water between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
         (l)   Avoid watering on windy days or midday when the evaporation rate
is the highest.
         (m)   Keep fire hydrants closed.
         (n)   Repair leaks in hoses, pipes, faucets and connections.
         (o)   Limit operation of non-recycling fountains.
         (p)   Limit city fleet washing by 30% to 50%.
      (3)   Mandatory restrictions on nonessential water use. No outside spray
irrigation use of water between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
   (B)   Stage 2: Mandatory water restriction. Reduction goal: 15 to 20%. Stage
1 restrictions will be in force.
      (1)   All parks, schools and cemeteries will be allowed to water every
other day during permitted hours.
      (2)   Residential and commercial water users will be allowed to water
outside during permitted hours on an odd/even concept as determined by address,
(i.e. even addresses water on even days, and the like).
      (3)   Noncommercial car washing requires using a hose with an automatic
shut off nozzle.
      (4)   Use of water for street and driveway washing will not be permitted.
      (5)   No planting any new grass or sod or other new landscaping.
      (6)   Water shall be served at restaurants only upon request.
   (C)   Stage 3: Additional mandatory restrictions.  Reduction goal: 25% to
30%. All restrictions included in Stages 1 and 2 are in force.
      (1)   No use of fire hydrants for purposes other than fire protection.
      (2)   No use of water for ornamental use including, but not limited to,
fountains, artificial waterfalls, and pools.
      (3)   No use of water for water games or to fill or top off swimming
pools, hot tubs, and the like.
      (4)   Culinary water will not be used to irrigate city parks or golf
courses or schools.
      (5)   Spray irrigation and hand watering may occur for a total of 15
minutes per landscaped area.
      (6)   Drip irrigation systems, bubbler or soaker hoses may be operated
for a total of 2 hours.
   (D)   Stage 4: Water rationing plan.  Reduction goal: 40% to 60%. All
restrictions included in Stages 1, 2 and 3 will be in force.
      (1)   No watering of lawns.
      (2)   No watering of gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs, and other
outdoor plants, except by means of a bucket, pail, or handheld hose equipped
with an automatic shut-off nozzle.
      (3)   The use of water for flushing sewers or hydrants by municipalities
or any public or private individual or entity except as deemed necessary and
approved in the interest of public health or safety and specifically approved
by the town.
      (4)   The use of fire hydrants by the Fire Department for testing fire
apparatus and for Fire Department drills, except as deemed necessary in the
interest of public safety and specifically approved by the town.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 6-15-2009; Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.103 EMERGENCY RESTRICTION.
   Additional restrictions on the use of culinary water may be implemented if
the Utility Board, the Colorado City Mayor and Colorado City Council determine
that additional emergency culinary water conservation measures are required.
Nothing herein shall prevent the Town Council from enacting another ordinance
or authorizing a further mayoral proclamation pertaining to limitation of water
use if such scarcity remains in existence.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 6-15-2009; Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.104 PENALTIES AND SURCHARGES.
   (A)   The Town Council authorizes the town to issue citations for violations
of this subchapter. During Stage 3 or 4 restrictions, any owner, occupant or
person having an interest in, or control over, the property subject to this
subchapter who shall fail to comply with this subchapter after being given
notice, may be guilty of an infraction for each offense, and water service may
be disconnected. Citations shall be issued with graduated penalties as follows:
      (1)   First violation, a warning will be issued.
      (2)   Second violation, a $50 fine shall be imposed.
      (3)   Third violation, a $100 fine shall be imposed.
      (4)   Forth violation, a $200 fine shall be imposed and a mandatory court
appearance shall be required.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates
any of these regulations, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be punishable by a fine and water service may be disconnected.
Fines shall be issued with graduated penalties as set forth in division (A)
above.
   (C)   Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense
punishable as herein above described. The imposition of any sentence shall not
exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of these regulations
and provisions of this subchapter.
   (D)   Civil enforcement. Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by
law or in equity to prevent any violation of these regulations, to recover
damages, to restrain, correct or abate a violation, and these remedies shall be
in addition to the penalties described above.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 6-15-2009; Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 51.105 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   If compliance with the nonessential use of water restrictions would
result in extraordinary hardship upon a water user, the water user may apply
for an exemption from this subchapter.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, extraordinary hardship shall mean a
permanent damage to property or other personal or economic loss, which is
substantially more severe than the sacrifices borne by other waters users
subject to the same nonessential use of water restrictions.
   (C)   A person or business entity may submit a written request for exemption
from this subchapter. The written request shall include full documentation
supporting the following:
      (1)   The nature of the hardship claimed and reason for the requested
exemption.
      (2)   The efforts taken by the applicant to conserve water and the extent
to which culinary water use for nonessential purposes may be reduced by the
applicant without extraordinary hardship.
   (D)   The Utility Board shall hear and decide exemptions from this
subchapter.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 6-15-2009; Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
CHAPTER 52: UTILITY BILLING
Section
   
52.01   Name
   
52.02   Billing
   
52.03   Due date
   
52.04   Late charge
   
52.05   Involuntary disconnect procedures
   
52.06   Voluntary disconnect procedures
   
52.07   New service for customer with debt to city
   
52.08   Monthly utility rate charges
§ 52.01 NAME.
   This chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Utility Billing Ordinance."
(Ord. 23, passed 4-15-1996; Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 52.02 BILLING.
   All charges for water, solid waste and sewer services provided by the city
shall be billed monthly on a combined statement (the "statement") generated by
Hildale City.
(Ord. 23, passed 4-15-1996; Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 52.03 DUE DATE.
   (A)   All charges billed on the statement generated by Hildale City shall be
due and payable on the due date provided on the statement.
   (B)   The due date shall be generally between 15 and 25 days after the
statement is mailed.
   (C)   All payments received shall be allocated among the charges billed on
the statement according to procedures determined by the city's independent
auditor.
   (D)   Those procedures shall be based on requirements of the city's debt
obligations and the computer facilities used for billings.
(Ord. 23, passed 4-15-1996; Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 52.04 LATE CHARGE.
   A late charge equal to 5% of all charges not paid on the due date thereof is
will be assessed. The late charge shall be due and payable with all other
unpaid charges. A 1% fee will be assessed to any amount due beyond one month.
(Ord. 23, passed 4-15-1996; Am. Ord. 2014-01, passed 11-14-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-
02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 52.05 INVOLUNTARY DISCONNECT PROCEDURES.
   In the event any customer fails to pay all charges billed for water, solid
waste and sewer services, and any late charges assessed, on or before the due
date of the statement, the customer shall be subject to the following
disconnect procedures:
   (A)   Disconnect notice.
      (1)   When a customer's bill becomes delinquent, the next monthly bill
shall include a notice that utility services will be subject to disconnection
if delinquent amounts are not paid. If after the first notice the bill remains
delinquent, a second notice shall be mailed to the customer's last known
address at least 7 days prior to the last day of the month, stating that the
customer's utility services may be disconnected if all delinquent charges
billed for water, solid waste, sewer services and all related late charges are
not paid by 12:00 p.m. of the last business day of the month. The customer
shall be informed in the disconnect notice that it is the final notice prior to
utility service being disconnected. The customer shall also be informed in that
notice that the customer may request a hearing no later than 2 days prior to
the last business day of the month to challenge the correctness of charges.
      (2)   During the winter months a good faith effort will be made to notify
(by phone or written notice left at the residence) the customer or an adult
member of the household, at least 48 hours prior to the disconnect.
   (B)   Contest of charges.  In the event that a customer contests the charges
as incorrect, he or she may request a hearing. The customer's requests for a
hearing must be in writing and received by the utility office no later than 2
days prior to the last business day of the month. The written request must
include the customer's name, contact information, account number and a brief
description of the request being made.
   (C)   Hearing.
      (1)   The Utility Business Manager is hereby appointed as Utility Hearing
Officer, and he or she may appoint one or more of the staff to assist him or
her. The Utility Hearing Officer shall hold an informal hearing with the
customer to determine if the charges are correct. In the event the bill is in
error, the Utility Hearing Officer shall have the authority to correct the bill
for the customer. In the event the bill is determined to be accurate, the
customer shall be held responsible for payment of the charges as billed. The
Utility Hearing Officer shall not have any authority to consider questions of
hardship or inability to pay.
      (2)   The hearing may be continued for up to 30 days by either the
Utility Hearing Officer or by written request from the customer in order to
assemble evidence. The determination of the Utility Hearing Officer shall be
communicated to the customer either at the hearing, the continued hearing, or
within 15 business days.. The customer may make a written appeal to the Utility
Board within 5 days of the determination. The determination of the Utility
Board shall be final.
   (D)   Disconnects.
      (1)   If all delinquent charges for water, solid waste and sewer services
and all related late charges are not paid by 12:00 p.m. of the last business
day of the month that the disconnect notice was given and a hearing
determination is not pending, the utility services for the customer may be
disconnected. Utility meters may be removed from the premises as part of the
disconnection process. Unauthorized connection/reconnection to the utility
system will be considered theft of service and will be prosecuted according to
law.
      (2)   The utility services will not be disconnected for an additional 30
days if the customer has an inability to pay and provides medical documentation
from a licensed physician that disconnecting utilities would be life
threatening to the customer or a permanent resident residing on the customer's
premises due to life support equipment used in the home that is dependent on
utility service for operation.
      (3)   The utility services will not be disconnected for an additional 10
days if the customer has an inability to pay and provides written documentation
that disconnection would be especially dangerous to the health of ill, elderly
or handicapped persons due to weather below 32° or above 99°. A customer making
a request as outlined above may be required to enter into a deferred payment
agreement within 10 days after the scheduled termination date.
      (4)   Utility services may be disconnected without advance written notice
when there exists an safety or health hazard, evidence of meter tampering or
fraud, or failure to comply with conservation measures imposed during extreme
shortages.
   (E)   Reconnects. The services may only be reconnected for the customer if
the following are paid:
      (1)    All delinquent charges for utility services;
      (2)   All outstanding late or penalty charges for utility services; and
      (3)   Reconnect charges as established by resolution.
   (F)   Deposit watch. When a service is disconnected for nonpayment and the
deposit for that customer does not equal the last 2 months utility usage, the
customer will be placed on "deposit watch" during which time $100 will be
assessed per month until the deposit is large enough to cover 2 months utility
usage. The deposit shall be pro-rated among all utility services; i.e. water,
sewer, gas and solid waste.
(Ord. 23, passed 4-15-1996; Am. Ord. 2014-01, passed 11-14-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-
02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 52.06 VOLUNTARY DISCONNECT PROCEDURES.
   In the event a customer desires to disconnect utility services, the service
shall be disconnected by the Utility Department. For security purposes, the
meter may be removed as part of the disconnection process. Then, if service is
again requested by that customer, reconnect charges established by resolution
shall be paid to reconnect the service(s) disconnected.
(Ord. 23, passed 4-15-1996; Am. Ord. 2014-01, passed 11-14-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-
02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 52.07 NEW SERVICE FOR CUSTOMER WITH DEBT TO CITY.
   No new utility service application may be accepted from any person with a
delinquent debt owing the city for any purpose, unless the debt is the subject
of an administrative or judicial proceeding in which the validity of the debt
is contested.
(Ord. 23, passed 4-15-1996; Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 52.08 MONTHLY UTILITY RATE CHARGES.
   Each user of water, gas, solid waste and sewer services furnished by the
city shall pay to the city a monthly charge for such use in such manner and at
such rates as may from time-to-time be established by resolution.
(Ord. 23, passed 4-15-1996; Am. Ord. 2014-01, passed 11-14-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-
02, passed 3-16-2015)
CHAPTER 53: GAS REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
53.01   Definitions
Responsibility of Department
   
53.10   Gas Department
   
53.11   Responsibility of Twin Town Power and Gas Board
   
53.12   Rules and regulations
Regulation of Gas Service
   
53.20   General
   
53.21   Service agreements
   
53.22   Billing and deposits
   
53.23   Priority of regulations
   
53.24   Special service contract
Connection and Installation of System
   
53.30   Connection to system
   
53.31   Unauthorized connection prohibited
   
53.32   Unauthorized connection; recovery of user charges
   
53.33   Main lines installation
   
53.34   Service lines; installation and fitter certification
   
53.35   Excavations for service
   
53.36   Extension and installation; conformance with rules and regulations
   
53.37   Customer responsibility
   
53.38   Relocation of Department facilities at customer's request
Gas Meters and Regulations
   
53.50   Supplying and taking of service
   
53.51   Multiple meter loops; marking required
   
53.52   Master meters
   
53.53   Unlawful acts
   
53.54   Evidence of violations
   
53.55   Interruption of service on account of tampering, bypassing or
unauthorized metering
   
53.56   Reconnection charges for tampering, bypassing or unauthorized metering
Control and Protection of Gas System
   
53.70   Unlawful to damage system
   
53.71   Prosecution and restitution
   
53.72   Disconnection for unsafe condition
   
53.73   Liability of town; exclusion of
 
   
53.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. The Twin Town Power and Gas Board or its designated representative.
   BY-PASS or BY-PASSING. Any line, pipe, hose or other instrument, device or
contrivance connected to the gas supply system, service line, fuel piping or
any part thereof in such a manner as to transport or distribute any such
natural or LPG gas without passing through an authorized meter for measuring or
registering the amount of such gas.
   CERTIFIED OPERATOR or OPERATOR. Any person certified by the Gas Department
of Colorado City to install gas lines.
   CUSTOMER. The person, authorized agent or employee of the person responsible
for the gas service account for the premises being served.
   DEPARTMENT or GAS DEPARTMENT. The operating department of the Town of
Colorado City which is responsible for the operation and maintenance of the gas
supply system of the town.
   DISTRIBUTION LINE. A pipe transporting natural or LPG gas, high or low
pressure, which is used for the purpose of general distribution of gas to the
user.
   DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.  That portion of the gas system of the town, which is
used primarily for the distribution of natural or LPG gas to the user.
   FUEL PIPING. The piping downstream of the Gas Department's meter set, which
is owned and maintained by the owner or occupant of the premise being served.
   GAS SUPPLY SYSTEM or NATURAL or LPG GAS SYSTEM.
      (1)   Any and all services, facilities, structure, equipment or works
owned or used by the town for the purpose of the production, transmission,
distribution or regulation of natural or LPG gas, including but not limited to
gas main lines, service lines, regulators, meter set, valves and associated
appurtenances;
      (2)   Any and all rights, property and obligations of the town concerning
gas transmission and distribution facilities;
      (3)   Any and all standby or contingency equipment, facilities, devices
or materials which may be necessary to provide reliable gas service;
      (4)   Any and all land or sites owned or used by the town for the purpose
of measuring and regulating gas and/or providing gas service to users,
including any and all Gas Department facilities, easements and rights of way;
and
      (5)   Any and all appurtenances, extension, improvements, additions,
alterations or replacements thereof.
   LIQUEFIED PROPANE GAS (LPG). Liquefied propane gas. May be piped in a
distribution system or may be stored in a tank.
   MAIN LINE. A distribution line that serves as a common source of supply for
more than 1 service line.
   MASTER METER SYSTEM. Any system of distributing gas whereby an owner buys
metered gas from the town then distributes and sells the gas through the
owner's own underground piping system to the ultimate user.
   METER SET. The Gas Department's piping, fittings, service regulator, service
meter, associated equipment, and instruments installed downstream of the
service riser shutoff valve and upstream of the connection to the owner's fuel
piping.
   NATURAL GAS.  Any fuel consisting in whole or in part of natural gas or
synthetic natural gas derived from petroleum liquids, coal organic wastes, etc.
   ORDINANCE or THIS ORDINANCE. This chapter (
Chapter 53) of the Town of Colorado City Code.
   OWNER.  The person who holds record title to the premise being served.
   SERVICE AGREEMENT. The agreement or contract between the Department and the
customer pursuant to which service is supplied and taken.
   SERVICE LINE. A distribution line that transports gas from a main line to a
gas department meter set.
   SERVICE STUB. That portion of the service line, which extends from the main
line to the owner's property line, or to the town's utility easement line,
whichever is appropriate.
   TAMPER or TAMPERING. Damaging, altering, adjusting or in any manner
interfering with or obstructing the action or operation of any regulator, meter
or related instrument provided for measuring, controlling or registering the
amount of gas passing through such meter.
   UNAUTHORIZED METERING. Removing, moving, installing, connecting,
reconnecting or disconnecting any meter or metering device for gas service by a
person other than an authorized employee of the Department.
   USER. Any person who uses, consumes gas from or is connected to the gas
supply system of the town. A user may also be an owner, customer, or neither.
   UTILITY EASEMENT LINE.  That portion of the service line from the owner's
property line to the Gas Department meter set.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
RESPONSIBILITY OF DEPARTMENT
§ 53.10 GAS DEPARTMENT.
   The Gas Department shall be responsible for the gas supply system serving
the town and such other areas as authorized by the Town Council.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 53.11 RESPONSIBILITY OF TWIN TOWN POWER AND GAS BOARD.
   (A)   The powers and limitations of the Gas Board ("Board") will be the same
as specified in the Electric Distribution System Management Operations and
Maintenance Agreements dated April 29, 1994.
   (B)   The Board shall be responsible for the management of the gas supply
system of the town and all of the property appertaining thereto. The Board
shall see that such system is properly maintained and kept in good working
order and repair and they shall ensure proper compliance with all local, state
and federal regulations concerning the distribution of gas.
   (C)   The Board shall perform such other duties in connection with
operations of the Department as may be required by the Town Council.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 53.12 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Rules and regulations adopted by the Board shall pertain to but shall
not be limited to installation, construction, operation and maintenance of the
gas distribution system of the town and standards, specifications, procedures
and guidelines for regulating the distribution and use of gas supplied by the
town.
   (B)   In establishing such rules and regulations, the Board shall seek to
assure the safe and efficient operation of the gas supply system and the
protection of such system, process, equipment and facilities appurtenant
thereto.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
REGULATION OF GAS SERVICE
§ 53.20 GENERAL.
   (A)   The rates, charges and regulations, including conditions for all
classes of gas service, for customers and users inside and outside of the
corporate limits of the town shall be determined by the Town Council. The
rates, charges and regulations including conditions for all classes of gas
service, shall be set forth in tariff sheets to be adopted by reference by
resolution of the Town Council.
   (B)   One copy of the current effective tariff sheets for natural and/or LPG
gas service shall be kept on file with the Town Clerk and shall be open for
public inspection during regular business hours. Copies thereof may be
purchased by any person upon payment of the cost of reproduction.
   (C)   Notice of any change in the base rates or regulations shall be mailed
to all gas customers. This notice may be sent with utility bills.
   (D)   Standard for setting rates. All rates, as established by the Town
Council, shall be just, reasonable, sufficient and not unduly discriminatory.
All rates and regulations shall be designated in tariff sheets as provided
above and shall indicate an approval date and an effective date to be set by
the Town Council.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 53.21 SERVICE AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   Form and execution of service agreements. Each applicant for service
shall make a written application therefor on the Department's standard form, or
execute a formal contract. The Department's standard application form, when
signed by the Department's authorized representative as well as the customer,
becomes a binding service agreement. Receipt of gas service shall constitute an
agreement to abide by all provisions of the standard application form and this
chapter.
   (B)   Implied service agreement. In the absence of a signed service
agreement, the delivery of gas service by the Department and acceptance thereof
by the customer shall be deemed to constitute an agreement by and between the
Department and the customer for delivery and acceptance of gas service under
the terms and conditions contained in this chapter and the applicable tariff.
   (C)   Department's right to cancel service agreement or to suspend service.
      (1)   For any default or breach of the service agreement by the customer,
including failure to pay bills within the specified period, the Department, in
addition to all other legal remedies, may terminate the service agreement or
suspend service at the location where such default has occurred. No such
termination or suspension, however, will be made by the Department without 5
days notice to the customer, stating in what particular manner the service
agreement has been violated, except that no notice need be given in cases of
theft or unauthorized use or disposition of service by the customer, or where
in the Department's judgment, the customer is violating or threatening to
violate the gas service regulations or other ordinances, laws or codes or the
provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   No notice need be given in case of emergency, other dangerous
condition on the customer's side of the gas meter, or in case of utilization by
the customer of service in such manner as to cause danger to persons or
property, or to jeopardize service to the customer or others. Failure of the
Department at any time after any such default or breach either to suspend
supply of service, or to terminate the service agreement, or to resort to any
other legal remedy, or its failure to exercise on any 1 or more of such
remedies shall not affect the Department's right to resort thereafter to any 1
or more of such remedies for the same or any future default or breach by the
customer.
   (D)   Cancellation of service agreement.  Unless otherwise provided in the
service agreement, where the customer entirely suspends operations with the
intention to permanently abandon them, the service agreement may be cancelled
by written notice to the Department not less than 30 days before the date upon
which service is to be terminated. No such cancellation shall release the
customer from his prior obligation.
   (E)   Change of address of the customer.
      (1)   When the customer changes his address, he shall give notice thereof
to the Department at least 3 days prior to the date of change. The customer
will be held responsible for all service supplied to the vacated premises until
such notice has been received and the Department has had a reasonable time, but
not less than 3 days, to discontinue service.
      (2)   If the customer moves to an address at which he requires gas
service for any purposes specified in his service agreement, and at which
address the Department has such service available under the same tariff, the
notice shall be considered as the customer's request that the Department
transfer such service to the new address; but if the Department does not have
such service available at the new address the old service agreement shall, at
the option of the Department, either be considered cancelled or the customer
remain liable thereunder.
      (3)   If the Department has service available at the new address to which
a different tariff applies, a new service agreement, including the applicable
tariff, will be offered to the customer. The Department will make transfers of
service as promptly as reasonably possible after receipt of notice.
   (F)   Successors and assigns. Service agreements shall inure to the benefit
of and be binding upon the respective heirs, legal representatives, or
successors by operation of law, of the parties thereto. The customer may assign
his service agreement to a third party only with the written consent of the
Department. The Department may, without the customer's consent, assign any
service agreement to any person or corporation, in any lawful way acquiring or
operating all or any part of the Department's property used in supplying
service under such agreement.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 53.22 BILLING AND DEPOSITS.
   (A)   Billing periods. Bills ordinarily will be rendered regularly at
monthly intervals, but may be rendered more frequently at the Department's
option. Non-receipt of bills by the customer shall not release or diminish the
obligation of the customer with respect to payment thereof.
   (B)   Minimums. When a customer receives service for less than 30 days
during the billing period, the applicable monthly minimum shall apply.
   (C)   Payment of bills. All charges due from the customer become delinquent
if not paid on or before the due date set forth on the bill. Service may be
thereafter disconnected 10 days after written notice has been mailed to the
customer or delivered to the service address. When so disconnected, service
will not be restored until all sums due, including but not limited to any
expense of disconnecting and reconnecting the service, are paid. Upon becoming
delinquent, a late penalty equal to 5% of all charges not paid on the due date
of the bill in question. The protest shall be referred to the Department
Manager for resolution. Upon their written determination of the amount due, the
customer may appeal to the Board. In the absence of such an appeal, the
determination of the Department Manager shall be final. If protest is not made
as herein provided, no adjustment will be made.
   (D)   Charge for restoring service. If service to the customer is
discontinued for non-payment of bill, or other violation of the service
agreement, before service is reestablished, the customer shall pay the
Department a reconnect fee as per tariff, and pay the entire balance of the
customer's pre-existing bill.
   (E)   Tax adjustment clause. In the event any town, municipality or other
governmental body shall impose a gross revenue, occupation or franchise tax
upon the Department for gas supplied, then the amount of such tax shall be
billed to and paid by the customers receiving the gas from the Department
within the town, municipality or governmental body imposing said tax.
   (F)   Deposits; when required. The Department, at the time application for
gas service is made or at any time thereafter, may require a cash deposit or
guarantee satisfactory to the Department to secure the payment of bills as they
become due. The Department may hold such deposit or guarantee in its entirety
until final settlement of the customer's account. Reasons for deposits may
include, but are not limited to, poor payment history and indeterminate or
temporary services. The amount of such deposit may be equivalent to the
estimated cost of service for 60 days, as estimated by the Department.
   (G)   Third party guarantees. Third party guarantees in lieu of a deposit
shall be permitted upon demonstration of a guarantor's satisfactory credit.
   (H)   Letter of credit. In lieu of a deposit, the Department may accept a
letter of satisfactory credit from the last gas utility from which the new
customer has taken service.
   (I)   Refunds. Deposits shall be refunded upon the customer's request after
a satisfactory payment history of 24 months. Deposits shall be credited to the
customer's bills for gas service. If the customer is terminating service and
that customer's deposit balance remains greater than the customer's last bill,
the remaining balance, after crediting the bill, shall be refunded directly to
the customer.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 53.23 PRIORITY OF REGULATIONS.
   The use or connection to the gas supply system of the town by any person
except a public utility shall be subject to 1 or more of the following as
applicable:
   (A)   All ordinances and resolutions of the town;
   (B)   The provisions of the currently effective tariff sheets governing gas
service for the various classes, including regulations set forth herein;
   (C)   The most current town gas department service line design and
construction specifications;
   (D)   Applicable provisions of the United States Department of
Transportation as published in the Federal Register concerning natural or LPG
gas; and
   (E)   Applicable provisions of the Uniform Mechanical Code and any other
applicable codes adopted by the Town Council.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 53.24 SPECIAL SERVICE CONTRACT.
   The town may provide by special contract for the use of a connection to the
gas supply system of the town by institutions, plants, districts, governments,
municipal corporations or other similar users. Any connection outside municipal
boundaries shall be supplied by gas surplus to the needs of the municipality.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
CONNECTION AND INSTALLATION OF SYSTEM
§ 53.30 CONNECTION TO SYSTEM.
   (A)   The owner or developer of premises shall notify the Department when
such premises are ready for connection to the gas distribution system of the
town. No premises shall be supplied with permanent gas from the gas
distribution system unless the same shall be designated by official street name
and number and such official number shall be placed and maintained
conspicuously thereon. Connection of such premises shall only be performed upon
approval by the Department.
   (B)   The town shall not be subject to any liability for any deficiency or
defect which is not discovered by inspection nor shall the owner or developer
of such premises be absolved from liability for such deficiency or defect and
any resulting damage or from responsibility to correct such deficiency or
defect.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 53.31 UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any line, pipe, hose or
other instrument, device or contrivance to the gas supply system or any part
thereof without the written consent of the Board.
   (B)   Any person found in violation of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. In addition to any other penalties that may be imposed, the court
may order any person who is found guilty of violating the provisions of this
section to pay estimated user charges for the period during which such
violation existed.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.32 UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTION; RECOVERY OF USER CHARGES.
   In addition to other penalties set out in this chapter, estimated user
charges may be recovered by the town from any person who connects any line,
pipe, hose or other instrument, device or contrivance to the gas supply system
or any part thereof without the written consent of the Board.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 53.33 MAIN LINES INSTALLATION.
   (A)   The Board shall determine the location, type and capacity of all main
lines. Easements may be required where deemed necessary by the Board to ensure
the safety or efficiency of the operation or maintenance of the gas supply
system.
   (B)   The cost of main lines shall be the responsibility of the owner or
developer requesting connection to the gas distribution system. All gas main
lines shall be a minimum of 2 feet in depth.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 53.34 SERVICE LINES; INSTALLATION AND FITTER CERTIFICATION.
   (A)   The Board shall determine the location or locations at which any owner
service line shall be connected to the gas distribution system of the town.
Such connections shall be made without entering upon property other than the
property of the owner so connected, unless an acceptable recorded utility
easement is provided.
   (B)   The cost of service lines up to and including the meter valve shall be
the responsibility of the owner or developer requesting connection to the gas
distribution system. Service lines shall be a minimum of 18 inches in depth.
   (C)   The gas service line from the property line of the premise to be
served, or the town's utility easement line, to the meter set shall be
installed for the Department by a certified service line fitter or the Gas
Department at the expense of the owner of the premise and in accordance with
the town's Gas Department specifications. The Gas Department shall be
responsible for the inspection of all such installations. Upon inspection and
approval, the department shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance
of the service line.
   (D)   There is hereby established a service line fitter certification
process to be administered by the Department. The Department shall review
applications, conduct training courses, and administer exams as part of the
service line fitter certification process. The certification, process shall be
conducted in accordance with the Gas Department's service line certification
procedures. The certification process shall be successfully completed by all
persons engaging or proposing to engage on the installation of gas service
lines destined to be connected to the town's gas supply system. Upon successful
completion of the certification process, the applicant shall be certified as a
service line fitter.
   (E)   Conditions for continued certification, re-certification, and issuance
of violations or revocation of certification shall be as set forth by the
Department's service line fitter certification procedures. The Department
reserves the right to revoke certification of any person determined by the
Department to be inadequately qualified to install gas service lines.
   (F)   As a condition precedent to receiving gas service, the owner of the
premise being served shall grant the Department permission to locate any
portion of the gas supply system necessary to provide service, on or within the
boundaries of the premise; and, further grant the Department the irrevocable
right of access for the purpose of reading the meter, and installation,
removal, operation and maintenance of all such portions of the gas supply
system, including permission to make necessary excavation for such purposes.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 53.35 EXCAVATIONS FOR SERVICE.
   (A)   All excavations for gas service installation or repair shall be
performed in accordance with the town ordinances and the rules and regulations
of the Department as applicable. Such excavations shall meet all applicable
safety standards, including any requirements as to barricades and lights.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Town Public Works
Director.
   (B)   All transmission lines having a pressure of over 100 pounds shall be a
minimum of 3 feet in depth.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 53.36 EXTENSION AND INSTALLATION; CONFORMANCE WITH RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All extensions of the gas supply system, including the installation of
new main lines and service lines, shall be in conformance with all applicable
rules and regulations of the Department. The Board in its discretion may refuse
to extend service to any person failing to so conform with such rules and
regulations.
   (B)   Line extensions done by an owner or developer shall be warranted by
said owner or developer for a period of 1 year after the line is completed and
charged with gas. The owner or developer shall be responsible for the cost of
main lines and service lines up to and including each customer's meter valve.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 53.37 CUSTOMER RESPONSIBILITY.
   The customer assumes all responsibility on the customer's side of the gas
meter for service supplied or taken, as well as for the apparatus used in
connection therewith, and shall indemnify the Department from and against all
loss, cost, damage or claim and claims for injury or damages to persons or
property occasioned by or in any way resulting from such service or the use
thereof on the customer's side of the gas meter. Such indemnity shall extend to
cover all expenses, including all attorney fees and court costs, incurred by
the Department, with or without suit.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 53.38 RELOCATION OF DEPARTMENT FACILITIES AT CUSTOMER'S REQUEST.
   When, solely for the customer's convenience, the Department is requested to
relocate its facilities, the customer shall pay to the Department the total
cost of making the requested change, as the Department determines that cost.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
GAS METERS AND REGULATIONS
§ 53.50 SUPPLYING AND TAKING OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Gas supply. The Department supplies gas at pressures agreed upon
between the Department and customer at time of connection.
   (B)   Supply of service. Service will be supplied only under and pursuant to
these gas service regulations, and any modifications or additions thereto, and
such applicable rate or rates as may from time to time be adopted. Service will
be supplied under a given tariff only at such connections as are adjacent to
facilities of the Department adequate and suitable as to capacity and pressure
for the service desired. Otherwise, special agreements between the customer and
the Department may be required.
   (C)   Continuity of service. The Department will use reasonable diligence to
supply steady and continuous service, but does not guarantee the service
against irregularities or interruptions. The Department shall not be liable to
the customer for any injury, loss, or damages occasioned by or related to
irregularities or interruptions from whatever cause, nor shall such
interruption or irregularity constitute a default in the service agreement or
on the part of the Department.
   (D)   Meter tests and bill adjustments:
      (1)   When the accuracy of a meter is questioned, upon written request
from the customer, the Department will test the meter by comparing with a
standard test meter. If the meter is found to be accurate within plus or minus
5%, the customer will reimburse the Department for the cost of said test. Prior
to any test, the Department reserves the right to require a deposit to cover
said costs.
      (2)   If the meter being tested is found to be more than 5% slow or fast,
no charge shall be made for testing and the Department will adjust the bill in
proportion to the error (either fast or slow) for the period covered by the
bill in question and until the date of installation of a new meter, but said
adjustment period, in any event, shall not exceed 90 days.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 53.51 MULTIPLE METER LOOPS; MARKING REQUIRED.
   In the event that gas is served to more than 1 user at a single premise,
through a multiple meter set, the owner shall be responsible for plainly
marking each meter of the multiple meter set with a permanent brass tag or
approved plastic tag which identifies the apartment, office, room or other area
served by each meter.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 53.52 MASTER METERS.
   (A)   In the event that gas is served through a master meter system, it
shall be the responsibility of the owner of such premise to install, operate
and maintain the gas piping and facilities downstream of the meter.
   (B)   Master meters shall be installed only upon the approval of the Board.
Installation and operation of piping downstream of a master meter shall be in
compliance with the current regulations of the Gas Department.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 53.53 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to install a by-pass without the
express written authorization of the Board.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any customer or the user at any premises
knowingly to receive gas service by means of a by-pass which has not been
authorized in writing by the Board.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with a gas meter,
regulator or related instrument without the express written authorization of
the Board.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any customer or the user at any premises
knowingly to receive gas service by means of tampering which the Board has not
authorized in writing.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in unauthorized
metering.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any customer or the user at any premises
knowingly to receive gas service by means of unauthorized metering which has
not been expressly authorized in writing by the Board.
   (G)   In no case shall the customer, except with the consent of the
Department, extend or connect his installation to lines across or under a
street, alley, lane, court or avenue, or other public or private space in order
to obtain service for an adjacent property through one meter, even though such
adjacent property be owned by the customer.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 53.54 EVIDENCE OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Proof of the existence of any by-pass, tampering or unauthorized
metering, as prohibited in this chapter, shall be deemed prima facie evidence
that the user at the premises where such bypass, tampering or unauthorized
metering is proved to exist had knowledge of the by-pass, tampering or
unauthorized metering if it is proved that the user is an occupant of the
premises and that said user had access to the gas meter or other utility
equipment where the bypass, tampering or unauthorized metering is proved to
exist.
   (B)   Proof of the existence of any by-pass, tampering or unauthorized
metering, as prohibited by this chapter, shall be deemed prima facie evidence
that the customer had knowledge of the by-pass, tampering or unauthorized
metering if it is proved that said customer controlled access to the gas meter,
regulator or other related equipment where the by-pass, tampering or
unauthorized metering is proved to exist.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 53.55 INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE ON ACCOUNT OF TAMPERING, BYPASSING OR
UNAUTHORIZED METERING.
   (A)   Tampering, by-passing or unauthorized metering, as defined in this
chapter, is subterfuge and constitutes a safety hazard.
   (B)   Such tampering, bypassing or unauthorized metering shall be grounds
for immediate disconnection of service without notice to the customer or user
at such premises, and service shall not be reconnected until any and all
deficiencies in piping, connections, meters and/or other gas facilities of the
premises have been repaired, corrected or otherwise altered to conform to the
requirements of all applicable ordinances, rules and regulations, and until the
requirements of this chapter are met.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 53.56 RECONNECTION CHARGES FOR TAMPERING, BYPASSING OR UNAUTHORIZED METERING.
   In order for gas service to be reconnected to premises where tampering, by-
passing or unauthorized metering has occurred, the customer or user at the
premises shall pay the following charges to the town prior to the reconnection.
   (A)   A service charge calculated to compensate the town for all reasonable
expenses incurred on account of the tampering, by-passing or unauthorized
metering, including, but not limited to, costs of investigation, disconnection,
reconnection and service calls, but in no event less than $75; and
   (B)   The cost of repairing or replacing any damaged utility equipment; and
   (C)   The actual or estimated user charges not previously billed to the
customer as a result of the tampering, bypassing or unauthorized metering.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
CONTROL AND PROTECTION OF GAS SYSTEM
§ 53.70 UNLAWFUL TO DAMAGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere or tamper in any
manner with any transmission or distribution line, service stub, service line,
meter set or any appurtenance thereof connected to or part of the gas system
without prior written permission obtained from the Board.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, impair or deface any
part, appliance or appurtenance of the gas distribution system of the town.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate, obstruct or
disconnect any transmission or distribution facility of the town, or to do any
act or thing to divert, damage or otherwise impede or hinder, or tend to impede
or hinder, the flow of gas through the gas distribution system of the town.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate with other than hand
tools within 18 inches of any underground gas pipeline or facility. Excavation
near such facilities shall be in combination with careful probing. For the
purpose of this section hand tools shall include only non-motorized tools.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate on a premise located
within the town's certified gas service area which is served by gas, or within
a street right of way or utility easement which contains gas facilities owned
by the town without first requesting utility locations from the town's central
locating unit at least 2 working days prior to beginning the excavation.
   (F)   In the event that piping or equipment; attached to or part of the
town's gas distribution system is exposed or damaged, it shall be the
responsibility of the party causing exposure or damage to immediately notify
the Gas Department of such exposure or damage, and further, to provide for the
continued exposure of said facilities until the town can appropriately inspect
or repair its facilities.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 53.71 PROSECUTION AND RESTITUTION.
   (A)   In case of such unauthorized re-metering, sale, extension, or other
unlawful acts of this chapter, the Department may immediately discontinue the
supplying of service to the customer until such unauthorized re-metering, sale,
or act is discontinued and full payment is made for all service supplied or
used, billed on proper classification and tariff sheets, and reimbursement in
full is made to the Department for all extra expenses incurred, including
attorney fees, expenses for clerical work, testing and inspections plus the
cost of repairing or replacing any damaged utility equipment, and any other
costs incurred by the town related to the violation including, but not limited
to costs of investigation, disconnection, reconnection and service calls.
   (B)   Anyone found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.72 DISCONNECTION FOR UNSAFE CONDITION.
   (A)   The owner of the premises served by the gas distribution system of the
town shall maintain all gas piping downstream of the meter set to the end use
at the premises and shall keep other gas equipment and facilities of such
premises in safe condition in accordance with all ordinances, rules and
regulations of the town; provided, however, that all the gas supply system
installed, owned or operated by the Gas Department shall be maintained by the
Department.
   (B)   In the event that the Board determines that any gas piping or other
gas equipment or facility on a premise is unsafe, service to such premises may
be disconnected and shall not be reconnected until the owner of such premises
has corrected the unsafe condition and approved by the Department.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 53.73 LIABILITY OF TOWN; EXCLUSION OF.
   The town shall not be liable to any person for failure to maintain gas
service during repairs or extensions to the gas supply system, nor shall the
town be liable where such failure is caused by or results from a strike, an act
of God, an unavoidable accident or other contingency beyond the control of the
town.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates any of
these regulations, shall be guilty of a Class One misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed $1,000, or by
imprisonment not to exceed 6 months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as
herein above described. The imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the
offender from compliance with the requirements of these regulations and
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-2009)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   ADMINISTRATION
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   JAYWALKING
CHAPTER 70: ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
70.01   Duty of Police Chief
   
70.02   Record of traffic violations
   
70.03   Police to investigate accidents
   
70.04   Traffic accident studies
   
70.05   Traffic accident reports
§ 70.01 DUTY OF POLICE CHIEF.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Police Chief to provide for the
enforcement of the street traffic regulations of the town and all of the state
vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the town to make arrests for
traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to assist in developing ways
and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out all duties specially
imposed upon the Police Chief by this chapter.
   (B)   Any peace officer of the town may be authorized by the Police Chief to
perform any of the duties of the Police Chief included in this title.
(A.R.S. §§ 9-240(B)(3) and (4), 28-627 and 28-643) (1986 Code, § 14-1-1)
§ 70.02 RECORD OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The police shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic laws
of the town or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged
together with that record the final disposition of all such alleged offenses.
This record shall be retained according to the Arizona State Library Archives
and Public Records municipal schedules.
   (B)   All records and reports shall be public records, except personal and
confidential information as protected by state or federal law.
(1986 Code, § 14-1-2)
§ 70.03 POLICE TO INVESTIGATE ACCIDENTS.
   It shall be the duty of the police to investigate traffic accidents and to
arrest and assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations
of law causing or contributing to those accidents.
(1986 Code, § 14-1-3)
§ 70.04 TRAFFIC ACCIDENT STUDIES.
   Whenever the accidents of any particular location become numerous the Police
Chief shall conduct studies of those accidents and determine remedial measures.
(1986 Code, § 14-1-4)
§ 70.05 TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (A)   The Police Chief shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic
accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed
alphabetically by location.
   (B)   The Police Chief shall receive and properly file all accident reports
made to him or her under state law or under any law of the town. All the
accident reports made by drivers shall be for the confidential use of the town.
No such report shall be admissible in any civil or criminal proceeding other
than upon request of any person making the report or upon request of the court
having jurisdiction, to prove compliance with the laws requiring the making of
any such report.
(1986 Code, § 14-1-5)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Adoption of Uniform Traffic Code
   
71.02   Directing traffic
   
71.03   Obedience to traffic regulations
   
71.04   Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted
   
71.05   Traffic control devices
   
71.06   Authority to designate crosswalks, establish safety zones and mark
traffic lanes
   
71.07   Authority to place and obedience to turning markers
   
71.08   Authority to place and obedience to restricted turn signs
   
71.09   Limitations of turning around
   
71.10   One-way streets and alleys
   
71.11   Regulation of traffic at intersections
   
71.12   Driver to obey signs
   
71.13   Special events
   
71.14   Speed limits
   
71.15   Speed contest; exhibition driving on highway
§ 71.01 ADOPTION OF UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE.
   A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 3 is hereby approved and adopted as the Traffic
Code for this municipality except as that code may be altered or modified.
(1986 Code, § 14-2-1)
§ 71.02 DIRECTING TRAFFIC.
   (A)   The Police Chief is hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice,
hand or signal.
   (B)   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the Police Chief in directing or detouring traffic thereat or
in the immediate vicinity.
(1986 Code, § 14-2-2)
§ 71.03 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   It is unlawful, except as otherwise provided in this code, for any person to
do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this chapter or
willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of the
Police Chief or of any Fire Department official.
(1986 Code, § 14-2-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.04 USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED.
   No person upon roller skates or riding any coaster, toy vehicle or similar
device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk,
and, when crossing, that person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be
subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians.
(1986 Code, § 14-2-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.05 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   The Public Works Director, in coordination with the approval of the
Council, shall place and maintain traffic control devices, signs and signals
when and as required under the traffic regulations of the town to make
effective the provisions of those regulations, and may place and maintain such
additional traffic control devices as he or she may deem necessary to regulate
traffic under the traffic laws of the town or under state law or to guide or
warn traffic.
   (B)   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the traffic
regulations of the town unless otherwise directed by the police, subject to the
exceptions granted in this chapter or by state law.
(1986 Code, § 14-2-5)
§ 71.06 AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE CROSSWALKS, ESTABLISH SAFETY ZONES AND MARK
TRAFFIC LANES.
   The Public Works Director is hereby authorized, on approval by the Council:
   (A)   To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon
the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his or her
opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at
such other places as he or she may deem necessary;
   (B)   To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such
places as he or she may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians; and
   (C)   To mark lanes for traffic on street pavement at such places as he or
she may deem advisable, consistent with the traffic laws of the town.
(1986 Code, § 14-2-6)
§ 71.07 AUTHORITY TO PLACE AND OBEDIENCE TO TURNING MARKERS.
   (A)   The Public Works Director is authorized to place markers, buttons or
signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled
by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so
indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.
   (B)   When authored markers, buttons or other indications are placed within
an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning
thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such
indications.
(1986 Code, § 14-2-7)
§ 71.08 AUTHORITY TO PLACE AND OBEDIENCE TO RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS.
   (A)   (1)   The Public Works Director, on approval by the Council, is hereby
authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall
not make a right, left or U-turn and shall place proper signs at those
intersections.
      (2)   The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of
any day and permitted at other hours, in which even the same shall be plainly
indicated on the signs, or the signs may be removed when such turns are
permitted.
   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left
or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of
any such sign.
(1986 Code, § 14-2-8) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.09 LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND.
   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not upon
any other street so turn a vehicle unless that movement can be made in safety
and without interfering with other traffic, having consideration for the
existing and potential hazards.
(1986 Code, § 14-2-9) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.10 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   (A)   The Council shall be resolution designate any streets or alleys which
are to be limited to 1-way traffic.
   (B)   (1)   When any resolution of the Council designates any 1-way street
or alley, the Public Works Director shall place and maintain signs giving
notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless those signs
are in place.
      (2)   Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be
placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
(1986 Code, § 14-2-10)
§ 71.11 REGULATION OF TRAFFIC AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The Public Works Director shall designate through streets,
intersections where stops are required, and intersections where vehicles shall
yield the right-of-way.
   (B)   Appropriate signs shall be erected at every location where a vehicle
must stop or yield the right-of-way.
(1986 Code, § 14-2-11)
§ 71.12 DRIVER TO OBEY SIGNS.
   (A)   Whenever traffic signs are erected as provided in this chapter, every
driver of a vehicle shall obey those signs unless directed to proceed by the
Police Chief or a traffic control signal.
   (B)   No driver shall drive upon or through any private property such as an
oil station, vacant lot or similar property to avoid obedience to any
regulation included in this chapter.
(1986 Code, § 14-2-12) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.13 SPECIAL EVENTS.
   (A)   No procession or parade, march, motorcade, fair, ceremony, show,
exhibit, festival, street performance, organized race, concert, carnival or
other such activity, except funeral processions, shall be held without first
securing a permit from the Police Chief and all such requests for permits shall
state the time, place of formation, proposed line of march, destination and
such other regulations as the Police Chief may set forth therein.
   (B)   A funeral procession composed of a procession of vehicles shall be
identified by such methods as may be determined and designated by the Police
Chief.
   (C)   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a
funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when those
vehicles are conspicuously designated. This provision shall not apply at
intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or the
Police Chief.
   (D)   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to
the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle
ahead as close as is practical and safe.
(1986 Code, § 14-2-13)
§ 71.14 SPEED LIMITS.
   Any speed in excess of 35 mph shall be prima facie evidence that the speed
is not reasonable and is a civil traffic violation, on every public street of
the town, except where the posted speed limit is different.
(1986 Code, § 14-2-14)
§ 71.15 SPEED CONTEST; EXHIBITION DRIVING ON HIGHWAY.
   (A)   A person may not engage in any motor vehicle speed contest or
exhibition of speed on a highway or aid or abet in any motor vehicle speed
contest or exhibition on any highway.
   (B)   A person may not, for the purpose of facilitating or aiding or as an
incident to any motor vehicle speed contest upon a highway, in any manner
obstruct or place any barricade or obstruction or assist or participate in
placing any barricade or obstruction upon any highway.
   (C)   A person shall not operate a motor vehicle on any highway in such a
manner as to cause it to fishtail, slide or otherwise cause the wheels to lose
contact or traction with the road surface in an unsafe manner.
(Ord. 21, passed 2-13-1995) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
72.01   Method of parking
   
72.02   Blocking traffic
   
72.03   Parking adjacent to schools
   
72.04   Authority to erect signs restricting parking
   
72.05   Parking vehicles on sidewalks
   
72.06   Restricted parking areas for the handicapped
   
72.07   Abandoned vehicles
   
72.08   Parking adjacent to parks prohibited during curfew hours
   
72.09   Prohibited parking
   
72.10   Application of restrictions
§ 72.01 METHOD OF PARKING.
   Except as otherwise provided by resolution of the Council, every vehicle
stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so
stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle parallel to and
within 18 inches of the right-hand curb.
(1986 Code, § 14-3-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.02 BLOCKING TRAFFIC.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle, or other
vehicle, upon a street in the town in such a manner or under such conditions as
to leave available less that 20 feet of the width of the roadway for the free
movement of vehicular traffic, except that a person may stop temporarily, in
the actual loading or unloading of passengers, or when necessary, in the
observance of traffic signs or signals of the Police Chief.
   (B)   No person shall park a motor vehicle, or other vehicle, within an
alley or entrance to a private driveway except for the loading or unloading of
materials, and not then unless the loading or unloading can be accomplished
without blocking the alley to the free movement of vehicular traffic.
(1986 Code, § 14-3-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.03 PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS.
   When signs are erected indicating no parking on that side of the street
adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such
designated place for 1 hour before school opens until 1 hour after school
closes on any school day.
(1986 Code, § 14-3-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.04 AUTHORITY TO ERECT SIGNS RESTRICTING PARKING.
   (A)   The Public Works Director, upon approval by the Council, may erect
signs requiring parking at an angle to the curb, allowing parking on the left-
hand curb on 1-way streets, notifying drivers that parking is prohibited, and
restricting parking in any way that may be necessary.
   (B)   When the signs have been erected, no person shall stop or stand a
vehicle in disobedience to those parking restrictions.
(1986 Code, § 14-3-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.05 PARKING VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall park any vehicle, whether in usable condition or not, nor
shall an owner permit his or her vehicle to be parked upon any sidewalk in the
town.
(1986 Code, § 14-3-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.06 RESTRICTED PARKING AREAS FOR THE HANDICAPPED.
   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle in a parking space set aside and
identified for use only by persons with physical disabilities, unless the
vehicle has displayed thereon a distinguishing insignia as provided in A.R.S. §
28-884.
   (B)   Division (A) above shall apply only to those parking spaces that are
identified with standard signs or other markers, as approved by the police.
   (C)   Any person or business which causes a parking space to be set aside
for use only by persons with physical disabilities and identifies that parking
space by the methods described in division (B) above shall be deemed to have
given consent to the police to enforce a violation of this section, when the
violation occurs on the private property of such person or business.
(1986 Code, § 14-3-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.07 ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   Any vehicle left unattended, after being tagged by the police, for more than
48 hours within the right-of-way of a highway, road, street or other public
thoroughfare or on any sidewalk, is declared to be an abandoned vehicle and the
police may forthwith remove the same from the sidewalks or streets of the town
at the expense of the owner of the vehicle.
(1986 Code, § 14-3-7)
§ 72.08 PARKING ADJACENT TO PARKS PROHIBITED DURING CURFEW HOURS.
   No person shall park a vehicle or allow a vehicle to remain parked on any
public road or alley adjacent to or abutting any town park during the hours
between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. The police may remove any vehicle in
violation at the expense of the owner.
(1986 Code, § 14-3-8) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.09 PROHIBITED PARKING.
   No person shall park a vehicle upon any street for the principal purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying the vehicle for sale;
   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency;
   (C)   Displaying advertising; or
   (D)   Displaying commercial exhibits.
(1986 Code, § 14-3-9) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.10 APPLICATION OF RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the standing or parking of
a vehicle shall apply at all times, or at those times herein specified or as
indicated on official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or official traffic control device.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall
not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in specified places or at specified times. The stopping, standing or
parking restrictions in this chapter do not apply to town police officers
acting in the actual performance of law enforcement duty.
(1986 Code, § 14-3-10)
CHAPTER 73: JAYWALKING
Section
   
73.01   Definition
   
73.02   Pedestrian’s duties
   
73.99   Penalty
§ 73.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CROSSWALK. That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs, or in absence of curbs, from the edges of the
traversable roadway and any portion of a roadway at an intersection or
elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other marks
on the surface.
(1986 Code, § 14-4-1)
§ 73.02 PEDESTRIAN’S DUTIES.
   Pedestrians shall be subject to any official traffic control device
applicable thereto placed in accordance with the state or local traffic laws,
unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
(1986 Code, § 14-4-2) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   Every person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $25 or by imprisonment for not more than 5 days or by
both the fine and imprisonment.
(1986 Code, § 14-4-3)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   HEALTH AND SANITATION
      
92.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
93.   RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
Administration and Enforcement
   
90.001   Animal Control Officer; authority
   
90.002   Animal Control Officer; enforcement
   
90.003   Investigations; right of entry
   
90.004   Pursuit; right of entry
   
90.005   Interference with Officer prohibited
   
90.006   Public nuisance declared
   
90.007   Definitions
Dog Licenses
   
90.020   Dog licenses required
   
90.021   License fees
   
90.022   Term of license
Impoundment and Disposition
   
90.035   Relinquishing an animal
   
90.036   Notification of owner of record
   
90.037   Release of animal to owner
   
90.038   Holding period; disposition
Communicable Disease
   
90.050   Harboring diseased animal prohibited; disposal
   
90.051   Rabid animal; reporting
   
90.052   Rabid animal; isolation
   
90.053   Euthanasia for testing
Animal Care and Control
   
90.065   Conditions of ownership
   
90.066   Applicability to non-residents
   
90.067   Restraint of animal by owner
   
90.068   Possession of vicious or dangerous animal
   
90.069   Dogs prohibited in certain public places
   
90.070   Disturbing the peace prohibited
   
90.071   Female dogs in heat
   
90.072   Abandoning sick or disabled animals
   
90.073   Removal and disposition of dead animals
   
90.074   Rendering assistance to animals
   
90.075   Emergency proclamation
   
90.076   Liability for at-large animals
   
90.077   Dogs attacking persons and animals
   
90.078   Cruelty to animals
   
90.079   Poisoning animals
   
90.080   Encouraging animals to fight
   
90.081   Keeping wild animals and reptiles
   
90.082   Animal packs
   
90.083   Animal waste
Kennels
   
90.100   Definition; permit required
   
90.101   Standards
   
90.102   Location
   
90.103   Permit revocation
   
90.104   Inspections
Fee Schedule
   
90.115   Adoption of fee schedule
 
   
90.999   Penalty
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 90.001 ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER; AUTHORITY.
   In accordance with the laws of the State of Arizona, the Town of Colorado
City is enabled to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare of its citizenry. The position of Animal Control
Officer is hereby created and vested with authority to perform the duties and
authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 90.002 ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER; ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Animal Control Officer or deputy thereof assigned to duties which
include the enforcement of animal control laws shall be responsible for
enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Each of the individuals referred to in this section shall have the
power to issue citations for violations of this chapter and to swear to
complaints for those violations when appropriate.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 90.003 INVESTIGATIONS; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Animal Control Officer, Public Health Officer and any Town Peace Officer
may enter upon privately owned land to investigate reports of vicious or
dangerous animals, rabies or other contagious animal diseases and to
investigate violations of this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 90.004 PURSUIT; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   In the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, the Animal
Control Officer or his or her deputy may enter upon the premises of any person
to take possession of registered or unregistered, fierce, dangerous or vicious
animals when in fresh pursuit of the animal at the time the animal goes onto
private property.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 90.005 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICER PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, molest, hinder or
prevent the Animal Control Officer from discharging his or her duties.
   (B)   Any person who hinders, delays, interferes with or obstructs an Animal
Control Officer, while the Officer is engaged in capturing, securing or taking
to the animal shelter any animal or animals to be impounded, or who breaks open
or in any manner directly aids, counsels or advises in the breaking of any
animal shelter or vehicle used for holding, collecting or conveying any animals
to the shelter, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.006 PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED.
   (A)   The introduction, possession or maintenance of any animal; or allowing
of any animal to be in violation of this chapter is, in addition to being a
misdemeanor, declared to be a public nuisance.
   (B)   The Animal Control Officer and his or her deputy are empowered and
authorized to abate the public nuisance by any means reasonable, including, but
not limited to, the impounding of the animal in an appropriate shelter, the
taking of the animal by humane means for impoundment, or the destruction of the
animal or animals involved.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.007 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any animal of a species that is susceptible to rabies, except
humans.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. That person who is responsible for the enforcement
of the rules adopted under this subchapter. Town police Officers shall act as
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICERS.
   AT LARGE. Being neither confined by an enclosure nor physically restrained
by a leash.
   EQUINE.  Horses, mules, burros and asses.
   IMPOUND. The act of taking or receiving into custody by the Animal Control
Officer any dog or other animal for the purpose of confinement in a pound in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
   IMPOUND FACILITY. Any establishment authorized by the town for the
confinement, maintenance, safekeeping and control of dogs and other animals
that come into the custody of the Animal Control Officer.
   KENNEL. Premises where more than 4 dogs are raised, housed or boarded.
   LIVESTOCK. Equine, cattle, sheep, goats, except feral pigs.
   RATITE.  Ostriches, emus, rheas and cassowaries.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL. 
      (1)   Any animal that has a propensity to bite, scratch, or inflict
injury to or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings without
provocation, or that has been so declared after a hearing before a justice of
the peace or a city magistrate;
      (2)   Any animal that has a propensity to approach human beings without
provocation in a menacing or terrorizing manner so as to confine the movement
of or instill fear in a reasonable person. One incident of causing injury may
be sufficient to establish a propensity.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed 5-11-2011; Am. Ord.
2016-01, passed 6-13-2016)
DOG LICENSES
§ 90.020 DOG LICENSES REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor or maintain within
city limits of the city, any dog which has attained the age of 4 months, unless
and until the dog has been duly licensed and registered as provided in this
chapter. All dogs must be licensed with the town, within 30 days after the dog
is brought into the town.
   (B)   Before a license is issued for any dog, the owner must present a
vaccination certificate stating the owner’s name and address and giving the
dog’s description, date of vaccination and type, manufacturer and serial number
of the vaccine and date revaccination is due. No dog shall be licensed unless
it is vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   (1)   Each dog licensed under the terms of this subchapter shall
receive, at the time of licensing a tag on which is inscribed the name of the
town, the number of the license and the year in which it expires.
      (2)   The tag shall be attached to a collar or harness which shall be
worn by the dog at all times except as otherwise provided in this subchapter.
      (3)   Whenever a dog tag is lost, a duplicate tag shall be issued upon
application by the owner and payment of replacement fee.
      (4)   License tags and current rabies tags are not transferable from one
dog to another.
      (5)   Every owner shall be required to provide each dog with a collar or
harness to which the current license and current rabies vaccination tag are
attached.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to counterfeit or attempt to counterfeit
an official dog tag or remove the tag from any dog for the purpose of willful
and malicious mischief or place a dog tag upon a dog unless the tag was issued
to that dog.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.021 LICENSE FEES.
   The license required by §
90.020 above shall be issued by the Police Department upon payment by the
applicant of a fee established by resolution of the Town Council. The license
fees shall be paid for each dog kept within the town limits.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 90.022 TERM OF LICENSE.
   The licensing period shall be one calendar year; January 1 through December
31.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007)
IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION
§ 90.035 RELINQUISHING AN ANIMAL.
   Any stray animal must be relinquished to the Animal Control Officer within
24 hours. Any person who relinquished an animal to the Animal Control Officer
shall give his or her name, address and if he or she is not the owner, the
location where he or she found the animal.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.036 NOTIFICATION OF OWNER OF RECORD.
   Upon receipt of a lost or stray animal bearing a current tag or other
identification, the Animal Control Officer shall notify the owner of the
record, by telephone or at the address indicated on the license form, of the
location of the animal. Compliance with notice requirements of this chapter
shall be deemed as met if the Animal Control Officer has spoken with the owner
or owner’s representative by telephone or mailed the notice at his or her
address of record.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007; Am. Ord. 2016-01, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 90.037 RELEASE OF ANIMAL TO OWNER.
   The owner of an impounded animal may claim it prior to its legal disposition
by providing proper identification, meeting all legal requirements and paying
the applicable redemption fees for impoundment, board, medical care,
sterilization, vaccination and/or other costs.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 90.038 HOLDING PERIOD; DISPOSITION.
   (A)   The Animal Control Officer shall hold impounded animals for not less
than 5 working days, so that the owner or custodian may claim it prior to other
disposition. Dogs that are not wearing a current license tag when impounded
shall be held for not less than 3 working days. Livestock or ratite shall be
held for not less than 7 days total, including advertising time.
   (B)   At the expiration of the prescribed holding time, anyone may claim the
animal, other than livestock and ratite, provided that such person pays all
impound fees and complies with all licensing provisions. Animals relinquished
by their owners may be humanely destroyed without regard to the prescribed
holding time in order to alleviate suffering or to protect other impounded
animals from exposure to contagious diseases. Any animal not claimed or sold at
public auction under the provisions of this section, shall be disposed of in a
humane manner within the prescribed holding time. Charitable organizations such
as animal shelters taking unwanted animals may be exempt from fees and release
agreements.
   (C)   The adopting party, or the owner seeking release of their dog, must
sign an agreement to have the animal vaccinated within 30 days or before 6
months of age, and deposit with the town, an amount as outlined in the fee
schedule, to ensure that the animal will be vaccinated and licensed. An owner
seeking the release of an unlicensed dog may receive a citation for failure to
have the dog licensed and for an animal at large. The town shall refund to the
adopting party any monies deposited pursuant to the agreement if within the
time provided in the agreement there is presented a written statement signed by
a licensed veterinarian that the adopted dog has been vaccinated. If the
adopting party or owner does not vaccinate the animal and provide a receipt to
the town within 30 days, the fee is forfeited to the town and the owner may
receive a citation for not having the dog licensed.
   (D)   The Animal Control Officer may utilize the impound facility or
services of the town, the county, state, or any other appropriate facility as
needed. The Animal Control Officer has discretion to transfer any impounded
livestock to the Arizona Department of Agriculture, brand inspector for state
impound.
   (E)   If the owner of a large animal or livestock is unknown or cannot be
located within the prescribed holding period, the Animal Control Officer may
sell the animal at a public auction following state guidelines. At any time,
the Animal Control Officer may transfer the animal to the state livestock
officer.
   (F)   The owner of a stray animal may take possession of the animal at any
time prior to sale by proving ownership and paying the impound fees and all
expenses incurred in keeping and caring for the animal.
   (G)   The town shall give the purchaser a bill of sale upon payment of
amount of bid. The owner of an animal sold may take possession of it at any
time before the purchaser sells it by paying to the purchaser the purchase
price paid at the sale, together with the expense of keeping and caring for the
animal from the date of sale to the time the owner takes possession of the
animal.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed 5-11-2011; Am. Ord.
2016-01, passed 6-13-2016)
COMMUNICABLE DISEASE
§ 90.050 HARBORING DISEASED ANIMAL PROHIBITED; DISPOSAL.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly harbor or keep any dog or other animal with
a serious injury or afflicted with mange, ringworm, distemper or any other
contagious disease, unless the dog or other animal is, in the opinion of the
Animal Control Officer, or veterinarian, being given adequate, treatment for
the disease.
   (B)   The Animal Control Officer or veterinarian may take immediate
possession of any such animal not being treated or which is not responding to
the treatment and immediately dispose of the animal unless the owner forthwith
places the animal under the control and treatment of a licensed veterinarian.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.051 RABID ANIMAL; REPORTING.
   (A)   Reporting of bites. All persons bitten, and the parents or guardians
of minor children bitten by a dog, cat, skunk, fox, bat, coyote, bobcat or
other animal known to constitute a serious threat of rabies shall notify the
Animal Control Officer immediately thereafter. Physicians treating such bites
and other persons having the knowledge of the bites are also required to make
that notification.
   (B)   Reporting of suspected rabid animals. Any person who observes or has
knowledge of an animal which shows symptoms of rabies, or which acts in a
manner which would lead to a reasonable suspicion that it may have rabies,
shall notify the Animal Control Officer and comply with appropriate laws and
regulations regarding suspected cases of rabies as directed by the County
Health Department.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.052 RABID ANIMAL; ISOLATION.
   Upon the reasonable order of the Animal Control Officer or Public Health
Officer, a biting or suspected rabid animal shall be isolated, at the owner’s
expense if owned, in strict confinement under proper care and under the
observation of the Animal Control Officer or in another adequate facility in a
manner approved by the Animal Control Officer or the County Health Department.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 90.053 EUTHANASIA FOR TESTING.
   (A)   Any biting or suspected rabid animal may be humanely euthanized
immediately by the Animal Control Officer or the Department of Health, and such
animals undamaged and properly packaged and properly refrigerated head shall be
delivered promptly to an approved medical facility having the capability of
performing the fluorescent antibody test to demonstrate the presence of rabies.
   (B)   Division (A) above notwithstanding, if the biting or suspected rabid
animal is of the domesticated variety that is owned or obviously could have an
owner, that animal shall be confined as set forth in §
90.052 above for a period of 5 days to allow time for an attempt to locate an
owner, unless the county veterinarian or other licensed veterinarian reasonably
deems it necessary to sacrifice the animal for the purpose of laboratory
examination.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007)
ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL
§ 90.065 CONDITIONS OF OWNERSHIP.
   Animal owners and keepers must comply with the following conditions of
animal ownership, and the Animal Control Officer may require the owners or
keepers, as a condition of licensing, to sign a contract agreeing to comply
with such conditions:
   (A)   Animals shall be restrained or confined as required by law;
   (B)   Animals shall be humanely treated at all times;
   (C)   Vaccinations, licenses and permits shall be obtained as required by
law;
   (D)   Animal premises shall be kept sanitary and shall not constitute a fly
breeding reservoir or source of offensive odors or human or animal disease; and
   (E)   Animals and animal premises shall not be permitted to disturb the
peace or constitute a public nuisance or hazard.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.066 APPLICABILITY TO NON-RESIDENTS.
   The licensing requirements of this chapter shall not be construed to affect
persons not residing in the town who temporarily visit the town and own a dog
or any other animal; provided that the person shall meet the other requirements
of this code including constantly keeping the dog or animal under his or her
personal care and not allow the same to run at large. Every non-resident dog
must be identifiable.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007; Am. Ord. 2016-01, passed 6-13-2016) Penalty,
see §
90.999
§ 90.067 RESTRAINT OF ANIMAL BY OWNER.
   Persons owning, keeping or harboring any dog, horse, cow, swine, sheep,
goat, mule or donkey or similar animal shall at all times keep the animals on
leash or within an enclosed area on their own property or private property of
another with permission of the owner thereof, and shall not permit the animal
to run at large at any time within the town, to bite or harass any person
engaged in a lawful act, to interfere with the use of another person’s private
property, or to be in violation of other sections of this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.068 POSSESSION OF VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS ANIMAL.
   (A)   The possession of a vicious or dangerous animal is unlawful unless it
is restrained, confined or muzzled so that it cannot bite or attack any person
or animal. Animals held in violation of this section shall be deemed a public
nuisance, and their continued possession or ownership shall be unlawful. The
Animal Control Officer may impound any such animal and dispose of it in a
humane manner, after 3 working days to allow for legal restraining action by
the owner. Possession of a hybrid wolf is unlawful within town limits.
   (B)   Any Animal Control Officer is authorized to kill any dangerous animal
of any kind when it is necessary for the protection of any person or property,
or the animal cannot be safely impounded.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007; Am. Ord. 2016-01, passed 6-13-2016) Penalty,
see §
90.999
§ 90.069 DOGS PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for a person owning, keeping or harboring any dog to
permit the same to enter or be in any public school building while school is in
session or to enter in any place of worship or any public building without the
express written consent or permission of the appropriate authorities or
officials. The owner or custodian of a dog must restrain and control the dog at
all times when in a public park by securing the dog with a leash. The owner or
custodian of a dog is responsible for the acts and conduct of the dog at all
times.
   (B)   Service animals, including guide dogs and dogs trained to assist
individuals with disabilities, are permitted to enter a public place. It is not
discriminatory to exclude a service animal from a public place if 1 or more of
the following apply:
      (1)   The animal poses a direct threat to the health or safety of others;
      (2)   The animal fundamentally alters the nature of the public place or
the goods, services or activities provided; and/or
      (3)   The animal poses an undue burden.
   (C)   A service animal handler is liable for any damage done to a public
place by the service animal or service animal in training.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007; Am. Ord. 2016-01, passed 6-13-2016) Penalty,
see §
90.999
§ 90.070 DISTURBING THE PEACE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall own or harbor any animal in such a manner that the
peace and quiet of the public is unreasonably disturbed. The peace and quiet of
the public may be disturbed, for example, by habitual barking and the like. For
the purposes of this section, the term HABITUAL BARKING shall be defined as
barking for repeated intervals of at least 5 minutes with less than 1 minute of
interruption. The barking must also be audible off of the owner’s or
caretaker’s premises.
   (B)   The written affirmation by 2 persons having separate residences that
the violation disturbs the peace and quiet of those persons shall be prima
facie evidence of a violation of this section.
   (C)   It is unlawful to harbor or keep any animal or fowl which disturbs the
peace by unreasonable odors or loud noises at any tune of the day or night., by
a Any frequent or long-continued noise such as barking, howling, squawking, or
bellowing, between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. is primae facia evidence of a
violation of this section whether or not it has caused unreasonable annoyance
or discomfort to any person of normal sensitivity in the vicinity; provided,
however, that nothing contained in this section shall be construed to apply to
reasonable noise emanating from legally operated animal hospitals, pounds, farm
and/or agricultural facilities or areas where keeping of animals or fowl is
authorized by a permit.
   (D)   The destruction by animal of property other than that which belongs to
the owner of the animal shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
section.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007; Am. Ord. 2016-01, passed 6-13-2016) Penalty,
see §
90.999
§ 90.071 FEMALE DOGS IN HEAT.
   Dog owners shall securely confine their female dogs while in heat, within an
enclosure in a manner that will prevent the attraction of male dogs to the
immediate vicinity.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 90.072 ABANDONING SICK OR DISABLED ANIMALS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to abandon or turn out at large, any
sick, diseased or disabled animal. These animals shall, when rendered worthless
by reason of sickness or disability, be disposed of by owner thereof as
provided in §
90.075 below for the disposition of dead animals within the city.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer of the town to
dispose of any animals found running at large within the town which are
worthless from sickness, disease or other disability.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.073 REMOVAL AND DISPOSITION OF DEAD ANIMALS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for the owner of any animal or fowl that dies or is
killed within the town to fail to remove or bury the carcass of the animal
within 10 hours after its death.
   (B)   No horse, cow, ox or other large animal shall be buried within the
closely inhabited portion of the town.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.074 RENDERING ASSISTANCE TO ANIMALS.
   (A)   Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic
animal shall stop and render such assistance as may be reasonably possible, and
shall immediately report the injury or death to the animal’s owner.
   (B)   In the event the owner cannot be located, the operator shall at once
report the accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 90.075 EMERGENCY PROCLAMATION.
   The Mayor, upon reasonable apprehension of danger from mad or rabid dogs,
may issue a proclamation forbidding dogs of every description from running at
large, and after the proclamation has been issued 24 hours, any dog found
running at large in the city, not securely muzzled, may be destroyed by the
Animal Control Officer.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 90.076 LIABILITY FOR AT-LARGE ANIMALS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for the owner or any person having the charge, care,
custody or control of any animal to allow the animal to be at large at any time
within the town limits.
   (B)   The owner or custodian of any animal which is at large shall be
strictly liable for a violation of this section, regardless of the precautions
taken to prevent the escape of the animal and regardless of the lack of
knowledge of the offense at the time it occurs.
   (C)   Injury to any person or damage to any property by an animal while at
large shall be the full responsibility of the owner or person or persons
responsible for the animal when such damages were inflicted.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007; Am. Ord. 2016-01, passed 6-13-2016) Penalty,
see §
90.999
§ 90.077 DOGS ATTACKING PERSONS AND ANIMALS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for the owner or person having the charge, care,
custody or control of any dog to allow the dog to attack, chase or worry any
person, domestic animal or any domestic fowl.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      WORRY as used in this section, means to harass by tearing, biting or
shaking with teeth.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.078 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   Any person who, within the town, maliciously kills, maims or wounds any
animal which is the property of another, or who maliciously or cruelly beats,
tortures or injures or harasses any animal, whether belonging to himself or
herself or another, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.079 POISONING ANIMALS.
   Any person who willfully, unlawfully and maliciously administers any poison
to any animal which is the property of any other, or who maliciously exposes
any poisonous substance with intent that the same shall be taken or swallowed
by any such animal, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.080 ENCOURAGING ANIMALS TO FIGHT.
   It is unlawful for any person within the town to in any manner whatever
encourage or urge dogs or any other animals or fowl to fight, or to urge them
after they commence to fight.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.081 KEEPING WILD ANIMALS AND REPTILES.
   Any person possessing any wild animal, reptile or wild fowl, within the
town, must adhere to all state regulations, and all the wild animals, reptiles
or wild fowl shall be kept under proper confinement on the premises and shall
not be allowed to run at large, and shall be maintained on the premises or
private property of the owner in such a manner as not to endanger the life or
limb of any person lawfully entering the premises.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.082 ANIMAL PACKS.
   (A)   In the event that cats or dogs or other animals shall form into a pack
as to cause a nuisance or a possible health hazard, the Police Department shall
be notified immediately.
   (B)   If the problem cannot be otherwise alleviated in a reasonable period
of time then the Animal Control Officer may cause to have the pack of animals
disposed of or humanely destroyed.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 90.083 ANIMAL WASTE.
   The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of any
excreta deposited by his or her animal or animals on public walks, street,
parks, recreation areas and other public areas, or on the private property
belonging to another.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
KENNELS
§ 90.100 DEFINITION; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      KENNELS. Premises where more than 4 dogs are raised housed or boarded.
   (B)   No person shall operate or maintain a kennel without first obtaining a
permit from the Police Department which includes paying an annual permit fee
due by the last day of December each year; and must meet all other requirements
of this chapter at all times.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.101 STANDARDS.
   The following minimum standards shall be complied with to obtain and
maintain a kennel permit:
   (A)   Enclosures must be provided against weather extremes. Floors of
buildings and walls shall be of an appropriate material as required for the
specific breed of dog and also to permit proper cleaning and disinfecting;
   (B)   Adequate ventilation shall be maintained and an appropriate
temperature provided as required by the specific breed of dog housed therein;
   (C)   Each animal shall have sufficient space to stand up, lie down and turn
around without touching the sides or tops of cages;
   (D)   Runs shall be provided with an adequate exercise area and protection
from the weather;
   (E)   All animal quarters and runs are to be kept clean, dry and in a
sanitary condition;
   (F)   The food shall be free of contamination, palatable and of sufficient
nutritive value as to meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and
size of the animal; and
   (G)   Fresh water is to be available at all times.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 90.102 LOCATION.
   Before the permit can be issued, the following conditions concerning the
location of the kennel must be met:
   (A)   It must be 200 feet away from any neighboring house; and
   (B)   It must be 150 feet from any road or street.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 90.103 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   The city, acting through the Animal Control Officer, shall have the power to
revoke the permit in the event the permit holder is convicted of any other
violation of the town’s animal control provisions.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 90.104 INSPECTIONS.
   The Animal Control Officer shall have the authority to enter the premises of
any person to inspect and assure compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007)
FEE SCHEDULE
§ 90.115 ADOPTION OF FEE SCHEDULE.
   All fees specified by this chapter, shall be set forth according to the fee
schedule approved by resolution of the Town Council. The Town Council may
modify the fee schedule by resolution at any time independent of this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 90.999 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates any of
these regulations, shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed $600, or by imprisonment
not to exceed 3 months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Violations of
licensing regulations found in §
90.020(A) are designated as a civil code infractions per Town Code §
10.99 General Penalty. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate
offense punishable as herein above described. The imposition of any sentence
shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of these
regulations and provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed 7-16-2007; Am. Ord. 2016-01, passed 6-13-2016)
CHAPTER 91: HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section
Solid Waste Management
   
91.01   Purpose
   
91.02   Powers of the town
   
91.03   Hours of Collection
   
91.04   Definitions
   
91.05   Authority to collect; unauthorized collection
   
91.06   Use of service required; cancellation of service
   
91.07   Responsibility for solid waste and recyclables
   
91.08   Types of service
   
91.09   Enclosures; right-of-way permits
   
91.10   Unobstructed passage in streets and alleys
   
91.11   Containers; general requirements
   
91.12   Town ownership of town-provided containers
   
91.13   Construction and demolition materials
   
91.14   Residential collection requirements
   
91.15   Automated residential solid waste and recycling collection
   
91.16   Residential bulk waste and brush collection
   
91.17   Roll-off container collection service
   
91.18   Commercial collection requirements
   
91.19   Prohibited substances, unacceptable materials or prohibited materials
   
91.20   Prohibited acts
   
91.21   Enforcement authority
   
91.22   Collection vehicle requirements
   
91.23   Container requirements
   
91.24   Seizure and impoundment of containers
   
91.25   Municipal solid waste fees
   
91.26   Restrictions on burning
Maintenance of Property
   
91.45   Definitions
   
91.46   Litter on private property
   
91.47   Owner to maintain premises, including sidewalks
   
91.48   Procedure to compel
   
91.49   Notice to comply
   
91.50   Service of notice
   
91.51   Appeal to Council
   
91.52   Work performed by the town
   
91.53   Lien assessment
   
91.54   Placement of debris
Public Health
   
91.65   Nauseous, foul or offensive conditions prohibited
   
91.66   Offensive water
   
91.67   Premises to be kept properly cleaned and drained
   
91.68   Premises to be sanitary; inspection of premises
   
91.69   Privy, vault, cesspool or well prohibited
   
91.70   Conditions under which flies breed prohibited
   
91.71   Pollution of ditches
   
91.72   Depositing debris or allowing drainage on public thoroughfares
prohibited
 
   
91.99   Penalty
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
§ 91.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health and safety of the
citizens of the town, and to protect the environment by establishing minimum
standards for the safe and sanitary collection, storage, treatment,
transportation, processing, and disposal of municipal solid waste and
recyclable materials generated within the town.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 91.02 POWERS OF THE TOWN.
   (A)   Residential solid waste and recyclable materials within the town shall
only be collected, removed and disposed of by officers or employees of the
town.
   (B)   Commercial and recycling services may be provided by the town or by
private contracted enterprises.
   (C)   The Town Manager, or designee, in order to protect the health and
safety of the citizens and the environment of the town, is authorized and
directed to implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter to control the
collection, storage, treatment, transportation, processing, and disposal of
solid waste and recyclable materials generated within the town.
   (D)   Rules and regulations. The Town Manager, or designee, shall make such
schedules, rules and regulations concerning the collection, storage, treatment,
transportation, processing, and disposal of solid waste, recyclable materials
and other wastes by any party. These rules and regulations will include
standards for equipment, transportation process, hours of operation, as
necessary and appropriate, to operate a solid waste and/or recycling collection
program, or other similar activities or facilities or relating to the operation
of any transfer station, disposal site, recycling or waste reduction program,
that are not inconsistent with this chapter.
   (E)   Inspection. The town may conduct inspections to secure compliance with
this chapter. A code inspector or an authorized representative from the Public
Works Department who has a reasonable basis to believe that a private premises
may not be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter shall have the
right to request consent to enter and, upon consent, to enter residential,
commercial, industrial, institutional establishments, business establishments,
and private premises, for inspection purposes.
   (F)   The town shall regulate the use of transfer station activities.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 91.03 HOURS OF COLLECTION.
   Hours of collection for solid waste or recycling services by the town and
private service providers shall be regulated by the town. In order to prohibit
the disturbance of the public peace and welfare, no person shall collect or
remove or cause, permit, facilitate, aid or abet the collection or removal of
solid waste or recyclables between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. if the
collection point or container location is within 300 feet of any residential
account, hotel or motel unless reasonable accommodations are approved in
writing by the Town Manager or designee.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 91.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A public passageway affording a secondary means of access to abutting
property for private, utility and emergency vehicles.
   ANIMAL WASTE. All waste from household pets, stables, kennels, pet pens,
chicken coops, veterinary establishments and other waste of a similar nature.
   ASHES. Any residue other than salvage from the burning of any combustible
material, specifically excluding ashes from medical waste or hazardous waste.
   BRUSH. Tree limbs and shrubbery clippings exceeding three feet in length.
   BULK WASTE. Wooden and cardboard boxes, crates, appliances not containing
Freon, furniture, machinery, and all other nonvegetative matter, which by
reason of size and/or shape are not readily containable. Bulk waste also
includes tree trunks, branches, or limbs, regardless of length, which are ten
or more inches in diameter.
   BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. Any public or private place, building or enterprise
utilized for the conduct of business or industry, including nonprofit
organizations, and schools specifically excluding all residential accounts.
   COMMERCIAL MULTI-FAMILY ACCOUNT. Any structure or premises used as a
domicile, dwelling, or habitation with five or more living units, consistent
with the definition contained in A.R.S. § 49-746. Multi-family does not include
units with four or less units; duplexes; patio homes; mobile home parks;
condominiums; town homes; apartments; trailer courts; rooming houses; boarding
houses; college dormitories; summer camps; assisted living facilities;
residential facilities providing 24 hour nonmedical services, supervision or
assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the
protection of the individual which include shelters, board and care facilities,
halfway houses, hospice care facilities, nursing homes, wards of juvenile
court, and the like; or any complex of the foregoing.
   COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE. Any solid waste produced by the operation of, or as
a by-product of, any business establishment, or commercial account consistent
with the definition contained in A.R.S. § 49-746, without regard to whether the
business establishment is licensed in the town, or whether the business
establishment’s activity is conducted in a private premises, public business,
within the town, or any other location.
   CONTAINED SOLID WASTE. All solid waste placed in containers for disposal.
   CONTAMINATED MATERIALS. Any materials which, when prepared for one of the
acceptable forms of collection described in this chapter, contain materials
which are not acceptable under that particular form of collection.
   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE. All debris, rubble, soil and excess
materials from any construction, demolition, repair or remodeling operations,
whether on private premises, public places, residential account or business
establishment, whether to the primary structure or any other structure, and
whether produced by the work or at the direction of the property owner,
contractor, subcontractor, agent, or any other party.
   DIRECTOR. The Field and Facilities Services Director or designee.
   FLY-TIGHT. The lid of the container must fit flush around all contact points
and prevent entry of flies or rodents.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL and HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any chemical, compound, mixture,
substance or article which is designated by the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, or appropriate agency of the state, to be hazardous as that term is
defined by, or pursuant to, federal or state law. Hazardous material includes,
but is not limited to, medical wastes, herbicides, pesticides, explosives, and
radioactive, toxic, flammable or corrosive materials.
   HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any waste that would otherwise be a hazardous
waste pursuant to A.R.S. Title 49, and 40 Code of Federal Regulations, Part
261, but is excluded as a hazardous waste because it is generated by the normal
day-to-day activities of households.
   IMMINENT HEALTH OR SAFETY HAZARD. A condition of real property, solid waste
or recycling that places a person’s life, health, safety or property in high
risk of peril when such condition is immediate, impending on the point of
happening and menacing.
   INCIPIENT HAZARD. A condition of real property, solid waste or recycling
that can become an imminent or health hazard if further deterioration occurs
that can cause unreasonable risk of death or severe personal injury.
   INDUSTRIAL SOLID WASTE GENERATOR. A generator of a wide variety of
nonhazardous solid waste produced as a result of any industrial operations.
   INERT DEBRIS. Includes concrete, asphaltic pavement, brick, rock, gravel,
sand, soil, and metal, if used as reinforcement in concrete, but does not
include hazardous waste, glass or other metal.
   LITTER. All solid waste, recyclables and debris not properly prepared for
collection under this code.
   MEDICAL WASTE. Materials defined as medical waste by Arizona Revised
Statutes.
   METAL GOODS. Appliances, and shall include refrigerators, freezers, ovens,
stoves, air conditioners, washers, dryers and water heaters, and shall
specifically exclude smaller household appliances and electronic equipment. Any
appliance containing Freon must have a tag certifying that the unit has been
properly evacuated.
   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ACCOUNT. Any structure or premises used as a
domicile, dwelling, or habitation with four or less units; duplexes; patio
homes; mobile home parks; condominiums; town homes; apartments; trailer courts;
rooming houses; boarding houses; college dormitories; summer camps; assisted
living facilities; residential facilities providing 24 hour nonmedical
services, supervision or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of
daily living or for the protection of the individual which include shelters,
board and care facilities, halfway houses, hospice care facilities, nursing
homes, wards of juvenile court, and the like; or any complex of the foregoing.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, institution, trust,
or other entity acting as principal, agent, officer, servant or employee for
himself or itself, or for any other individual, firm, partnership, corporation,
institution or other entity, who owns, leases, rents or occupies any real
property within the town limits.
   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any land and/or structure owned by any person(s) other
than the United States, a state, a county, the town, or any political
subdivision of the United States.
   PRIVATE SERVICE PROVIDERS. Any entity or person other than the town who
provides for the collection, storage, treatment, transportation, processing,
and disposal within the Town of any solid waste of another person or entity
including recyclable materials, hazardous materials, or medical waste, or any
other types of waste, for disposal, salvage, recycling or any other purpose.
   PROHIBITED SUBSTANCE. Any liquid, solid, or gas with an ignition temperature
or flashpoint of less than 200 degrees Fahrenheit including, but not limited
to, gasoline, benzene, naphtha, or other flammable or explosive substance; any
material having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than nine or having any other
corrosive property that could be injurious or hazardous to town employees
collecting any solid waste under this chapter, or which could cause damage to
equipment; any noxious or malodorous substance offensive to the senses and
depriving other properties or a considerable number of persons of the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property; or any hypodermic needle or syringe.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all public streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or
other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
   PUTRESCIBLE MATERIALS. Solid waste which is capable of being decomposed by
microorganisms with sufficient rapidity as to cause nuisances from odors or
gases and capable of providing food for or attracting birds, insects, snakes,
rodents or animals capable of transferring a diseased bacterium or virus from
one organism to another. These materials must be bagged and securely tied for
proper disposal.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Solid waste that has been set aside or separated from
other solid waste for the purpose of being collected and recycled and which is,
at the Town’s discretion, acceptable recyclable material. Acceptable recyclable
material may include the following materials if clean and dry: paper,
cardboard, chipboard, plastic containers made from polyethylene terephthalate
(“PET”) or high density polyethylene (“HDPE”), glass bottles, steel food cans,
aluminum cans, disposable aluminum bakeware, aluminum foil and other materials
determined by the town as being marketable.
   RECYCLING CONTAINER. A container owned by the town for use as part of the
town’s recycling program, if any; a recycling container provided for use by a
private service provider; or a recycling container provided by a nonprofit
organization.
   RESIDENTIAL ACCOUNT. Any structure or premises used as a domicile, dwelling,
or habitation including single-family dwellings; multi-family units with four
or less units; duplexes; patio homes; mobile home parks; condominiums; town
homes; apartments; trailer courts; rooming houses; boarding houses; college
dormitories; summer camps; assisted living facilities; residential facilities
providing 24 hour nonmedical services, supervision or assistance essential for
sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the
individual which include shelters, board and care facilities, halfway houses,
hospice care facilities, nursing homes, wards of juvenile court, and the like;
or any complex of the foregoing; consistent with the definition contained in
A.R.S. § 49-746 that generates solid waste and recycling.
   RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE. Household trash and recyclables produced by town
residents on or in their residential premises within the town, specifically
excluding:
      (1)   Construction and demolition waste, whether on or off the
residential premises or any other structures on the property.
      (2)   Commercial or industrial solid waste, whether produced at a
residential premises or at any other location.
      (3)   Hazardous materials.
      (4)   Medical waste.
      (5)   Manure.
      (6)   Large animals exceeding 50 pounds.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. An occupant, lessor, lessee, manager, licensee, owner or
other person having control over a structure or parcel of land and, in the case
where remediation is proposed as a means of abatement, any lien holder whose
lien interest is recorded in the official records of the Mohave County
Recorder’s office.
   SOLID WASTE. All wastes (except medical wastes), including garbage, rubbish,
ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, containable rubbish, filth, construction
and demolition waste, brush, bulk waste, metal goods or prohibited substances
when these terms are not specifically noted in this chapter. “Solid waste
charge account customers” means all individuals or businesses that have
established charge accounts approved by the town for transfer station fees.
   SOLID WASTE INSPECTOR. Any police officer, code enforcement officer, or
other town employee with written authorization from the Town Manager to inspect
public and private properties, to issue citations and to enforce the provisions
of this chapter.
   TOWN. The Town Colorado City, Arizona.
   TOWN MANAGER. The Town Manager or the Town Manager’s designee.
   TRANSFER STATION. Any Town of Colorado City transfer station as may be
designated by the town.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL. means any animal of a vicious species, or an animal of a
domesticated species, including, but not limited to, cats and dogs, which
without provocation are prone to attack persons.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 91.05 AUTHORITY TO COLLECT; UNAUTHORIZED COLLECTION.
   No person shall collect solid waste or recycling from a residential account
within the town contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-17-2018) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.06 USE OF SERVICE REQUIRED; CANCELLATION OF SERVICE.
   (A)   No residential account or business establishment within the town shall
be permitted to avoid or refuse to accept solid waste collection service, and
the failure of any party to accept such service shall not exempt that party
from the payment of the charges for such service.
   (B)   At such time as a business establishment or commercial multi-family
account contracts for services with a private service provider, other than the
Town of Colorado City, authorized to provide such services as described in this
chapter, the business establishment or commercial multi-family account shall
notify the Town Solid Waste Division of intent to cancel service.
   (C)   The Town of Colorado City container shall be scheduled for removal in
a timely manner, within 30 days of notification received by the Solid Waste
Division. Charges for town service will cease on the date of container removal,
prorated at the monthly rate per day.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 91.07 RESPONSIBILITY FOR SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLES.
   (A)   The responsible party of any private premises or business
establishment shall be responsible for their solid waste or recyclables until
the solid waste or recyclables are collected by the town, agents of the town or
private service provider.
   (B)   The responsible party of any private premises or business
establishment shall be responsible for the sanitary condition of said private
premises or business establishment and for the proper storage, containment, and
placement for collection of all solid waste and recyclables.
   (C)   Except as provided in this chapter, no person shall bury, dump,
dispose, transport, release, or allow to be released upon any street, alley,
right-of-way or public land, any municipal solid waste or recyclables,
including construction and demolition waste and tires.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-17-2018) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.08 TYPES OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Residential. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the town shall
function as sole provider of residential solid waste collection service and
residential recycling service.
   (B)   Each residential account receiving service under this subsection shall
be provided solid waste containers for individual use and curbside collection.
Additionally, residents may request additional containers for a fee.
   (C)   Additional residential services may include household hazardous waste
collection events, annual bulk waste cleanups, and other services as approved
by Council.
   (D)   The town, or private service providers, may provide commercial solid
waste collection service to business establishments as required by state,
county, this chapter, and other town regulations. If the business establishment
is serviced by a private service provider other than the Town, the service
schedule shall be set by the private service provider and the business
establishment and subject to the hours of collection and other provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 91.09 ENCLOSURES; RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS.
   (A)   General. The town reserves the right to require business
establishments or commercial multi-family accounts to utilize town or private
service providers for solid waste and recycling collection sufficient to
properly manage the volume of solid waste and recycling generated by their
activities.
   (B)   Containers may be required to be in enclosures that shall be designed
in accordance with Town Code and shall be properly accessible and sufficiently
sized to accommodate the number of containers for the volumes of solid waste
and recyclables generated. All enclosures shall have proper drainage to prevent
accumulation and stagnation of any liquid.
   (C)   Right-of-way permits. Except as provided either by this subsection or
subsection (D) of this section, no person shall place, allow to be placed,
maintain or cause to be placed or maintained, any encroachment or obstruction
in public right-of-way, including any solid waste or recycling collection
container, temporary or permanent, unless a permit has been issued by the town
pursuant to procedures contained in the Town Code. The owner of each container
shall obtain a permit prior to container placement. Location of each container
is subject to approval by the town.
   (D)   Commercial solid waste right-of-way encroachment permits. Except as
provided either by this subsection or subsection (C) of this section, no
private commercial solid waste collector or recycler, or person contracting
with a private commercial solid waste collector, shall place, allow to be
placed, maintain or cause to be placed or maintained any solid waste collection
container in public right-of-way unless the commercial solid waste collector
has obtained a permit issued by the town pursuant to procedures contained in
this chapter. The private commercial solid waste collector shall obtain a
permit prior to container placement. Location of each container is subject to
approval by the town.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 91.10 UNOBSTRUCTED PASSAGE IN STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   (A)   No person shall permit trees, shrubs or brush growing upon their
property to encroach on or over any public right-of-way so as to interfere with
the movement of persons or vehicles, or a safe line of sight.
   (B)   It is the responsibility of the responsible party to trim trees,
shrubs, or brush on their property and in the adjacent right-of-way back to
their property line and allow 18-foot height clearance at any location solid
waste or recyclable materials are collected.
   (C)   No person shall allow any obstruction including, but not limited to,
parked vehicles, within 15 feet of a solid waste or recycling container placed
for collection service, or to obstruct solid waste and/or recycling collection
operations in any other manner.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-17-2018) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.11 CONTAINERS; GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every person or commercial or residential solid waste generator shall
place, or cause to be placed, all solid waste and recycling accumulating on the
premises in suitable collection receptacles or containers provided by the town,
or private service providers.
   (B)   All materials prepared for collection shall be stored in a town-
approved container until removed by the Town, or a private service provider,
unless those materials are properly prepared for the Town’s bulk waste
collection service, if any.
   (C)   Solid waste and recyclable materials shall be properly stored,
treated, transported, processed, and disposed of in accordance with the Mohave
County Health Code, Arizona Department of Health Services, Arizona Department
of Environmental Quality Regulations, and this chapter.
   (D)   Any user of a town-provided solid waste and recycling container shall
be required to use and maintain the container as follows:
      (1)   Cleaning. All containers shall be used, maintained and stored in a
clean and sanitary condition. The user shall bag and securely tie all
putrescible material, thereby maintaining the container free of intense odors,
evidence of flies in any stage of development, and any other nuisance or threat
to public health or safety.
      (2)   Reporting damage or loss. The user shall store container(s) between
collection in such a way as to minimize the possibility of damage or theft. The
user shall be responsible for reporting any container damage or theft to the
town.
      (3)   Proper and safe use. The user shall not damage the container(s)
intentionally or use the container(s) for any purpose other than those
specified in this chapter. The user shall not use the container(s) in any
manner which is, in the sole determination of the town, unsafe.
      (4)   Lids or covers. The lids or covers of any container(s) shall at all
times be kept secure in such a manner to prevent intrusion of moisture,
infestation of insects, and scattering of solid waste or recyclable materials.
Covers or lids shall be kept closed except when containers are being loaded or
emptied.
   (E)   No person, unless authorized by the town, shall remove, collect or
disturb the solid waste and recyclable materials stored in such container(s) or
remove from a container any solid waste or recyclable materials set out for
collection and disposal by the town, town customers, or agents of the town, or
private service providers. This prohibition does not apply to public law
enforcement officers or town employees acting within the scope of their
official duties.
   (F)   No person shall utilize the container(s) assigned to other persons for
the disposal of solid waste or recyclable materials without their permission.
This does not apply to the solid waste or recycling collection system where
persons or responsible parties share the use of common containers. The use of
common or shared containers and the assigned residential account or business
establishment(s) using a container shall be determined by the town, or in the
case of private service, by a private service provider.
   (G)   All boxes, cartons and crates shall be collapsed before being placed
in solid waste or recycling containers. Ashes shall be soaked with water to
extinguish any live embers and be contained in tied bags before placement in
solid waste containers.
   (H)   Explosives or flammable materials of any kind shall not be placed in
any solid waste or recycling container.
   (I)   Corrosives, reactives, oxidizers, lead acid batteries or any hazardous
waste shall not be disposed of in solid waste or recycling containers.
   (J)   Pool chemicals shall be completely used, or properly disposed of,
before disposing of the container. Pool chemical containers shall be emptied
and moisture free prior to being placed in a solid waste or recycling
container.
   (K)   It is the container user’s and responsible party’s obligation to
properly contain solid waste or recyclable materials generated on their
premises and to keep the area around the container continuously clear and free
of all debris. If the property has alley solid waste service, the term “area”
includes the alley.
   (L)   It shall be a violation of this chapter to overload or overfill a
container, or place material in any solid waste or recycling container of a
volume or weight which prevents the collection vehicle from safely emptying the
container or which may damage the collection vehicle or container. Maximum
weight of material placed in any residential container shall not exceed 100
pounds.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-17-2018) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.12 TOWN OWNERSHIP OF TOWN-PROVIDED CONTAINERS.
   (A)   The town may place a container approved by the town at each
residential account that is required to receive residential collection service
from the town or at a business establishment that has authorized town service.
   (B)   Each person or entity which shall contract with or accept solid waste
service from the town, using a town-owned container, shall, by acceptance of
such service, recognize the right of the town to enter upon the premises of
such person or entity to retake possession of the container upon termination of
service, and shall be deemed to have extended to the town an express license to
so enter the premises for that purpose.
   (C)   The town will furnish one solid waste container for the accumulation,
storage, and collection of solid waste to residential accounts. Additionally,
residents may request additional containers for a fee, subject to the
discretion of the Director. All such containers are owned by the town, and the
town may remove, repair, or replace the container without notice to the user.
   (D)   If a solid waste or recycling container is in violation of this
chapter and presents an imminent health or safety hazard, or incipient hazard,
a solid waste representative shall issue a notice of violation to the
responsible party. In the event that the violation is not corrected within a
reasonable number of days as required by such notice, the violation will be
considered a public nuisance that may be abated.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 91.13 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION MATERIALS.
   (A)   Construction and demolition waste or materials shall not be placed in
a residential account’s solid waste or recycling container.
   (B)   If such construction and demolition waste or materials are generated,
the responsible party is responsible for the removal and proper disposal.
   (C)   All construction and demolition waste or materials shall be removed
promptly and shall not be stored in any location where it may be blown or
otherwise dispersed beyond the construction site.
   (D)   In the event that the violation is not corrected, the violation will
be considered a public nuisance that may be abated.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-17-2018) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.14 RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All residential solid waste generators within the town shall receive
town solid waste service, and shall pay the applicable fees assessed for such
service. Solid waste fees shall be applied and will continue as long as town
water or sewer services are supplied.
   (B)   The town may require any residential solid waste generator regularly
generating solid waste that exceeds 65 gallons or 100 pounds within a
collection period to acquire an additional container or containers subject to
the applicable fee per additional container or volume, or any resident
regularly generating solid waste that requires special handling to schedule a
special solid waste collection subject to the applicable collection fee.
   (C)   Only properly prepared materials as described in this chapter shall be
acceptable for collection under this chapter.
   (D)   Collection days shall be as designated by the town.
   (E)   The service level required and method of collection shall be as
designated by the town.
   (F)   Only the town shall be authorized to remove any town-owned solid waste
or recycling container from its assigned location. It shall be a violation of
this chapter for any other person to remove a container from the address to
which it is assigned.
   (G)   Residential accounts receiving collection under any of the town’s
collection programs are limited to one emptying of the container being serviced
per collection day. Missed collections are not eligible for fee credits.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 91.15 AUTOMATED RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING COLLECTION.
   (A)   All residential solid waste for collection by the town’s automated
residential solid waste collection equipment shall be prepared for collection
according to this section.
   (B)   Placement. Solid waste and recycling containers set out for collection
must be placed in the street in front of the house to which they are assigned,
with the wheels adjacent to the curb of the sidewalk, and the lid opening
toward the street.
      (1)   Where there is no sidewalk, the container(s) must be placed at the
edge of the street, within two feet of the pavement or improved road, as
applicable.
      (2)   Containers may not be collected from private property or when
placed within 15 feet of a vehicle, mailbox or other obstruction to safe
collection as determined by the Director.
      (3)   Containers shall not be placed out for collection on a sidewalk or
be allowed to remain after collection on a sidewalk. All container placement
shall be subject to approval by the Director.
      (4)   To ensure all solid waste and recycling containers are ready for
collection they may be placed at the curb after 6:00 p.m. on the day preceding
collection. Containers for street collection shall be placed at the curb for
service no later than 6:00 a.m. on the day of collection.
      (5)   Containers must be removed prior to 11:00 p.m. of the day of
collection. It shall be a violation of this chapter to place or permit
containers to remain adjacent to the curb except upon regular collection days
or scheduled day for container maintenance.
      (6)   All solid waste and recycling containers shall be stored, between
collection days, on the premises so as not to interfere with pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, and to minimize the container’s visibility.
   (C)   Lids must be closed. The lids of containers set out or used for
residential solid waste or recycling collection must be entirely closed.
   (D)   Solid waste and all putrescible material must be bagged and tied. All
solid waste prepared for residential solid waste collection including grass
clippings must be bagged and securely tied to exclude flies and other pests.
   (E)   Container contents.
      (1)   The contents of the solid waste and recycling containers must be
arranged so that they fall out easily when serviced by authorized collection
vehicles.
      (2)   The town shall not be required to remove any materials which remain
in the container after the container has been serviced by the collection
vehicle.
      (3)   Loose branches and brush are not required to be bagged, under the
condition that the unbagged contents empty readily during normal collection
conditions, and do not unduly dirty the container. Bagged material placed below
unbagged material may allow all the contents to fall out and the container to
empty completely.
   (F)   Household medical waste and infectious waste.
      (1)   All household medical waste and infectious waste, including
lancets, syringes and hypodermic needles, must be properly prepared for
disposal in the solid waste container.
      (2)   Household medical waste and infectious waste must be placed in
plastic bags and securely tied before placing in the solid waste container, or
it shall be considered an incipient hazard, or imminent health or safety
hazard.
      (3)   Lancets, syringes and hypodermic needles must be placed in a rigid,
leak-proof and puncture resistant container with a secured and taped lid and
must be clearly labeled identifying the contents before placing in the solid
waste container.
      (4)   Depositing or disposing of household medical waste and infectious
waste or lancets, syringes and hypodermic needles in any recycling container is
prohibited.
   (G)   Prescription drugs and medicines. All “discarded drugs,” as defined by
Arizona Department of Environmental Quality Regulations, and prescription drugs
and medicines shall be disposed of according to the guidelines in this chapter
or as follows:
      (1)   Unless otherwise prohibited by this chapter, according to the
specific disposal instructions on the drug label or patient information form.
      (2)   Through a pharmacy or other licensed agency that provides for the
lawful disposal for such items.
      (3)   This disposal method shall only be used by individual citizens, and
shall not be utilized by any doctors, hospitals, pharmacies, or other
commercial ventures.
      (4)   Consistent with the procedures prescribed by a state, federal,
county, town or other governmental law enforcement agency that administers a
program for the disposal of such items.
      (5)   Prescription drugs and medication shall not be introduced into the
town’s sanitary sewer system through sinks, drains, toilets, or other means.
These materials shall not be introduced into any storm water system or seasonal
creek, run-off system, or any town lakes or tributaries.
   (H)   Recyclable materials must not be bagged and must be placed in the
recycling container in such a manner that they separate under the normal
operating procedures of the applicable materials recovery facility.
   (I)   Only recyclable materials shall be collected by the town’s residential
recycling collection program. No person or customer shall contaminate
recyclables. Contamination of recyclables includes, but is not limited to,
putrescible material such as food waste, grass, any brush clippings, filth,
diapers, concrete, dirt or polystyrene.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 91.16 RESIDENTIAL BULK WASTE AND BRUSH COLLECTION.
   (A)   All materials prepared for residential bulk waste and brush
collection, if such service is offered by the town, shall be prepared for
collection and disposed of in accordance with this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be a violation of this chapter to place bulk waste or brush
out for collection more than one week before collection is scheduled by the
Town of Colorado City.
   (C)   Bulk waste and brush shall be placed out for collection no later than
6:00 a.m. on the first day of the scheduled week of collection as determined by
the Director.
   (D)   Bulk waste and brush placed out for collection shall be in neat
stacks.
   (E)   Bulk waste and brush placed out for curbside collection shall be
placed on the person’s property, parallel to the street or curb. The Director
may designate alternative placement and collection points. Bulk waste and brush
shall not be placed, or allowed to be placed, on the sidewalk or in the street,
behind a fence or any obstruction or barrier.
   (F)   Bulk waste and brush shall not be placed within five feet of any fixed
object, solid waste or recycling container, or in any manner which would
interfere with or be hazardous to pedestrians, bicyclists, equestrians or
motorists.
   (G)   Brush must be clipped to no more than four feet in length, and bundled
with twine or other biodegradable string in bundles weighing no more than 50
pounds per bundle.
   (H)   The amount of bulk waste and brush placed out for collection during a
bulk waste and brush collection shall not exceed a total uncompacted volume of
20 cubic yards. The responsible party shall arrange for the commercial
transportation and licensed disposal for additional bulk waste over 20 cubic
yards per calendar year.
   (I)   Century plants, thorned plants, cacti, and similar plants which are
difficult to handle, or may present a danger to collection employees, shall be
contained in boxes or containers after having been cut to lengths of no more
than three feet. Any such container or box shall enable municipal collection
workers to pick up the container or box without risk of exposure to the
contents and shall weigh, when loaded, no more than 50 pounds per container.
   (J)   Items of bulk waste which are acceptable for normal residential
collection are:
      (1)   Tree limbs and branches less than four feet in length and palm
fronds.
      (2)   Metal material weighing less than 50 pounds.
      (3)   Pipe less than four feet in length and weighing less than 50
pounds.
      (4)   Household items, furniture, appliances, bicycles, and other durable
goods.
      (5)   Bagged or boxed leaves, weeds, grass, small vegetation clippings
and hedge clippings.
      (6)   Construction and demolition waste generated by a residential
account weighing less than 25 pounds.
      (7)   Cardboard boxes.
   (K)   Items of bulk waste which are not acceptable for residential
collection include:
      (1)   Tree limbs and branches more than four feet in length.
      (2)   Metal material weighing in excess of 50 pounds.
      (3)   Pipe more than four feet in length or weighing in excess of 50
pounds.
      (4)   Unbagged or unboxed leaves, weeds, grass, small vegetation
clippings or hedge clippings.
      (5)   More than 25 pounds of construction and demolition solid waste
generated by a residential account or any amount generated by a contractor,
subcontractor or builder.
      (6)   Cement, cement blocks, brick, asphalt, stones and dirt.
      (7)   Lead acid batteries, any hazardous waste, infectious or medical
solid waste.
      (8)   Automotive parts including tires or tires of any other type.
   (L)   No person shall place, or allow to be placed, unacceptable bulk waste
items, or improperly place bulk waste items, out for collection. The person or
responsible party shall remove and dispose of all bulk waste improperly placed
and any unacceptable items of bulk waste at their own expense. The Director may
require that brush and other yard waste be separated from other bulk waste for
collection in an alternative manner.
   (M)   In the event a violation is not corrected, the violation will be
considered a public nuisance that may be abated by Tocwn crews and charged to
the residential account.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-17-2018) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.17 ROLL-OFF CONTAINER COLLECTION SERVICE.
   (A)   The town may provide roll-off container collection service for a fee
as determined by the Town Council.
   (B)   All roll-off placements shall be subject to approval by the town, and
shall not interfere with sidewalk or street traffic.
   (C)   A release of liability may be required before containers will be
placed or collected from private property, or when placed within 15 feet of a
vehicle, mailbox or other obstruction to safe collection.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 91.18 COMMERCIAL COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All business establishments and commercial multi-family accounts shall
maintain alleys and the area surrounding the solid waste and recycling
containers free from solid waste, recycling and other potential hazards to the
public health, safety, or welfare. Where unusual or inordinate waste material
is generated, special collections shall be arranged with the Town or other
private service providers.
   (B)   Business establishments and commercial multi-family accounts may
receive town solid waste and recycling collection services and town-owned
containers. Collection employees shall at all times have convenient
accessibility to said containers.
   (C)   Recyclable materials must not be bagged and must be placed in the
recycling container in such a manner that they separate under the normal
operating procedures of the applicable materials recovery facility.
   (D)   No person or customer shall contaminate recyclables. Contamination of
recyclables includes, but is not limited to, putrescible material such as food
waste, grass, any brush clippings, filth, diapers, concrete, dirt or
polystyrene.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-17-2018) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.19 PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES, UNACCEPTABLE MATERIALS OR PROHIBITED MATERIALS.
   (A)   No person shall allow, deposit or cause to be deposited in any
container that is serviced by the town any prohibited substance, unacceptable
material or prohibited material as defined in this chapter.
   (B)   The town may, by special written agreement, contract to haul
prohibited substances when placed in special containers and clearly labeled.
   (C)   Unless the town has contracted by special written agreement to haul
the prohibited substances, it is the responsibility of the generator of such
substances to ensure their removal and proper disposal.
   (D)   Small quantities of construction and demolition waste, defined in this
chapter, may be placed in solid waste containers subject to weight and other
restrictions listed in this chapter.
   (E)   Removal of construction and demolition waste shall be the
responsibility of the responsible party or owner of the real property upon
which such waste is generated. Small quantities of construction and demolition
waste may be collected through the bulk waste program as per the conditions of
that program and this chapter.
   (F)   Unacceptable materials will not be collected under this chapter, may
subject the producer to a penalty under this chapter, and will be the
generator’s responsibility to ensure their removal. Unacceptable material may
be removed by the town at the generator’s expense as set forth in this chapter.
Unacceptable material may be collected through special collection events that
are periodically scheduled by the town.
   (G)   Prohibited materials. No person or responsible party shall set the
following prohibited materials out for collection, cause them to be set out for
collection, or allow them to be set out for collection. The following materials
are unacceptable for collection under any collection program described in this
chapter:
      (1)   Tires and other automotive parts. “Automotive parts” includes any
part, or combination of parts, of any kind of motor vehicle, including but not
limited to tires, batteries, seats, engines, fuel tanks, doors, auto glass, and
upholstery.
      (2)   Waste materials collected by any sidewalk or street sweeper.
      (3)   Gardening and landscape waste. No landscapers, tree trimmers, lawn
maintenance businesses or similar operators may dispose of yard waste, or any
other solid waste, in solid waste containers unless the waste is generated
solely from the grounds of the property, and the property owner or manager has
approved such disposal.
      (4)   Fire hazards. Hot ashes, hot cinders, burning matter, loose
sawdust, flammable liquids, volatile liquids, or any other material which
presents a fire hazard, shall not be acceptable.
      (5)   Hazardous material.
      (6)   Medical waste.
      (7)   Contaminated materials.
      (8)   Liquid or wet material that would easily flow through a paint
filter.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-17-2018) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.20 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   No person or responsible party shall:
      (1)   Place, allow to be placed, or cause to be placed any solid waste or
recyclables upon any public or private property not owned or under his or her
control;
      (2)   Place, allow to be placed, or cause to be placed in a solid waste
container any solid, waste or dead animal which is not contained within a
securely fastened leak-proof plastic bag, unless otherwise exempted by this
chapter;
      (3)   Place, allow to be placed, or cause to be placed any solid waste in
a container not owned or maintained by said property owner;
      (4)   Fail to restrain any vicious animal that prevents interference with
collection employees acting in the course of their duties, or any town employee
acting within the scope of their employment under this chapter;
      (5)   Cause, permit, facilitate, allow, or aid or abet any violation of
this chapter or fail to perform any act or duty required by this chapter;
      (6)   Fail to remove construction and demolition waste. It shall be a
violation of this chapter for a generator of construction and demolition waste
to fail to remove construction and demolition waste from a premises within 30
days from the date on which it was placed upon the premises, or not later than
the final building inspection, the clearance of public utilities, or the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever comes first;
      (7)   Burn solid waste. No person shall burn solid waste except in
incinerators as may be permitted by the town, county or the state. Any burning
of solid waste must comply with the rules and regulations established by the
Arizona Department of Health Services, Arizona Department of Environmental
Quality, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency;
      (8)   Interfere with collection. It shall be a violation of this chapter
for any person to interfere with authorized collection of solid waste in any
way;
      (9)   Mishandle hazardous waste. No person, responsible party, business,
contractor or private service provider shall knowingly collect, place or cause
to be placed or allow to be collected any hazardous waste or similar materials
from any container or any public or private property, except as specifically
permitted by the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality or the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency;
      (10)   Fail to contain and cover solid waste and recyclables in transit.
No person shall collect, transport or receive any solid waste or recyclables
within or upon any public or private streets in the town, or anywhere in the
town, except in covered leak proof containers or vehicles so constructed that
no solid waste or other wastes leak or sift through, fall out or be blown from
such container or vehicle. Any person collecting or transporting any solid
waste or recyclables shall immediately pick up all solid waste or recyclables
which drop, spill, leak, sift through, fall out, or are blown from the
collecting or transporting container or vehicle, and shall otherwise clean the
place onto which any such solid waste or recyclables were dropped, spilled,
blown, leaked, sifted through, or fell out;
      (11)   Contaminate recyclable materials. No person shall deposit or cause
to be deposited, in any recycling container, anything other than acceptable
recyclable materials as determined by the Director;
      (12)   Scavenge. No person, unless authorized by the owner of the solid
waste or recyclables, may remove, collect, or disturb solid waste or
recyclables in a container that is set out for collection for the purposes of
recycling or disposal. No person may remove, collect, or disturb recyclable
materials deposited for collection at any designated recycling drop-off and
collection center. Town employees acting within the scope of their employment
are not subject to the prohibitions described in this section.
   (B)   Each day any violation of this chapter exists shall constitute a
separate violation or offense and shall be treated as such during the
enforcement process.
   (C)   The owner of the premises, as shown in the records of the Mohave
County Recorder, at which a violation of this chapter exists, shall be presumed
to be a person having lawful control over any building, structure or parcel of
land. If more than one person shall be shown as the owner of the property, said
persons are jointly and severally presumed to be persons having lawful control
over the building, structure or parcel of land.
   (D)   If a responsible party served with a notice of violation or citation
by the town fails to correct the violation within the period specified, the
town may correct or abate the condition as described in the notice and, in
addition to any penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this chapter,
the responsible party shall be liable for all costs which may be assessed
pursuant to this chapter for the correction or abatement of the condition.
   (E)   If in the determination of the town the condition constitutes an
incipient hazard, or an imminent health or safety hazard, the Director may
immediately abate the hazard without notice. Such abatement of an imminent
health or safety hazard shall be limited to the minimum work necessary to
remove the hazard and the customer’s account shall be charged for the
abatement.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-17-2018) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.21 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The town is authorized to abate conditions which are an incipient
hazard, or are an imminent health and safety hazard, toward any person or
persons.
   (B)   The authority of the town to enforce provisions of this chapter is
independent of, and in addition to, the authority of other town officials to
enforce the provisions of any other Town Code provisions.
   (C)   Upon request from the Town Manager, the Police Department or any other
department of the town shall be authorized to assist and cooperate in the
enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 91.22 COLLECTION VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS.
   All vehicles used for solid waste and recycling collection and
transportation within the town must meet all applicable state and federal rules
and regulations.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 91.23 CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Private service providers shall have joint responsibility with the
business establishment or commercial multi-family account to keep and maintain
sufficient standard containers as to accommodate the solid waste and recycling
needs of the establishment being serviced.
   (B)   Private service providers shall at all times maintain their
containers, roll-off bodies and solid waste compactors in clean and sanitary
condition and good repair as may be determined by the Director.
   (C)   Private service provider’s containers, roll-off bodies and solid waste
compactors shall be located so as not to interfere with vehicular or pedestrian
traffic, or a safe line of sight, and to minimize visibility, and shall be in
conformance with all permits, license, Town Code requirements, and this
chapter.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 91.24 SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF CONTAINERS.
   (A)   In addition to any other penalties set forth in this chapter, any
solid waste or recycling container which is placed or maintained at a
residential account, business establishment, or commercial multi-family account
in violation of any town or state law may be seized and impounded by the Town,
at the owner’s expense.
   (B)   Prior to the seizure and impoundment of any solid waste container, the
town shall conspicuously post upon said container a notice of violation which
sets forth the specific violation and the date on which the container will be
seized if the violation has not been corrected. The notice of violations shall
be posted at least ten days prior to the seizure of the container, unless the
Director determines the container creates an incipient hazard, or imminent
health or safety hazard.
   (C)   The owner of any container which is impounded pursuant to the
provisions of this section shall have 30 days to pay the town cost of seizure
and storage and to retrieve the container. If the owner of a container has
failed to pay the applicable cost or failed to retrieve the container within 30
days of its seizure, the town is authorized to dispose of the container upon
such condition and terms as determined by town.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 91.25 MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE FEES.
   Fees for solid waste and recycling collection shall be established by the
Town Council and shall be paid monthly.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 91.26 RESTRICTIONS ON BURNING.
   (A)   Permit required.
      (1)   No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or rubbish fire or
authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on or in any public street,
alley, road or other public ground without a permit or other proper
authorization.
      (2)   During construction or demolition of buildings or structures, no
waste materials or rubbish shall be disposed of by burning on the premises or
in the immediate vicinity without having obtained a permit or other proper
authorization. Authorization may be obtained by telephone.
   (B)   Location restricted. No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or
rubbish fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on any
private land, except as provided for by state law, and unless the location is
not less than 50 feet from any structure and adequate provision is made to
prevent fire from spreading to within 50 feet of any structure, or the fire is
contained in an approved waste burner located safely not less than 15 feet from
any structure.
   (C)   Attendance of open fires. Bonfires and rubbish fires shall be
constantly attended by a competent person until that fire is extinguished. This
person shall have a garden hose connected to the water supply or other fire
extinguishing equipment readily available for use.
   (D)   Chief may prohibit. The Chief of the Fire Department may prohibit any
or all bonfires and outdoor rubbish fires when atmospheric conditions or local
circumstances make those fires hazardous.
   (E)   Kindling of fire on land of others. No person shall kindle a fire upon
the land of another without permission of the owner thereof or the occupant.
(1986 Code, § 9-1-5) (Ord. 2008-02, passed 4-18-2008) Penalty, see §
91.99
MAINTENANCE OF PROPERTY
§ 91.45 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LITTER. Any rubbish, trash, weeds, filth or debris which shall constitute a
hazard to public health and safety and shall include all putrescible and
nonputrescible solid wastes including garbage, trash, ashes, street cleanings,
dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial waste; any
deposit, accumulation, pile or heap of brush, grass, debris, weeds, cans,
cloth, paper, wood, rubbish or other unsightly or unsanitary matter of any kind
whatsoever; and any growth of weeds, brush, grass or other unintended vegetable
growth to a height of over 24 inches.
   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed
or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether
inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall
include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps or vestibules belonging
or appurtenant to the dwelling, house, building or other structures.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
(A.R.S. § 9-499) (1986 Code, § 9-4-1) (Ord. 2008-02, passed 4-18-2008)
§ 91.46 LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied or unoccupied
private property within the town, whether owned by that person or not, except
that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for refuse in such a manner that litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any public place.
(1986 Code, § 9-4-2) (Ord. 2008-02, passed 4-18-2008) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.47 OWNER TO MAINTAIN PREMISES, INCLUDING SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all
times maintain the premises free of litter; provided that this section shall
not prohibit the storage of litter in suitable containers.
   (B)   Any owner or any person in control of any private property, hereafter
referred to as “owner”, shall maintain the same, including abutting public
ways, up to the curb of the streets where the sidewalk and curbs are present,
in a non-dangerous condition, and shall owe this duty to the public.
   (C)   This responsibility includes areas that are public or private
property. The owner shall be charged with the responsibility to keep the
sidewalk in a good state of repair and free from defects, debris, trash and
pedestrian obstructions. The term SIDEWALK shall apply to driveway approach. If
the damage is caused by the town, such as a town tree root lifting the
sidewalk, the town shall be responsible for paying for the cost of the repair.
The owner shall remove snow from the sidewalk within 24 hours of the end of a
continuous period of snowfall.
   (D)   On any claim presented for bodily injury or property damage on the
sidewalk, due to negligent maintenance, the adjoining or abutting property
owner shall be held liable in tort for such damages to another, unless the
hazard was created by the town.
(1986 Code, § 9-4-3) (Ord. 2008-02, passed 4-18-2008) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.48 PROCEDURE TO COMPEL.
   The Marshal shall enforce the provisions of §§
91.46 and
91.47 above by prosecuting violators of those sections in the Magistrate’s
Court pursuant to the criminal provisions of this code. If the prosecution
fails to secure compliance with the provisions of those sections, or in the
event of inability to prosecute violators by reason of failure to secure
jurisdiction over their persons, the Marshal shall compel the removal of litter
or maintenance by the procedure outlined in §§
91.49 through
91.53 below.
(1986 Code, § 9-4-4) (Ord. 2008-02, passed 4-18-2008)
§ 91.49 NOTICE TO COMPLY.
   (A)   To compel the removal of litter or maintenance through the provisions
of this section and of §§
91.50 through
91.53 below, if a person owning or controlling any property fails, neglects or
refuses to remove or properly dispose of litter, located on property owned or
controlled by such person, he or she shall be given written notice by the
Marshal to remove all litter or cut the weeds from the property within 30 days
from the date the notice was received by him or her, and prior to the date of
compliance on the notice.
   (B)   The notice shall be received not less than 30 days before the date set
thereon for compliance, and shall contain an estimate of the cost of removal by
the town, a statement that unless the person owning or controlling the property
complies therewith within 30 days from the date the written notice is received
that the town will, at the expense of the person owning or controlling the
property, perform the necessary work at a cost not to exceed the estimate given
in the notice, and that such person may appeal in writing to the Council within
30 days from the date the notice is received by him or her and prior to the
date of compliance.
(1986 Code, § 9-4-5) (Ord. 2008-02, passed 4-18-2008) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.50 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   Notice shall be personally served on the owner or person controlling the
property by an officer of the town in the manner provided in Rule 4(d) of the
Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure, being A.R.S. § 12-2406, or mailed to the
owner or person controlling the property at his or her last known address by
certified or registered mail.
(1986 Code, § 9-4-6) (Ord. 2008-02, passed 4-18-2008)
§ 91.51 APPEAL TO COUNCIL.
   (A)   Prior to the date set for compliance on the notice, the owner or
person controlling the property may appeal in writing to the Council.
   (B)   The Council shall, at its next regular meeting after receiving the
appeal, hear and determine the same and the decision of the Council shall be
final.
   (C)   The Council may either affirm or reverse the decision of the Marshal
or modify the scope of the work as required in the notice.
(1986 Code, § 9-4-7) (Ord. 2008-02, passed 4-18-2008)
§ 91.52 WORK PERFORMED BY THE TOWN.
   (A)   When any such person to whom notice, as aforesaid, has been given, and
on or before the date of compliance on the notice, or within such further time
as may have been granted by the Council on appeal, fails, neglects or refuses
to comply, the Marshal is authorized and directed to cause same to be
performedat the expense of the owner or person controlling the property.
   (B)   Upon completion of the work, the Marshal shall prepare a verified
statement of account of the actual cost of the removal or abatement, the date
the work was completed, and the street address and the legal description of the
property on which the work was done, including 10% for additional inspection
and other incidental costs in connection therewith, and shall serve a duplicate
copy of the verified statement upon the person owning or controlling the
property in the manner prescribed in §
91.50.
   (C)   The owner or person controlling the property shall have 30 days from
the date of service upon him or her to appeal in writing to the Council from
the amount of the assessment as contained in the verified statement. If an
appeal is not filed with the Marshal within that 30-day period, then the amount
of the assessment as determined by the Marshal shall become final and binding.
If an appeal is taken, the Council shall, at its next regular meeting, hear and
determine the appeal and may affirm the amount of the assessment, modify the
amount thereof, or determine that no assessment at all shall be made. The
decision of the Council shall be final and binding on all persons.
(1986 Code, § 9-4-8) (Ord. 2008-02, passed 4-18-2008)
§ 91.53 LIEN ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   If no appeal is taken from the amount of the assessment, or if an
appeal is taken and the Council has affirmed or modified the amount of the
assessment, the original assessment or the assessment as so modified shall be
recorded in the office of the County Recorder and, from the date of its
recording, shall be a lien on the lot or tract of land until paid. Such liens
shall be subject and inferior to the lien for general taxes and to all prior
recorded mortgage and encumbrances of record.
   (B)   A sale of the property to satisfy a lien obtained under the provisions
of this section shall be made upon judgment of foreclosure or order of sale.
The town shall have the right to bring an action to enforce the lien in the
Superior Court at any time after the recording of the assessment, but failure
to enforce the lien by such action shall not affect its validity. The recorded
assessment shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of all matters recited
therein and of the regularity of all proceedings prior to the recording
thereof.
   (C)   A prior assessment for the purposes provided in this section shall not
be a bar to a subsequent assessment or assessments for such purposes, and any
number of liens on the same lot or tract of land may be enforced in the same
action.
(1986 Code, § 9-4-9) (Ord. 2008-02, passed 4-18-2008)
§ 91.54 PLACEMENT OF DEBRIS.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall place any rubbish, trash, filth or
debris upon any private or public property not owned or under the control of
that person, firm or corporation, except in authorized private receptacles as
defined in §
91.46, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, in addition to any fine which may
be imposed for a violation of any provision of this section, shall be liable
for all costs which may be assessed pursuant to this subchapter for the removal
of the rubbish, trash, filth or debris.
(1986 Code, § 9-4-10) (Ord. 2008-02, passed 4-18-2008) Penalty, see §
91.99
PUBLIC HEALTH
§ 91.65 NAUSEOUS, FOUL OR OFFENSIVE CONDITIONS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall suffer or permit any premises, owned, leased, occupied,
controlled or managed by him or her, or any cellar, privy, vault, pool,
cesspool, water closet, sewer or private ditch or drain therein or thereupon,
to become nauseous, foul or offensive to the senses or prejudicial to the
public health or comfort.
(1986 Code, § 9-5-1) (Ord. 2008-02, passed 4-18-2008) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.66 OFFENSIVE WATER.
   No filthy or offensive water shall at any time be poured, thrown, sprinkled
or put in or upon any street, ditch, land, court, square, alley, vacant lot or
public place within the town.
(1986 Code, § 9-5-2) (Ord. 2008-02, passed 4-18-2008) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.67 PREMISES TO BE KEPT PROPERLY CLEANED AND DRAINED.
   It is unlawful for any person owning, conducting, operating or managing any
business place, stand, building, establishment, machinery or equipment to fail
to keep the same, with the premises whereon the same is located, properly
cleaned and drained.
(1986 Code, § 9-5-3) (Ord. 2008-02, passed 4-18-2008) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.68 PREMISES TO BE SANITARY; INSPECTION OF PREMISES.
   The premises upon which fowl, rodents, cattle, horses, mules, sheep or goats
are kept shall always be sanitary and subject to inspection and regulation by
the Health Officer or Animal Control Officer.
(1986 Code, § 9-5-4) (Ord. 2008-02, passed 4-18-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. § 9-240B(20), (21) and (22)
§ 91.69 PRIVY, VAULT, CESSPOOL OR WELL PROHIBITED.
   No open privy, vault, cesspool or well shall be installed or maintained
within the corporate limits of the town.
(1986 Code, § 9-5-5) (Ord. 2008-02, passed 4-18-2008) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.70 CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH FLIES BREED PROHIBITED.
   No owner, tenant or occupant of any premises within the town shall suffer,
permit or have upon the premises any cesspool, vault, pit or the like place; or
animal manure, garbage, trash, litter, rags or any other thing in which flies
may breed or multiply, unless the same shall be protected as to prevent the
attraction, breeding and multiplying of flies.
(1986 Code, § 9-5-6) (Ord. 2008-02, passed 4-18-2008) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.71 POLLUTION OF DITCHES.
   No person shall pollute, suffer or cause to be polluted any ditches within
the town by bathing, washing, washing clothing or any animal in or about the
same; or throwing or depositing therein any filthy matter or anything injurious
to the health or offensive to the senses or by running into the same any
sewerage matter, slops, brewery, bathhouse or kitchen wastes.
(1986 Code, § 9-5-7) (Ord. 2008-02, passed 4-18-2008) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.72 DEPOSITING DEBRIS OR ALLOWING DRAINAGE ON PUBLIC THOROUGHFARES
PROHIBITED.
   No person shall deposit in or upon or permit to drain into, any street,
alley or public place of the town from any premises owned or occupied by such
person, any refuse, slop, filth, garbage or debris of any kind or nature or any
matter or thing which is offensive to sight or smell or is derogatory to
health, except at such times and places, and under such regulations as may be
made by the Council.
(1986 Code, § 9-5-8) (Ord. 2008-02, passed 4-18-2008) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates
any section within this chapter, shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor and
upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or
by imprisonment not to exceed 6 months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as
herein above described. The imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the
offender from compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   The penalties set forth above shall be cumulative and nonexclusive. In
addition to those penalties set forth above, the town may institute any other
remedies available, including but not limited to a civil action to seek
injunctive relief for a violation of this chapter, and the recovery of
attorney’s fees for such violation.
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in
Section 1-3-1. Each and every day any such violation continues shall be deemed
and considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 4-18-2008; Am. Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-17-2018)
CHAPTER 92: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
92.01   Presence in parks
   
92.02   Riding vehicles on grounds
   
92.03   Damaging, tampering with or improper use of facilities
   
92.04   Loud noises
   
92.05   Animals in parks
   
92.06   Intoxicating beverages
   
92.07   Camping
   
92.08   Use of parks
   
92.09   Garbage and trash
   
92.10   Glass bottles or containers
   
92.11   Trees, shrubbery and lawns
   
92.12   Park supervision
   
92.13   Additional rules and regulations
§ 92.01 PRESENCE IN PARKS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to be upon or remain upon any Colorado
City municipal park, ball field or golf course between 10:00 p.m. and dawn of
each day.
   (B)   Any authorized town employee or such other person as authorized in
writing by the Chief of Police shall be excepted from division (A) above.
(1986 Code, § 11-1-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.02 RIDING VEHICLES ON GROUNDS.
   No person shall at any time drive or ride on any automobile, truck,
motorcycle, motor scooter or other motor vehicle upon the grounds of any
municipal park, playground, ball field or golf course, except in public streets
running through the premises or within designated parking areas located upon
the premises, without the permission of the Town Marshal or such other person
as the Council may designate.
(1986 Code, § 11-1-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.03 DAMAGING, TAMPERING WITH OR IMPROPER USE OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to damage or improperly use the toilets,
or water and sewer facilities in any municipal park, playground, ball park or
golf course.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to cause the lighting facilities to be
turned on during other than normal hours, without the consent of that person as
the Town Council may designate.
(A.R.S. § 9-494) (1986 Code, § 11-1-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.04 LOUD NOISES.
   No person shall play any radio, tape player, hand or musical instrument,
television, phonograph, tape recorder or other device capable of reproducing
sound at such a high volume so as to disturb the peace and quiet of another.
There shall be no loud or band music or excessive noise beyond 10:00 p.m.
without the express consent of that person as the Town Council may designate.
(1986 Code, § 11-1-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.05 ANIMALS IN PARKS.
   No animals shall be allowed in Colorado City parks, golf course, playgrounds
or ball fields, unless those animals are leashed or in direct control of the
owner.
(1986 Code, § 11-1-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.06 INTOXICATING BEVERAGES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any spirituous liquor of any
kind in the Colorado City playgrounds, ball fields or parks.
(1986 Code, § 11-1-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.07 CAMPING.
   No person shall sleep or camp overnight in any town park or its adjacent
streets, except by permission of the Town Marshal or other person designated by
the Town Council.
(1986 Code, § 11-1-7) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.08 USE OF PARKS.
   Any individual or group who wishes to use parks in a manner contrary to this
chapter must obtain a park-use permit from the person designated by the Town
Council.
(1986 Code, § 11-1-8)
§ 92.09 GARBAGE AND TRASH.
   No person shall dump, spill, deposit, place, throw or leave refuse, rubbish,
filthy or odor-causing objects, substances or other trash in the parks,
playgrounds, ball fields, golf course or any other town owned or operated
recreation area. No trash except that associated with picnic activity at the
park or recreation area shall be deposited in the trash receptacles provided by
the town at those locations.
(1986 Code, § 11-1-9) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.10 GLASS BOTTLES OR CONTAINERS.
   No person shall bring glass bottles or containers into or on the premises of
the parks, playgrounds, ball fields, golf course or any other town operated
recreation area.
(1986 Code, § 11-1-10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.11 TREES, SHRUBBERY AND LAWNS.
   (A)   No person shall damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or
plant or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant,
nor shall any person attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or
plant without the express written permission of the director.
   (B)   No person shall dig or remove any sand, whether submerged or not, or
any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, down timber or other wood or
materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means
or agency without the express written permission of the director.
(1986 Code, § 11-1-11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.12 PARK SUPERVISION.
   The town shall supervise all parks, park scheduling and park maintenance.
Parks may be reserved in advance for use by an approved group or event. Any
construction, alterations, additions or repairs to the parks affected by anyone
other than the town shall require written advance permission and comply with
all specifications imposed by the town or its designated agent for such
purposes. Smoking is prohibited in town parks.
(1986 Code, § 11-1-12)
§ 92.13 ADDITIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Town Council may adopt additional rules and regulations from time to
time as it deem reasonably necessary for the safety and efficient use by the
public of the parks.
(1986 Code, § 11-1-13)
CHAPTER 93: RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA
Section
   
93.01   Purpose
   
93.02   Definitions
   
93.03   Marijuana prohibited on public property
   
93.04   Marijuana establishment prohibited
   
93.05   Marijuana testing facility prohibited
   
93.06   Individual's primary residence for personal use
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is adopted to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
community. Except as allowed by law for personal, private use, the town
prohibits the retail sale, cultivation, and manufacturing of marijuana or
marijuana products in town. Nothing in this chapter is intended to promote or
condone the sale, cultivation, manufacture, transport, production,
distribution, possession, or use of marijuana or marijuana products in
violation of any applicable law.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed - -)
§ 93.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The below words and phrases, wherever used in this chapter, shall be
construed as defined in this section unless, clearly from the context, a
different meaning is intended. Words used in the present tense include the
future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words
in the singular number include the plural number.
   CHEMICAL EXTRACTION. The process of removing a particular component of a
mixture from others present, including removing resinous tetrahydrocannabinol
from marijuana.
   CHEMICAL SYNTHESIS. Production of a new particular molecule by adding to,
subtracting from, or changing the structure of a precursor molecule.
   CONSUME, CONSUMING, and CONSUMPTION. The act of ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body.
   CONSUMER. An individual who is at least 21 years of age and who purchases
marijuana or marijuana products.
   CULTIVATE and CULTIVATION. To propagate, breed, grow, prepare and package
marijuana.
   DELIVER and DELIVERY. The transportation, transfer or provision of marijuana
or marijuana products to a consumer at a location other than the designated
retail location of a marijuana establishment.
   DEPARTMENT. The State of Arizona Department of Health Services or its
successor agency.
   DUAL LICENSEE. An entity that holds both a nonprofit medical marijuana
dispensary registration and a marijuana establishment license.
   ENCLOSED AREA. A building, greenhouse, or other structure that has:
      (1)   A complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls that are
constructed of solid material extending from the ground to the roof;
      (2)   Is secure against unauthorized entry;
      (3)   Has a foundation, slab or equivalent base to which the floor is
securely attached; and
      (4)   Meets performance standards ensuring that cultivation and
processing activities cannot be and are not perceptible from the structure in
terms of not being visible from public view without using binoculars, aircraft
or other optical aids and is equipped with a lock or other security device that
prevents access by minors.
   EXTRACTION. The process of extracting or separating resin from marijuana to
produce or process any form of marijuana concentrates using water, lipids,
gases, solvents, or other chemicals or chemical processes.
   MANUFACTURE and MANUFACTURING. To compound, blend, extract, infuse or
otherwise make or prepare a marijuana product.
   MARIJUANA.
      (1)   Means all parts of the plant of the genus cannabis, whether growing
or not, as well as the seeds from the plant, the resin extracted from any part
of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or
preparation of the plant or its seeds or resin.
      (2)   Includes cannabis as defined in A.R.S. § 13-3401.
      (3)   Does not include industrial hemp, the fiber produced from the
stalks of the plant of the genus cannabis, oil or cake made from the seeds of
the plant, sterilized seeds of the plant that are incapable of germination, or
the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical
or oral administrations, food, drink or other products.
   MARIJUANA CONCENTRATE.
      (1)   Means resin extracted from any part of a plant of the genus
cannabis and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or
preparation of that resin or tetrahydrocannabinol.
      (2)   Does not include industrial hemp or the weight of any other
ingredient combined with cannabis to prepare topical or oral administrations,
food, drink or other products.
   MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT. An entity licensed by the Department to operate all
of the following:
      (1)   A single retail location at which the licensee may sell marijuana
and marijuana products to consumers, cultivate marijuana and manufacture
marijuana products.
      (2)   A single off-site cultivation location at which the licensee may
cultivate marijuana, process marijuana and manufacture marijuana products, but
from which marijuana and marijuana products may not be transferred or sold to
consumers.
      (3)   A single off-site location at which the licensee may manufacture
marijuana products and package and store marijuana and marijuana products, but
from which marijuana and marijuana products may not be transferred or sold to
consumers.
   MARIJUANA PRODUCTS. Marijuana concentrate and products that are composed of
marijuana and other ingredients and that are intended for use or consumption,
including edible products, ointments, and tinctures.
   MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY. The Department or another entity that is
licensed by the Department to analyze the potency of marijuana and test
marijuana for harmful contaminants.
   NONPROFIT MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY. A nonprofit entity as defined in
A.R.S. § 36-2801(12).
   OPEN SPACE. A public park, public sidewalk, public walkway or public
pedestrian thoroughfare.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, association, or any other
entity of whatever kind or nature.
   PROCESS and PROCESSING. To harvest, dry, cure, trim or separate parts of the
marijuana plant.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Has the same meaning prescribed in the Smoke-Free-Arizona Act,
A.R.S. § 36-601.01.
   SMOKE. To inhale, exhale, burn, carry or possess any lighted marijuana or
lighted marijuana products, whether natural or synthetic.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed - -)
§ 93.03 MARIJUANA PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   The use, sale, cultivation, manufacture, production or distribution of
marijuana or marijuana products is prohibited on property that is occupied,
owned, controlled or operated by town.
   (B)   It is unlawful for an individual to smoke marijuana in a public place
or open space in town.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed - -)
§ 93.04 MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT PROHIBITED.
   (A)   To the fullest extent allowable by law, the operation of a marijuana
establishment is prohibited in town.
   (B)   To the fullest extent allowable by law, the operation of a marijuana
establishment by a dual licensee is prohibited in town.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed - -)
§ 93.05 MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY PROHIBITED.
   To the fullest extent allowable by law, the operation of a marijuana testing
facility is prohibited in town.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed - -)
§ 93.06 INDIVIDUAL'S PRIMARY RESIDENCE FOR PERSONAL USE.
   Only to the extent permitted by Arizona law, marijuana possession,
consumption, processing, manufacturing, transportation, and cultivation is
permitted in a residential zoning district in town subject to the following
conditions and limitation:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any individual who is at least 21 years of
age to possess, transport, cultivate or process more than six marijuana plants.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for two or more individuals who are at least 21
year of age to possess, transport, cultivate or process more than 12 marijuana
plants at the individuals' primary residence.
   (C)   Except as provided by A.R.S. § 36-2801 et seq. and this section, it
shall be unlawful for an individual to otherwise cultivate marijuana in a
residential zoning district within town limits.
   (D)   Individuals shall not process or manufacture marijuana by means of any
liquid or gas other than alcohol, that has a flashpoint below 100 degrees
Fahrenheit.
   (E)   Kitchen, bathrooms, and primary bedroom(s) shall be used for their
intended use and shall not be used primarily for residential marijuana
processing, manufacturing, or cultivation.
   (F)   A residence shall not emit dust, fumes, vapors, or odors into the
environment and individuals shall ensure that ventilation, air filtration,
building and design standards are compatible with adjacent uses and the
requirements of adopted building codes of town.
   (G)   Cultivation shall be limited to a closet, room, greenhouse, or other
enclosed area on the grounds of the residence equipped with a lock or other
security device that prevents access by minors.
   (H)   Cultivation shall take place in an area where the marijuana plants are
not visible from public view without using binoculars, aircraft, or other
optical aids.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed - -)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a person to sell,
cultivate, process, manufacture or transport marijuana or marijuana products if
the person fails to meet all the requirements in this chapter or state law,
including the Department's rules.
   (B)   Each day any violation of any provision of this chapter shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   Violations of this chapter are in addition to any other violation
enumerated within the town ordinances or the town code and in no way limits the
penalties, actions or abatement procedures which may be taken by the town for
any violation of this chapter, which is also a violation of any other ordinance
or code provision of the town or federal or state law. Conviction and
punishment of judgment and civil sanction against any person under this chapter
shall not relieve such person from the responsibility of correcting prohibited
conditions, or removing prohibited structures or improvements, and shall not
prevent the enforced correction or removal thereof.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed - -)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL LICENSES
      
111.   PEDDLERS
      
112.   SHORT-TERM RENTALS AND VACATION RENTALS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL LICENSES
Section
   
110.01   Purpose and scope
   
110.02   License required
   
110.03   Issuance of license
   
110.04   License approval
   
110.05   Business license fee
   
110.06   Posting of license
   
110.07   Enforcement authority
   
110.08   Transfer of license
   
110.09   Exemptions
   
110.10   Notice of termination of business required
   
110.11   Restrictions; suspension; revocation
   
110.12   Appeal from denial; restrictions, suspension or revocation of license;
notice and hearing
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is both regulatory and revenue raising.
   (B)   The regulations are for the protection of the health, safety and
welfare of the residents, business owners and visitors of the Town of Colorado
City. Regulations found in other chapters of this code, which pertain to
specific types of business, shall be in addition to those found within this
chapter. The revenue raising procedures are defined in
Chapter 111.
(1986 Code, § 8-1-1)
§ 110.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to carry on any business, game or
amusement, calling, profession or occupation without having first procured a
business license from the Town of Colorado City. Applicant/licensee must comply
with any and all regulations of the business, game or amusement, calling,
profession or occupation, as well as all provisions of this code. Applicant/
licensee must also comply with all town ordinances, county ordinances and state
laws affecting the health, safety and welfare of the public in the town.
   (B)   A separate license shall be required for each separate business, game
or amusement, calling profession or occupation. Only 1 license is required for
each business, game or amusement, calling, profession or occupation if operated
at more than 1 location. Each location shall have a copy of the license issued
to the business prominently displayed as required by this chapter. Each license
shall authorize the person obtaining the license to carry on, pursue or conduct
that business, game or amusement, calling, profession or occupation described
in the license, and only at the locations which are indicated.
(1986 Code, § 8-1-2) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.03 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to prepare and to issue
licenses under this chapter for every person, firm, company or corporation
required to procure such license hereunder, and to state in each license the
fee thereof, the period of time covered, the name of the person, firm or
corporation for whom issued, the business, game or amusement, calling,
profession or occupation licensed, and the location or place of business where
the business, game or amusement, calling, profession or occupation is to be
carried on.
   (B)   Application for a business license shall be made on forms furnished by
the Town Clerk. Every application shall be accompanied by an application fee,
as provided hereinafter. The Office of the Town Clerk shall be responsible for
the acceptance and processing of all applications.
(1986 Code, § 8-1-3)
§ 110.04 LICENSE APPROVAL.
   (A)   The following department heads must approve the business license
application before issuance:
      (1)   Zoning and Building;
      (2)   Fire; and
      (3)   Police.
   (B)   The Town Clerk may place restrictions upon the issuance of the
business license as requested by the department heads. These restrictions shall
be for the purpose of protecting the health, safety and welfare of the public.
(1986 Code, § 8-1-4)
§ 110.05 BUSINESS LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   All business license fees shall be paid at the office of the Town
Clerk or in such a manner as may be specified by the Town Clerk. The licenses
shall expire on December 31 of each year. License renewal fees shall be paid
before expiration of the previous license. The Town Clerk may require re-
application before renewal, if the Town Clerk determines that there has been a
substantial change in the business.
   (B)   A flat rate of $28 per business is hereby established as the business
license annual fee and will be payable to the Town Clerk before the business
license expiration date of December 31 each year, and that new licenses will be
prorated on a quarterly basis. That the business license applications will be
considered delinquent after February 1 of each year and will be subject to a
late charge of $10 as established in this chapter and
Chapter 111.
(1986 Code, § 8-1-4) (Res. 89-16, passed - -)
§ 110.06 POSTING OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Every person, firm, company or corporation having a license under the
provisions of this chapter, and carrying on a business, game or amusement,
calling, profession or occupation at a fixed place of business shall keep the
license posted and exhibited, while in force, in some conspicuous part of the
place of business.
   (B)   Every person having such a license and not having a fixed place of
business shall carry such license with him or her at all times while carrying
on that business, game or amusement, calling, profession or occupation for
which the license was issued.
   (C)   Every person, firm, company or corporation having a license under the
provisions of this chapter shall produce and exhibit the same, whenever
requested to do so by the Town Clerk, any police officer of the town or any
department head or authorized representative of the department head, who is
required to approve the issuance of the license.
(1986 Code, § 8-1-5) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.07 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   (A)   All police officers of the town shall have and exercise the power to
make arrests and to cause complaints to be filed against any person violating
the provisions of this chapter. In addition, the Town Clerk also shall have to
the power to cause complaints to be filed against such persons.
   (B)   All town police officers, department heads and their authorized
representatives of those departments whose approval is required for issuance of
the license shall have the power to enter free of charge at any reasonable time
any place of business for which a license is required by this chapter. That
person shall have the right to inspect for compliance with the regulations
regarding the particular license, and to demand the exhibition of the license
for the current term from any person engaged or employed in the transaction of
any such business. If any such person shall then and there fail to exhibit that
license, that person shall be in violation of this code.
(1986 Code, § 8-1-6) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.08 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   (A)   No license granted or issued under any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be in any manner assignable or transferable to anyone other than
is therein mentioned or named to do business.
   (B)   No business license shall authorize any other business than is therein
mentioned or named to be done or transacted, or at any place other than is
therein mentioned or named, without first obtaining permission for the Council
upon application to the Town Clerk.
(1986 Code, § 8-1-7)
§ 110.09 EXEMPTIONS.
   No business license shall be required for the following:
   (A)   The practice, transaction or carrying on of any business, game or
amusement, calling or occupation which is solely engaged in delivery, but is
not based in the town;
   (B)   Hospitals, whether or not operated for profit;
   (C)   Physicians, surgeons or nurses not engaged in private practice;
   (D)   Sellers of agricultural produce grown within the town by the seller;
or
   (E)   Religious, charitable or other non-profit organizations, institutions
or associations.
(1986 Code, § 8-1-8)
§ 110.10 NOTICE OF TERMINATION OF BUSINESS REQUIRED.
   Every licensee shall notify the Town Clerk in writing of the termination of
his or her business, game or amusement, calling, profession or occupation,
either before the termination date or within 10 days thereafter.
(1986 Code, § 8-1-9)
§ 110.11 RESTRICTIONS; SUSPENSION; REVOCATION.
   Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be restricted,
suspended or revoked by the town clerk, after notice and an opportunity for a
hearing, for any of the following causes:
   (A)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license;
   (B)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business;
   (C)   Any violation of this chapter;
   (D)   Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or
   (E)   Conducting business in violation of any town ordinance, county
ordinance or state law relating to the public health, safety and welfare.
(1986 Code, § 8-1-10)
§ 110.12 APPEAL FROM DENIAL; RESTRICTIONS, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE;
NOTICE AND HEARING.
   (A)   Notice of the hearing for restrictions, suspension or revocation of a
license shall be given in writing, by the Town Clerk, setting forth
specifically the grounds for the restrictions, suspension or revocation and the
time and place of the hearing. The notice shall be mailed to the licensee at
the address listed on the business license application at least 10 days prior
to the date set for the hearing. The mailing of the notice shall constitute
proper notice to the licensee.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved by the denial of an application for license or by
the restrictions placed upon the license or by the suspension or revocation of
the license shall have the right of appeal to the Council. The appeal shall be
taken by filing with the Town Clerk, within 14 days after the denial,
restriction, suspension or revocation, a written statement setting forth fully
the grounds for the appeal. The Council shall set a time and a place for
hearing of the appeal, and notice of the hearing shall be given to the
appellant in the same manner as provided for notice of a hearing on suspension
or revocation. The decision and order of the Council on the appeal shall be
final.
(1986 Code, § 8-1-11)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished according to §
10.99. Each day or part thereof that an activity is carried on in violation of
this chapter shall be a separate violation.
(1986 Code, § 8-1-12)
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS
Section
   
111.01   License required
   
111.02   Applications
   
111.03   Fee
   
111.04   Permission required for selling on streets or sidewalks
   
111.05   Signs to be observed
   
111.06   Newspaper delivery persons exempt
   
111.07   Issuance of registration cards
§ 111.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the business
of hawker or peddler of any merchandise, article or thing without having first
secured a license therefor.
(1986 Code, § 8-2-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.02 APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Clerk and shall
state thereon the description and number of vehicles, if any, intended to be
operated, the kind of merchandise to be peddled and the permanent address of
the peddler, and any other information required.
(1986 Code, § 8-2-2)
   (B)   Applications shall also include the business and cell phone numbers of
the applicant, as well as the names of all persons accompanying or assisting
the applicant. The Police Department shall check the validity of the
registration of the vehicles.
§ 111.03 FEE.
   (A)   A flat rate of $20 is hereby established as the peddlers license fee,
payable the Town Clerk before any such business is conducted within the town,
and that this fee will be assessed on an occurrence basis, valid for 2 days
from the time of issuance.
(1986 Code, § 8-2-3) (Res. 89-16, passed - -)
§ 111.04 PERMISSION REQUIRED FOR SELLING ON STREETS OR SIDEWALKS.
   It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any booth, stand or
counter on any sidewalk in the town for the purpose of barter, sale or trade,
or keep or maintain upon the streets or alleys any wagon, cart, wheel, vehicle,
movable booth or stand for the purpose of barter or trade without obtaining
permission of the Council.
(1986 Code, § 8-2-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.05 SIGNS TO BE OBSERVED.
   It is unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or canvasser in the course of his
or her business to ring the doorbell or knock at any building whereon a sign
bearing the words “no peddlers, solicitors or canvassers,” “no trespassing,”
“private property,” “keep out” or similar signs are exposed to public view.
(1986 Code, § 8-2-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.06 NEWSPAPER DELIVERY PERSONS EXEMPT.
   Newspaper delivery persons are exempt from the provisions of this chapter
for the sale of newspaper subscriptions.
(1986 Code, § 8-2-6)
§ 111.07 ISSUANCE OF REGISTRATION CARDS.
   Registration cards shall be given without charge to all applicants who have
complied with §
111.02 above, unless the Chief of Police discovers that any such applicant is
deemed not to be a proper person to be permitted to go from house to house
because of any of the following reasons:
   (A)   He or she has a criminal record;
   (B)   He or she is associated with a company that has engaged in fraudulent
dealings; or
   (C)   The proposed sales proposition includes some element of trickery,
fraud or deceit, in which case, in the interest of public safety and
protection, the applicant shall not be registered.
(1986 Code, § 8-2-7)
CHAPTER 112: SHORT-TERM RENTALS AND VACATION RENTALS
Section
   
112.01   Purpose
   
112.02   Definitions
   
112.03   Permit required; penalties
   
112.04   Emergency point of contact requirements; penalties
   
112.05   Compliance with the law; prohibited uses
   
112.06   Neighbor notification required
   
112.07   Advertisement requirements
   
112.08   Posting on the property required
   
112.09   Insurance required
   
112.10   Background checks required
   
112.11   Permit suspensions
   
112.12   Appeals
   
112.13   Judicial relief
   
112.99   Enhanced penalties
§ 112.01 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is adopted to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
community of the town's residents and visitors by enacting reasonable
regulations for short-term rentals and vacation rentals. The inclusion of a
specific regulation or reference to the Town Code in this chapter does not
imply the exclusion of any other applicable law. It shall be unlawful to
provide, offer or operate a short-term rental or vacation rental with the
corporate limits of the town without obtaining a permit as provided in this
chapter and without complying with any and all applicable laws, regulations and
this code. These regulations are in addition to other codes of the town.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 2-13-2023)
§ 112.02 DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter, unless the context or definitions in A.R.S. § 9-500.39
indicate otherwise, the following terms or phrases are defined as follows.
   ADVERTISEMENT. Any method of soliciting the use of property for vacation
rental purposes.
   APPLICANT. The owner or owner's designee who applies with the town for a
permit or renewal of a permit.
   DAYS. Calendar days unless stated otherwise.
   DESIGNEE AND AGENT. Interchangeable for purposes of this chapter; any person
or persons with the charge, care, or control of any property, dwelling unit, or
portion thereof. DESIGNEE includes the EMERGENCY POINT OF CONTACT.
   EMERGENCY POINT OF CONTACT. The owner or individual designated by the owner
to:
      (1)   Serve as the local 24-hour emergency point of contact for the
vacation rental; and
      (2)   Respond to complaints and emergencies relating to the vacation
rental in a timely manner as required by this chapter.
   GUEST. A person who makes use of transient short-term rental. For purposes
of this chapter, any person who makes payment for the use of a short-term
rental, any person identified on the rental agreement for a short-term rental,
any person who sleeps or plans to sleep overnight in a short-term rental, and
any person present in a short-term rental after 10:00 p.m. local time, are each
presumed to be a GUEST of that short-term rental.
   HEARING OFFICER. A town judicial officer or another person appointed by the
Town Manager to hear appeals regarding permit suspensions, provided that no
administrative employee of the town shall serve as a HEARING OFFICER.
   NEIGHBOR NOTIFICATION. The written notice provided by the owner to each
single-family residential property adjacent to the vacation rental property,
directly across from the vacation rental property, and diagonally across the
street of the vacation rental property that includes the valid permit number
issued by the town, the physical address of the vacation rental, and the name,
address, and 24-hour telephone number of the emergency point of contact.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL USE. Any use that is not permitted in a residential zoning
district pursuant to a town zoning ordinance. Non-residential use also includes
noise as defined in § 130.06(A), an unruly gathering and any use for which
entrants pay an entrance fee.
   ONLINE LODGING MARKETPLACE. The same meaning prescribed in A.R.S. § 42-5076.
   OWNER. Any person who, alone or with others, has title or interest in a
property, dwelling unit, or portion thereof, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof, and includes any person who as agent, executor,
administrator, trustee, or guardian has charge, care, or control of any
property, dwelling unit, or portion thereof.
   PERMIT. A permit issued by the town to operate a vacation rental in
accordance with this chapter.
   PERSON. An individual, public entity, firm, corporation, partnership,
limited liability company, trust, association, or any other business entity or
juridical person, whether operating on a for-profit or non-profit basis.
   REVOCATION. The cancellation of a permit that was wrongfully issued or
issued in reliance on false or incorrect information.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL AND VACATION RENTAL. Interchangeable for purposes of this
chapter; any individually or collectively owned single-family or one-to-four-
family house or dwelling unit, or any unit or group of units in a condominium
or cooperative, that is also a transient public lodging establishment or owner-
occupied residential home offered for transient use. VACATION RENTAL does not
include:
      (1)   Accommodations or property that is classified for property taxation
under A.R.S. § 42-12001; or
      (2)   Any unit that is used for any non-residential use, including a
special event that would otherwise require a permit, retail, restaurant,
banquet space, or other similar use.
   SUSPENSION. Any order temporarily prohibiting the use of a permit authorized
under this chapter of the Town Code.
   TIMELY MANNER. Responding to complaints and emergencies in person, by phone,
by text or by email within:
      (1)   Sixty minutes after the initiation of contact with the owner or
owner's representative for a compliant or incident that has been reported to
the Police Department or for which police officers have been dispatched or on
the scene; or
      (2)   Twenty-four hours after the initiation of contact with owner or
owner's representative for a compliant or incident for which the Police
Department has not been dispatched at the time that such contact is initiated.
   TRANSACTION PRIVILEGE TAX LICENSE. The license issued by the State of
Arizona pursuant to A.R.S. Title 42.
   TRANSIENT. As prescribed in A.R.S. § 42-5070.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 2-13-2023)
§ 112.03 PERMIT REQUIRED; PENALTIES.
   (A)   Permit required. Prior to use of a property as a vacation rental, the
owner shall obtain an annual vacation rental permit from the town. Renting, or
offering for rent, a vacation rental without complying with the permit
requirement in this section is prohibited.
   (B)   Permit applications. The owner of a proposed vacation rental shall
submit to the town a permit application on a form furnished by the town. The
permit application shall be signed by the applicant and shall contain the
following minimum information, which shall be made publicly available:
      (1)   The physical address of the residential property proposed to be
used as a vacation rental.
      (2)   The name, address, and telephone number of the owner for which the
vacation rental registration certificate is to be issued. If the property owner
is an entity, the legal name of the entity and its statutory agent.
      (3)   The name, address, and telephone number of each designee of the
owner, if any.
      (4)   The full name, address, and 24-hour telephone number of the
individual who will serve as the emergency point of contact.
      (5)   Proof of a valid transaction privilege tax license.
      (6)   Acknowledgment by the owner of an agreement to comply with all
applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances, including the requirement that
the owner and each designee shall not be a registered sex offender, been
convicted of any felony act that resulted in death or serious physical injury,
or been convicted of any felony use of a deadly weapon within the past five
years.
      (7)   Attestation of compliance with the notification required in this
chapter.
      (8)   Evidence of liability insurance appropriate to cover the vacation
rental in the aggregate of at least $500,000 or evidence that each vacation
rental transaction will be provided through a platform that provides equal or
greater primary liability insurance coverage for the vacation rental.
      (9)   Evidence the vacation rental is registered with Mohave County
Assessor's Office in accordance with A.R.S. § 33-1902.
      (10)   If the applicant is an individual, proof of lawful presence in the
United States in accordance with A.R.S. §§ 1-502 and 41-1080.
   (C)   Permit fee. Every application, including any renewal application, for
a vacation rental permit
under this chapter shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee established by
Town Council resolution.
   (D)   Issuance; reasons for denial. The town shall issue or deny the permit
within seven business days after receipt of a complete application, except that
the town may deny issuance of a permit for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   The applicant failed to provide the information required under
division (B);
      (2)   The applicant failed to pay the permit fee required under division
(C);
      (3)   The applicant provided false information;
      (4)   The owner or designee of the owner:
         (a)   Is a registered sex offender;
         (b)   Has been convicted of any felony act that resulted in death or
serious physical injury;
         (c)   Has been convicted of any felony use of a deadly weapon within
five years of submitting the application; or
      (5)   At the time of application, the owner has a suspended permit for
the same vacation rental or any of the following applies:
         (a)   One violation at the vacation rental that resulted in or
constituted any of the offenses described in § 112.99; or
         (b)   Three violations of this chapter at the vacation rental within a
12-month period, not including an aesthetic, solid waste disposal or vehicle
parking violation that is not also a serious threat to public health and
safety.
   (E)   Notice of denial; appeal. The Town Manager or designee shall give
notice of the denial of an
application to the applicant by emailing the notice to applicant at the email
address listed on the application. The notice of the denial shall inform the
applicant of the right to appeal the denial as provided for in § 112.12.
   (F)   Maintaining accurate information; violations. All applicants and
persons holding permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall give prior
written notice to the Town Manager or designee of any change in information
submitted in connection with an application for a permit or renewal of a
permit. The notice shall be provided to the Town Manager not less than ten days
prior to the effective date of the change. Any information required for an
application under this section is deemed to be material for purposes of this
section. A violation of this division is a civil offense.
   (G)   Term of permit; renewal application. All permits issued under this
chapter shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of their issuance
unless suspended or revoked. Except where the town has received a new
application along with the requisite fees, it shall be unlawful for any person
to operate a vacation rental after the expiration date recorded upon the face
of the vacation rental permit.
   (H)   Operating without a permit; penalties. A vacation rental that fails to
apply for a permit or license within 30 days of the permit application being
made available by the town shall immediately cease operations. In addition to
any other penalty pursuant to the Town Code, the town may impose a civil
penalty of up to $1,000 per month against the owner if the owner or owner's
designee fails to apply for permit within 30 days of receiving the written
notice of violation from the town. Representations or advertisements including
online listings that reference the property, house or dwelling unit location
within the town is prima facie evidence that a vacation rental is operating in
the town.
   (I)   Non-transferable. No permit shall be transferable either as to
location or as to person.
   (J)   Implementation. The Town Manager or designee shall develop the
necessary forms and/or database necessary to implement this section.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 2-12-2023)
§ 112.04 EMERGENCY POINT OF CONTACT REQUIREMENTS; PENALTIES.
   (A)   Emergency responses; violations. When requested by a police officer,
the owner or emergency point of contact whose name appears on the permit
application must be on the vacation rental premises, or be available over the
phone or text, within 60 minutes of the request.
   (B)   Non-emergency responses; violations. The owner or emergency point of
contact shall respond to all other complaints relating to the vacation rental
in person, over the phone, by email, or by text within 24 hours of the request.
   (C)   Maintaining accurate emergency information. All applicants and persons
holding permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall give prior written notice
to the Town Manager or designee of any change to the contact information
provided to the town for the emergency point of contact. The notice shall be
provided to the Town Manager not less than ten days prior to the effective date
of the change.
   (D)   Violations. In addition to any other penalty pursuant to the Town
Code, a violation of this section shall be a civil offense.
   (E)   Penalties. In addition to any other penalty pursuant to the Town Code,
an owner shall be subject to civil penalties of up to $1,000 for every 30 days
the owner fails to provide notice to the town as required under this section.
Before imposing the initial civil penalty, the town shall provide 30 days'
notice to the owner by mailing a notice of violation to the owner's mailing
address that was provided to the town. The notice of the violation shall inform
the applicant of the right to appeal the denial as provided for in § 112.12.
Notwithstanding the date of the notice of violation, the date for calculating
the penalties shall be the first day the vacation rental is occupied following
the owner's failure to provide the notice to the town regarding the change.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 2-13-2023)
§ 112.05 COMPLIANCE WITH THE LAW; PROHIBITED USES.
   (A)   A vacation rental shall comply with the federal, state, and local
laws, including laws relating to public health and safety, sanitation, solid
waste, hazardous waste, tax privilege licensing, property tax registration,
traffic control, pollution control, noise, property maintenance, and nuisance
abatement.
   (B)   No person or entity shall operate a vacation rental in violation of
this chapter or other law. In addition, the use of a vacation rental property
for any of the following uses or purposes is strictly prohibited:
      (1)   Any non-residential use;
      (2)   Holding a special event that requires a permit or license pursuant
to a city or town ordinance or state law or rule;
      (3)   Operating a retail business, restaurant, event center, banquet hall
or similar use;
      (4)   Housing sex offenders;
      (5)   Operating or maintaining a sober living home;
      (6)   Selling liquor, illegal drugs, or pornography;
      (7)   Operating a nude or topless dancing;
      (8)   Obscenity;
      (9)   Adult-oriented business; or
      (10)   Any other use prohibited by A.R.S. § 9-500.39 or the Town Code.
   (C)   A vacation rental lacking a valid transaction privilege tax license
issued by the State of Arizona shall not be rented or offered for rent.
   (D)   No person or entity may receive payment or accept a fee, directly or
indirectly, for facilitating the rental of a vacation rental operating in
violation of this code or other law.
   (E)   In addition to any other penalty pursuant to the Town Code, any person
who causes, allows, facilitates, aides, or abets any violation of this chapter
shall be subject to a civil offense.
   (F)   The failure of any designee to comply with this chapter shall not
relieve the owner of liability under this chapter.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 2-13-2023)
§ 112.06 NEIGHBOR NOTIFICATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Neighbor notification. Prior to offering a vacation rental for rent
for the first time, the owner or designee shall provide neighbor notification
to each single-family residential property adjacent to the vacation rental
property, directly across from the vacation rental property, and diagonally
across the street of the vacation rental property. The neighbor notification
shall be provided in writing in the form required by the town and shall include
the following minimum information:
      (1)   The permit number issued by the town;
      (2)   The physical address of the vacation rental; and
      (3)   The name, physical address, email address, and 24-hour telephone
number of the emergency point of contact.
   (B)   Additional neighbor notification required. Any change to the
information provided under division (A) shall require additional neighbor
notification by the owner or designee not later than five days prior to each
change. The additional notification shall be provided in the manner required by
division (A).
   (C)   Attestation. Prior to offering a vacation rental for rent for the
first time, the owner or designee
shall provide to the town an attestation of compliance with the neighbor
notification required by this section.
   (D)   Violations. In addition to any other penalty pursuant to the Town
Code, a violation of this section shall be a civil offense.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 2-13-2023)
§ 112.07 ADVERTISEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Required disclosure. To protect the peace, health, safety, and general
welfare of the town's residents and visitors, the owner or owner's designee
shall be responsible for displaying the permit number issued by the town on
each advertisement for such vacation rental.
   (B)   Violations. In addition to any other penalty pursuant to the Town
Code, a violation of this section shall be a civil offense. Each advertisement
in violation of this section shall constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-13-2023)
§ 112.08 POSTING ON THE PROPERTY REQUIRED.
   (A)   Posting at the vacation rental. The owner of the vacation rental must
display the name, phone number, and email address of the designee/emergency
point of contact in a conspicuous place within 20 feet of the primary entrance
and street facing of the vacation rental to read as follows: name or address of
property, name of designee/emergency contact, contact information, max
occupancy, max parking allowed. Signs must be a minimum of six square feet and
maximum of eight square feet.
   (B)   Failure to comply. In addition to any other penalty pursuant to the
Town Code, a violation of this section shall be a civil offense. Each day a
vacation rental does not display the information required by this section shall
constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 2-13-2023)
§ 112.09 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Required insurance. Prior to offering or renting a vacation rental for
rent for the first time, liability insurance appropriate to cover the vacation
rental in the aggregate of at least $500,000 shall be provided by the owner or
the online marketplace platform.
   (B)   Proof of insurance. Proof of the required liability insurance coverage
shall be provided to the town no later than ten days prior to offering the
vacation rental for rent for the first time.
   (C)   Violation. In addition to any other penalty pursuant to the Town Code,
a violation of this section shall be a civil offense. Each day a vacation
rental lacks the insurance required by this section shall constitute a separate
violation.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 2-13-2023)
§ 112.10 BACKGROUND CHECKS REQUIRED.
   (A)   No sex offender shall be permitted to rent or occupy the vacation
rental. Owners who allow a
sex offender at the vacation rental shall be found in violation of this
section.
   (B)   Within 24 hours of every booking, a sex offender background check on
each guest shall be conducted by the owner or by the online lodging marketplace
on which the vacation rental is advertised. The owner shall demonstrate
compliance with this requirement by retaining a full copy of each background
check for a minimum of 12 months after the booking date and providing the copy
to the town upon a request by a police officer.
   (C)   In addition to any other penalty pursuant to the Town Code, any person
who violates this section shall be subject to a civil offense.
   (D)   The requirements of this section are waived if an online lodging
marketplace performs a sex offender background check of the booking guest.
   (E)   The failure of an online lodging marketplace to conduct a background
check shall not relieve the owner of liability under this section.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 2-13-2023)
§ 112.11 PERMIT SUSPENSIONS.
   (A)   Permit suspensions. The town may initiate an administrative process to
suspend a vacation rental permit for a period of up to 12 months for any of the
following:
      (1)   Three verified violations of this chapter within a 12-month period,
not including any such violation based on an aesthetic, solid waste disposal or
vehicle parking violation that is not also a serious threat to public health
and safety.
      (2)   One verified violation that results in or constitutes any of the
following:
         (a)   A felony offense committed at or in the vicinity of a vacation
rental by the owner of the vacation rental or by the owner's designee;
         (b)   A serious physical injury or wrongful death at or related to a
vacation rental resulting from the knowing, intentional or reckless conduct of
the owner of the vacation rental or the owner's designee;
         (c)   The owner of the vacation rental or the owner's designee
knowingly or intentionally housing a sex offender, allowing offenses related to
adult-oriented businesses, sexual offenses, or prostitution, or operating or
maintaining a sober living home; or
         (d)   The owner of the vacation rental or the owner's designee
knowingly or intentionally allowing the use of a vacation rental for a special
event that would otherwise require a permit or license pursuant to the Town
Code or a state law or rule or for a retail, restaurant, banquet space or other
similar use.
   (B)   Appeals. A decision to suspend a permit may be appealed by the owner
as set forth in § 112.12.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 2-13-2023)
§ 112.12 APPEALS.
   (A)   A decision to suspend a permit, or to impose a penalty pursuant to §
112.11, shall be subject to appeal as set forth below.
      (1)   An appeal may be filed only by the owner, or by that owner's
representative, and only within ten days of the decision from which relief is
sought. An appeal shall be in writing and shall include a statement fully
setting forth the grounds for appeal.
      (2)   The Town Manager shall appoint a Hearing Officer to hear suspension
appeals pursuant to this chapter. That Hearing Officer shall set the time and
place for a suspension appeal hearing and shall preside over any such hearing
in a fair and orderly manner.
      (3)   The town may be represented at a suspension appeal hearing by any
member of the town staff, or by legal counsel, or both. The owner may self-
represent or be represented by the owner's representative, or by legal counsel.
Either party may present evidence through documents, witness testimony, or
other materials.
      (4)   The formal rules of evidence will not apply to a suspension appeal
heard pursuant to this
section; the burden of proof shall be upon the town, and the standard shall be
a preponderance of evidence.
      (5)   The Hearing Officer shall issue a written decision on any
suspension appeal heard pursuant to this division, and such decision shall be
final.
   (B)   An appeal under this section does not operate as a stay of the permit
suspension.
   (C)   This section is not applicable to judicial actions brought pursuant to
§ 112.13 or to penalties including fines imposed by a court.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 2-13-2023)
§ 112.13 JUDICIAL RELIEF.
   (A)   Notwithstanding § 112.11, any attempted or completed felony act,
arising from the occupancy or use of a vacation rental that results in a death,
or actual or attempted serious physical injury, shall be grounds for judicial
relief in the form of a suspension of the property's use as a vacation rental
for a period that shall not exceed 12 months.
   (B)   The Town Attorney may initiate proceedings in the town court or other
court of competent jurisdiction to enforce this section.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 2-13-2023)
§ 112.99 ENHANCED PENALTIES.
   (A)   The remedies in this chapter are cumulative and the town may proceed
under one or more such remedies.
   (B)   In addition to any other penalty pursuant to the Town Code, and
notwithstanding any other law, the town may impose a civil penalty of the
following amounts against an owner if the owner or owner’s designee causes,
allows, facilitates, aides, or abets a verified violation of any provision of
this chapter or fails to perform any act or duty required by this chapter,
related to the same vacation rental property within the same 12-month period:
      (1)   Up to $500 or up to an amount equal to one night's rent for the
vacation rental as advertised, whichever is greater, for the first violation.
      (2)   Up to $1,000 or up to an amount equal to two nights' rent for the
vacation rental as advertised, whichever is greater, for the second violation.
      (3)   Up to $3,500 or up to an amount equal to three nights' rent for the
vacation rental as advertised, whichever is greater, for a third and any
subsequent violation.
   (C)   If multiple violations arise out of the same response to an incident
at a vacation rental, those violations are considered one violation for the
purpose of assessing civil penalties.
   (D)   In addition to any other penalty pursuant to the code, any property
that operates as a vacation rental and fails to apply for a vacation rental
permit in accordance with this chapter within 30 days of the application
process being made available by the town, must cease operations immediately. In
addition to any fines imposed pursuant to this section, the town may impose a
civil penalty of up to $1,000 per month against the owner if the owner or
owner's designee fails to apply within 30 days of receiving written notice of
the failure to comply with this chapter.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 2-13-2023)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Dangerous constructions
   
130.02   Damage to property
   
130.03   Deposits of injurious material on thoroughfares
   
130.04   Excavations to be covered
   
130.05   Explosives
   
130.06   False or misleading reports to police
   
130.07   Nuisance
   
130.08   Liquor violations
   
130.09   Littering
   
130.10   Loitering
Specific Provisions
   
130.25   Minors
   
130.26   Noise
   
130.27   Obstruction of streets
   
130.28   Obstruction of view
   
130.29   Offensive business
   
130.30   Offensive premises
   
130.31   Prostitution
   
130.32   Prohibited use of public right-of-way
   
130.33   Weapons
   
130.34   Wrecking or storage yard
   
130.35   Signs and banners
   
130.36   Spitting
   
130.37   Water flow upon streets prohibited
   
130.38   Disorderly conduct
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01 DANGEROUS CONSTRUCTIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any signs, billboards,
awnings and other similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public
grounds or places frequented by the public, so situated or constructed as to
endanger the public safety.
(1986 Code, § 10-1-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.02 DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to damage in any manner or attempt to
damage or tamper with any pipe lanes, water hydrants, street signs, street
lamps or lights, or the fixtures and appliances thereunto belonging upon any of
the poles or other objects for use in connection with the lighting of the
streets of the town or any water pipes, hydrants or any appliances pertaining
to the water or sewer works, or any other property of any and every character
belonging to the town.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to deface, walk, ride or drive upon or
over any sidewalk or street crossing composed of or containing cement, during
the construction thereof, or before the same is thrown open to public use.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to damage in any
manner any road, street or bridge in the town limits by using the same, by
heavy destruction or by any act that will result in damage to any such road,
street or bridge.
   (D)   It is unlawful to break or destroy any window, door or part of any
dwelling owned or occupied by another or to break or sever from any premises
owned or occupied by another any gate, fence, railing, tree, brush or vine or
any property whatsoever, or to deface, mutilate or injure the same.
(A.R.S. § 9-240B) (1986 Code, § 10-1-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.03 DEPOSITS OF INJURIOUS MATERIAL ON THOROUGHFARES.
   It is unlawful for any person, either willfully and maliciously carelessly
and negligently to drop, throw, place or scatter upon any street, alley,
sidewalk or public place in the town any nails, tacks, broken glass, glass
bottles or any instrument or thing whatsoever of such nature as to be capable
of injuring persons or property.
(1986 Code, § 10-1-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.04 EXCAVATIONS TO BE COVERED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to make any excavation or dig any hole,
drain or ditch in any highway or thoroughfare in the town without providing a
sufficient light at night and a temporary fence or suitable obstruction around
or in front of the excavation during the day.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to maintain a well, cellar, pit or other
excavation of more than 2 feet in depth on any unenclosed lot, without
substantial curbing, covering or protection.
(1986 Code, § 10-1-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.05 EXPLOSIVES.
   It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the town to blast or use
powder, fireworks or other explosives without a permit from the Chief of Police
in writing. The Chief of Police may accept a Fire Department permit for
fireworks.
(1986 Code, § 10-1-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.06 FALSE OR MISLEADING REPORTS TO POLICE.
   It is unlawful for any person willfully to make to the Police Department of
the town any false, fraudulent, misleading or unfounded report or statement, or
willfully to misrepresent any fact for the purpose of interfering with the
operation of the Police Department or with the intention of misleading any
police officer.
(1986 Code, § 10-1-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.07 NUISANCE.
   (A)   Anything which is injurious to health, or is indecent, or offensive to
the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere
with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by an entire community or
neighborhood, or by any person, or which unlawfully obstructs the free passage
or use, in the customary manner, of any public park, square, alley, sidewalk,
street or highway, is a public nuisance, and is no less a nuisance because the
extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted is unequal.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to maintain or commit a public nuisance,
or to willfully omit to perform any legal duty relating to the removal of a
public nuisance.
   (C)   A public nuisance may be abated by order of the Town Magistrate.
   (D)   (1)   A public nuisance is a crime against the order and economy of
the state and consists in unlawfully doing any act or omitting to perform any
duty, which act or omission either:
         (a)   Annoys, injures or endangers the comforts, health or safety of 3
or more persons;
         (b)   Offends public decency;
         (c)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct, or
renders dangerous for passage, any lake, stream canal or basin, or any public
park, square, highway, bridge or trail; or
         (d)   In any way renders 3 or more persona insecure in life or the use
of property.
      (2)   An act which affects 3 or more persons in any of the ways specified
in this section is still a nuisance regardless of the extent of annoyance or
damage inflicted on individuals in unequal.
(1986 Code, § 10-1-7) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.08 LIQUOR VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to consume or have in his or her
possession spirituous liquor from a broken package in a public place,
thoroughfare or gathering.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to be under the influence of liquor in
any public place in this town.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, BROKEN PACKAGE means any container of
spirituous liquor on which the United States tax seal has been broken or
removed, or from which the cap, cork or seal placed thereupon by the
manufacturer has been removed.
(1986 Code, § 10-1-8) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.09 LITTERING.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any litter in or upon any
street, alley, public grounds, school grounds or church grounds.
(1986 Code, § 10-1-9) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.10 LOITERING.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, other than the owner, manager or his or
her authorized representative, to interfere individually or collectively with
free enjoyment of the property by the owners thereof; or interfere with the
conduct of any lawful business by obstructing entrance to the business or by
obstructing free passage of persons or merchandise or commodities within the
place of business, or by obstructing service rendered by the business to its
customers.
   (B)   A person is guilty of loitering if he or she appears at a place or at
a time under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or
property in the vicinity and upon inquiry by a law enforcement official, he or
she fails to give a reasonably credible account of his or her identity, conduct
or purposes.
   (C)   No person shall be convicted under this section if the explanation he
or she gave of his or her conduct and purposes was true and if believed by the
law enforcement official at the time, would have dispelled the alarm.
(1986 Code, § 10-1-10) Penalty, see §
10.99
SPECIFIC PROVISIONS
§ 130.25 MINORS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to idle or loiter
upon the streets or public places of the town between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 5:00 a.m. unless that person is accompanied by a parent, guardian or some
person of lawful age having legal custody of the person. It is unlawful for any
parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the
person to encourage or allow that person to idle or loiter upon the streets or
public places between the hours specified in this section unless accompanied by
the parent or guardian.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to continuously and/or repeatedly make
uninvited contact or solicitation of minors for any unauthorized purpose,
business or sexual acts without parental consent which contact could include,
but is not limited to, persons whose acts create a public nuisance as defined
by §§
130.07 and
130.10 above.
(1986 Code, § 10-1-11) (Ord. 16, passed 3-16-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.26 NOISE.
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and it is unlawful for
any person, firm or corporation owning or operating or in control of any
restaurant, hotel, dance hall, show, store or any place of public amusement,
entertainment or accommodation, to play or permit to be played any music or
musical instrument or instruments whether played by individuals, orchestra,
radio, phonograph, music box, CD player, television or other mechanical device
or means in such a loud or unusual manner as to be offensive to the slumber,
peace and quiet, or otherwise interfere with or annoy the comfortable enjoyment
of life or property of any person and is no less a nuisance because the extent
of the annoyance inflicted is unequal.
   (B)   It is unlawful to play, operate or use any device known as a sound
truck, trust speaker or sound amplifier, radio or phonograph with loud speaker
or sound amplifier or any instrument of any kind or character which emits loud
and raucous noises and is attached to and upon any vehicle unless the person in
charge of the vehicle shall have first applied to and received permission from
the Chief of Police to operate any such vehicle so equipped.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle which shall
not at all times be equipped with a muffler upon the exhaust thereof in good
working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise.
(1986 Code, § 10-1-12) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.27 OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS.
   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct any public street or alley,
sidewalk or park or other public grounds within the town by committing any act
of, or doing anything which is injurious to the health, or indecent or
offensive to the senses or to do in or upon any such streets, alleys,
sidewalks, parks or other public grounds, any act or thing which is an
obstruction or interference to the free use of property or with any business
lawfully conducted by anyone, in or upon, or facing or fronting on any of the
streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks or other public grounds in the town.
(1986 Code, § 10-1-13) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.28 OBSTRUCTION OF VIEW.
   It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any tree, hedge,
billboard or other obstruction which prevent persons driving vehicles on public
streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when stopped
at an intersection or pedestrian crosswalks.
(1986 Code, § 10-1-14) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.29 OFFENSIVE BUSINESS.
   It is unlawful for any person to establish or maintain any slaughterhouse or
make a practice of slaughtering cattle, hogs, sheep or any other kind of
animal, or establish or maintain any soap factory, render tallow, or pursue,
maintain or carry on any other business or occupation offensive to the senses
or prejudicial to the public health within the limits of the town, unless so
authorized by the town.
(1986 Code, § 10-1-15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.30 OFFENSIVE PREMISES.
   It is unlawful for any person to suffer or permit any premises belonging to
or occupied by him or her, or any cellar, privy, vault, pool, sewer or private
drain therein to become nauseous, foul or offensive to the senses or
prejudicial to the public health or comfort.
(1986 Code, § 10-1-16) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.31 PROSTITUTION.
   It is unlawful for any person to practice prostitution, to patronize a
prostitute or to solicit any person to visit or patronize a prostitute or place
of prostitution.
(1986 Code, § 10-1-17) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.32 PROHIBITED USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   It is unlawful for any person to use a public street, highway, alley, lane,
parkway, sidewalk or other right-of-way, whether the right-of-way has been
dedicated to the public in fee or by easement, for lying, sleeping or otherwise
remaining in a sitting position thereon, except in the case of a physical
emergency or the administration of medical assistance.
(1986 Code, § 10-1-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.33 WEAPONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, within the limits of the town to fire
or discharge any firearm, BB gun, air gun, pellet gun, gas-operated gun or
other similar gun or instrument except:
      (1)   As allowed pursuant to the provisions of A.R.S. Title 13, Ch. 4;
      (2)   On a properly supervised range; and
      (3)   By special permit of the Chief of Police of the town for the use of
the gun or instrument for a valid and proper purpose, and for use in a manner
not likely to harm any person, animal or property.
   (B)   Any person, other than a peace on duty carrying a weapon, upon
entering any public place or attending a public event, may be required by the
operator of the establishment or the sponsor of the event to remove his or her
weapon and place it in the custody of the operator of the establishment or the
sponsor of the event.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to sell or give to a minor under the age
of 18 years, without written consent of the parent or legal guardian, a weapon,
ammunition or toy pistol by which dangerous and explosive substances may be
discharged.
(1986 Code, § 10-1-19) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.34 WRECKING OR STORAGE YARD.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person or person, corporation, partnership or
association doing business to establish, maintain or control a wrecking yard or
storage yard for any type of wrecked or disabled vehicles, of any type or
character, within the corporate limits of the town without special permit from
the Chief of Police.
   (B)   Each 24-hour period during which the condition remains in violation of
this section shall be deemed to be a separate offense and violation of this
section.
   (C)   For purpose of this section any person with more than 2 inoperable and
unlicensed vehicles shall be in violation.
(1986 Code, § 10-1-20) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.35 SIGNS AND BANNERS.
   It is unlawful for any person to place any banner or sign upon any
streetlight pole, traffic signal pole or utility pole within the town without
first obtaining authorization from the town.
(1986 Code, § 10-1-21) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.36 SPITTING.
   It is unlawful for any person to spit upon any public sidewalks or
crosswalks in the town or upon any public path, by-way or highway, or in or on
any public ground or park in the town, or upon the floor or interior of any
public building in the town.
(1986 Code, § 10-1-22) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.37 WATER FLOW UPON STREETS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently permit or
cause the escape or flow of water in such quantity as to cause flooding, or to
impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic to create a hazardous condition to such
traffic, to cause damage to the public streets of the town.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently permit or
cause the escape or flow of irrigation water in such quantity as to cause
flooding, to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a hazardous
condition to such or to cause damage to the public streets of the town through
the failure or neglect to properly operate or maintain any irrigation
structure, delivery ditch or waste ditch in which the person has a vested right
or interest or through the willful or negligent failure of the person to accept
irrigation water after it has been ordered by him or her.
(1986 Code, § 10-1-23) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.38 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to willfully conduct himself or herself
in a noisy, boisterous, rude, insulting or other disorderly manner with intent
to abuse or annoy any person, which conduct could include but is not limited to
persons whose conduct results from being under the influence of alcohol or
drugs.
(1986 Code, § 10-1-24)
   (B)   The proprietor of any business has the right to request such
disorderly persons to immediately leave their premises and by so doing will not
be violating civil rights.
   (C)   Smoking is prohibited in all public places within the town, including
eating and drinking establishments and places of employment according to A.R.S.
§ 36-601.01. Smoking is expressly prohibited within 50 feet measured in all
directions of a public place, including outdoor patios.
Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING CODE
      
151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
152.   ZONING CODE
      
153.   LAND DIVISION
      
154.   DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
      
155.   COLORADO CITY MUNICIPAL AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONING
      
156.   DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING CODE
Section
Codes Adopted
   
150.01   International Building Code
   
150.02   International Residential Code
   
150.03   International Plumbing Code
   
150.04   International Mechanical Code
   
150.05   National Electrical Code
   
150.06   International Fuel Gas Code
   
150.07   International Energy Conservation Code
   
150.08   International Fire Code
Access Required For Building Permit
   
150.20   Permit contingent upon access
Fence and Setback Requirements
   
150.30   Setbacks
   
150.31   Fence permits required
   
150.32   Swimming pools
   
150.33   Fire hydrant
   
150.34   Utility providers
   
150.35   Power pole and easement
   
150.36   Survey of property line
   
150.37   Corner lot height restriction
   
150.38   Public safety fences
   
150.39   Modification of requirements
Petition for Exception; General Fees
   
150.50   Variance allowed
   
150.51   Petition in writing
   
150.52   Fee schedule adopted by Town Council
 
   
150.99   Penalty
CODES ADOPTED
§ 150.01 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE.
   That certain code entitled International Building Code, 2006 Edition, along
with Appendix H, is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the Town of Colorado
City and made part of this chapter the same as though that code was
specifically set forth in full herein, with the following revisions:
   (A)   All references to the International Electrical Code are deleted and
replaced with the National Electrical Code;
   (B)   Section 105.2 Work Exempt From a Permit shall be revised as follows:
Item 1 replace 120 with 200; Item 2 replace 6 with 8;
   (C)   Section 110.1 Use and Occupancy, is revised by adding, “Exception: R-
3 and U Occupancies;”
   (D)   Section 305.2 Day Care, is amended by adding, “This section only
applies to those facilities with a state licence;”
   (E)   Section 308.5.2 Child Care Facility is amended by replacing “five”
with “100;”
   (F)   Section 310.1 Residential Group R-3, is revised by the deletion of
“for less than 24 hours;” deletion of “with 16 or fewer persons;”
   (G)   Section 312.1 General, is amended by replacing “6 feet” with “8 feet,”
and adding “over 4 feet” after “Retaining walls;”
   (H)   Section 1608.1 Snow Loads, is amended by adding “The roof snow load
for Colorado City shall be 20 psf and the ground snow load shall be 30 psf;
   (I)   Section 1609.1 Wind Loads, is amended by adding “The wind load for
Colorado City shall be 80 mph, exposure C;”
   (J)   Section 1805 Foundation Walls, shall be revised by adding “Section
1805.5.8: Group R-3 and U Occupancies three stories or less in height, shall be
permitted to have concrete foundations constructed in accordance with Table
1805.5(6).” Table 1805.5(6) titled “Empirical Foundation Walls” published by
the Utah Department of Commerce, Division of Occupational and Professional
Licensing is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference;
   (K)   Section 2902 Plumbing Systems, revise Table 2902.1 Minimum Plumbing
Facilities by adding footnote “e. Use 30 square feet per occupant for the
minimum number of plumbing fixtures;” “f. Where urinals are provided, the
number of specified water closets may be reduced by the number of urinals
installed, except the number of water closets shall not be reduced to less than
half; Replace drinking fountain “1 per 100" with “1 per 150;” Add “Note:
Separate facilities shall not be required in occupancies where 15 or less
people are employed; and
   (L)   Section H112.1 General, is amended by deleting “constructed entirely
of metal or other noncombustible material.”
(Ord. 2007-4, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 150.02 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE.
   That certain code entitled International Residential Code, 2006 Edition,
along with Appendices A, B, C, D, E and L is hereby adopted as the Residential
Building Code of the Town of Colorado City and made part of this chapter the
same as though that code was specifically set forth in full herein, with the
following revisions:
   (A)   All amendments in other chapters of this code which may be applied to
1- and 2-family dwellings and multiple single family dwellings shall be
applicable to the corresponding provisions in the IRC; and
   (B)   Table R301.2(1) Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria is revised as
follows:
 
Ground Roof   Wind    Seismic     Site    Weathering Frost     Termite  Decay
Snow   Snow   Speed   Design      Class   Damage     Line      Damage   Damage
Load   Load           Category                       Depth
              80 mph, Category C, Class D                      Moderate None to
30 psf 20 psf Exp. C  or          soil or Moderate   16 inches to heavy slight
                      engineering Eng.
 
(Ord. 2007-4, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 150.03 INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE.
   That certain code entitled International Plumbing Code, 2006 Edition, along
with Appendices, E and F is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the Town of
Colorado City and made part of this chapter the same as though that code was
specifically set forth in full herein, with the following revisions:
   (A)   Section 603.1 Size of Water Service Pipe shall be amended to read
“Water service pipe sizing tables found in the Uniform Plumbing Code is an
acceptable alternate method to determine size;”
   (B)   Section 311.1 Toilet Facilities is deleted in its entirety;
   (C)   Add Section 412.5 Public Toilet Rooms. All public toilet rooms shall
be equipped with at least one floor drain;
   (D)   Section 606.2 Location of Shutoff Valves shall be amended by deleting
item #2;
   (E)   Section 701.2 Sewer Required shall be amended to add “within 300 feet
of the property line” after where available;
   (F)   Section 715.1 Sewage Backflow shall be deleted in its entirety and
replaced with the following: All structures connected to a public sewer system
shall be protected by an approved backwater valve;
   (G)   Section 904.6 Extension Through the Wall shall have the following
sentence added at the end of the paragraph: Vents extending through the wall
shall terminate not less than 12 inches from the wall with an elbow pointing
downward;
   (H)   Section 905.4 Vertical Rise of Vent Exception shall be revised to add
“floor drains and floor sink installations; and
   (I)   Section 1108 Combined Sanitary and Storm System is hereby deleted in
its entirety and replaced with “Combining storm and sanitary drainage
prohibited. The combining of sanitary and storm drainage systems is
prohibited.”
(Ord. 2007-4, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 150.04 INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE.
   That certain code entitled International Mechanical Code, 2006 Edition,
along with Appendix A is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the Town of
Colorado City and made part of this chapter the same as though that code was
specifically set forth in full herein.
(Ord. 2007-4, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 150.05 NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE.
   (A)   Code adopted. That certain code entitled National Electrical Code,
2008 Edition, is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of the Town of Colorado
City and made part of this chapter the same as though that code was
specifically set forth in full herein.
   (B)   Amendment. Article 110.2 Approval. Add “Electric meters shall not be
energized unless approved. Approval may be conditioned upon required permits
and inspections.”
(Ord. 2007-4, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 150.06 INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE.
   That certain code entitled International Fuel Gas Code, 2008 Edition, along
with Appendices A, B, C and D, is hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of the
Town of Colorado City and made part of this chapter the same as though that
code was specifically set forth in full herein, with the following revisions:
Section 402.1 General Considerations shall be amended to add, “For all new
construction, gas piping shall be sized for a natural gas system. Residential
occupancies gas service lines shall be no less than 1 inch in diameter.”
(Ord. 2007-4, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 150.07 INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.
   That certain code entitled International Energy Conservation Code, 2006
Edition, is hereby adopted as the Energy Conservation Code of the Town of
Colorado City and made part of this chapter the same as though that code was
specifically set forth in full herein, with the following revisions: § 504.7
Heat Traps shall be amended to read “Heat traps, other than the arrangement of
piping and fittings, shall be prohibited unless a means of controlling thermal
expansion can be ensured as required in the IPC § 607.3.”
(Ord. 2007-4, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 150.08 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
   That certain code entitled International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, along with
Appendices B, C and D, is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the Town of
Colorado City and made part of this chapter the same as though the code was
specifically set forth in full herein.
(Ord. 2007-4, passed 7-16-2007)
ACCESS REQUIRED FOR BUILDING PERMIT
§ 150.20 PERMIT CONTINGENT UPON ACCESS.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a building permit, the Building
Official shall determine whether the building site is accessible to town
vehicles which would provide town services such as fire protection, police
protection, garbage collection and other services.
   (B)   Available access shall mean the access that will not cause damage or
unusual wear to town vehicles providing those services.
   (C)   If the access is not available, the Building Department shall not
issue a building permit.
(Ord. 2007-4, passed 7-16-2007)
FENCE AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
§ 150.30 SETBACKS.
   The minimum distance from the road right-of-way to any building shall be 25
feet. The minimum distance from side and rear yard lines to any structure shall
be 10 feet. Additional setback may be required to accommodate additional
parking.
(Ord. 2007-4, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 150.31 FENCE PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Fence permits are required as per the Building Code.
   (B)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may require the erection of fences
as a prerequisite to the approval of any project or building permit where, in
the opinion of the Commission, it is necessary to protect life and property, or
to separate commercial zones from residential.
(Ord. 2007-4, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 150.32 SWIMMING POOLS.
   Fencing or walls at least 5 feet in height, including gates, must be
installed around permanent swimming pools, Jacuzzis and similar structures.
Gates must be self-closing and self-latching.
(Ord. 2007-4, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 150.33 FIRE HYDRANT.
   No fence shall be erected within a 3-foot radius of a fire hydrant. A fire
hydrant shall not be enclosed by fencing.
(Ord. 2007-4, passed 7-16-2007) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.34 UTILITY PROVIDERS.
   Utility meters, telephone pedestals, electrical sectionalizers and
transformers shall be accessible as much as possible and where enclosed by
fencing, arrangements must be made with the serving utility provider for
access. Dumpster or garbage can enclosures with a gate may be required for
access.
(Ord. 2007-4, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 150.35 POWER POLE AND EASEMENT.
   (A)   No fence shall be erected within a 3-foot radius of a power pole.
   (B)   A power pole shall not be enclosed by fencing materials.
   (C)   Power distribution lines overhead or underground will have a 20-foot
easement centered on the line.
   (D)   Any damage done to fences or private property in order to gain access
for repair and maintenance of the line will be at the occupant’s expense.
(Ord. 2007-4, passed 7-16-2007) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.36 SURVEY OF PROPERTY LINE.
   Fences shall not be placed in the road right-of-way without the written
permission of the town. It is the responsibility of the applicant and/or the
person performing the fence construction, to properly survey, locate and
identify property lines.
(Ord. 2007-4, passed 7-16-2007) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.37 CORNER LOT HEIGHT RESTRICTION.
   (A)   No solid fences or walls above 4 feet shall be built on any corner lot
within a triangular area formed by the street property lines and a connecting
line at points 25 feet from the intersection.
   (B)   The Building Official may require additional height restrictions or
modifications demonstrated to be in the best interest of public safety.
(Ord. 2007-4, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 150.38 PUBLIC SAFETY FENCES.
   Public safety fences enclosing utilities, retaining walls, culverts,
walkways, drainage channels and the like are exempt from this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-4, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 150.39 MODIFICATION OF REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   When requested, the Building Official may grant a waiver or
modification of the requirements of this section upon finding that the waiver
or modification will not circumvent the intent of the requirements.
   (B)   If the Building Official so desires, he or she may submit the request
for a waiver or modification directly to the Town Council for its
determination.
(Ord. 2007-4, passed 7-16-2007)
PETITION FOR EXCEPTION; GENERAL FEES
§ 150.50 VARIANCE ALLOWED.
   A variance from the terms of this chapter may be allowed under A.R.S. § 9-
462.06 when, owing to peculiar conditions, a strict interpretation would cause
an unnecessary hardship, if in granting such a variance the general intent and
purpose of this chapter will be preserved, and the variance is not a grant of
special privileges inconsistent with limitations upon other properties in the
vicinity and zone in which the property is located.
(Ord. 2007-4, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 150.51 PETITION IN WRITING.
   (A)   An applicant shall petition for exception in writing, including the
applicant’s name, address, phone number, location of the property, the legal
description, proposed improvement and a brief statement of the requested
exception.
   (B)   The petition, along with the appropriate fee shall be submitted to the
Town Clerk following the appeal and variance process outlined in Town Code
Chapter 153.
(Ord. 2007-4, passed 7-16-2007; Am. Ord. 2017-03, passed 11-13-2017)
§ 150.52 FEE SCHEDULE ADOPTED BY TOWN COUNCIL.
   Building permit fees shall be assessed as established by Town Council
resolution which may be changed or modified at any time separate from the rest
of this code. The change by resolution will become a part of this code
immediately upon adoption.
(Ord. 2007-4, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates
any of these regulations, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed $1,000, or by
imprisonment not to exceed 6 months, or by both the fine and imprisonment. Each
day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as herein
above described.
   (B)   The imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the offender from
compliance with the requirements of these regulations and provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2007-4, passed 7-16-2007)
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
Purpose and Methods
   
151.01   Statutory authorization
   
151.02   Findings of fact
   
151.03   Statement of purpose
   
151.04   Methods of reducing flood losses
   
151.05   Definitions
General Provisions
   
151.20   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
151.21   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
   
151.22   Compliance
   
151.23   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
151.24   Interpretation
   
151.25   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
151.26   Statutory exceptions
   
151.27   Declaration of public nuisance
   
151.28   Abatement of violations
   
151.29   Severability
   
151.30   Unlawful acts
Administration; Flood Hazard Reduction
   
151.40   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
   
151.41   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   
151.42   Establishment of development permit
   
151.43   Standards of construction
   
151.44   Storage of materials and equipment
   
151.45   Standards for utilities
   
151.46   Additional development standards, including subdivisions
   
151.47   Standards for manufactured homes
   
151.48   Standards for recreational vehicles
   
151.49   Floodways
Variance Procedure
   
151.60   Nature of variances
   
151.61   Appeals
   
151.62   Conditions for variances
 
   
151.99   Penalty
PURPOSE AND METHODS
§ 151.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The Legislature of the State of Arizona has in A.R.S. § 48-3610 enabled the
Town of Colorado City to assume the powers and duties for floodplain management
and adopt regulations in conformance with A.R.S. § 48-3609 designed to promote
the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the
Town Council of the Town of Colorado City, Arizona, does ordain as follows.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 151.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the Town of Colorado City are subject to
periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses may be caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other areas. Uses
that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood
damage also contribute to the flood loss.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 151.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
   (A)   To protect human life and health;
   (B)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines; streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood
blight areas;
   (G)   Notify that potential buyers that the property is in an area of
special flood hazard;
   (H)   Notify those who occupy special flood hazard areas that they assume
responsibility for their actions; and
   (I)   Participate in and maintain eligibility for flood insurance and
disaster relief.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 151.04 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   (A)   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
      (1)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion, in flood heights or velocities;
      (2)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      (3)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
waters;
      (4)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
      (5)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
   (B)   These regulations take precedence over any less restrictive
conflicting local laws, ordinances and codes.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 151.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “A” ZONE. See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure that is on the same parcel of property as a
primary structure, the use of which is incidental to the use of the primary
structure.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal
use of the parcel of land on which it is located.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on the flood insurance
rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from 1 to 3 feet; a clearly
defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and
indeterminate; and, velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This area is
designated as Zone A, AE, AO, AH and A1-30 on the FIRM and other areas
determined by the criteria adopted by the Director of the Arizona Department of
Water Resources. See “Special flood hazard area”)
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year (also called the “100 year flood”).
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The computed elevation to which floodwater is
anticipated to rise during the base flood.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade - i.e., below
ground - level on all sides.
   BREAKAWAY WALL. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its construction to collapse under specific
lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of
building supporting foundation system.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   COMMUNITY. Any state, area or political subdivision thereof, or any Indian
tribe or authorized tribal organization, or authorized native organization,
which has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for
the areas within its jurisdiction.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, storage of equipment or materials or
drilling operations located within the area of special flood hazard.
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. An administrative tool of the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP) that is used to provide elevation information
necessary to ensure compliance with community floodplain management ordinances,
to determine the proper insurance premium rate, and to support a request for a
Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) or Letter of Map Revision based on fill (LOMR-
F).
   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill,
excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain,
which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EROSION. The process of the gradual wearing away of landmasses. This peril
is not, per se, covered under the Program.
   FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE. Any form of loan, grant, guaranty, insurance, payment,
rebate, subsidy, disaster assistance loan or grant, or any other form of direct
or indirect federal assistance, other than general or special revenue sharing
or formula grants made to states.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of flood waters;
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source; and/or
      (3)   The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or
other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or
currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by
an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a
severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or
an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event
which results in flooding as defined by this definition.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which FEMA the Federal
Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards
and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRM), and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. Those physical structural works for which funds
have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area
within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes dams,
reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those
constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source (see definition of FLOODING).
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The community official designated by the Town of
Colorado City who is hereby authorized to administer and enforce the floodplain
management regulations of this chapter.
   FLOODPLAIN BOARD. The Town Council of the Town of Colorado City at such
times as they are engaged in the enforcement of this chapter.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other
applications of police power which control development in flood prone areas.
This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and
damage.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOOD-RELATED EROSION. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of
a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or
currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by
an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a
severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or
an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event
which results in flooding.
   FLOODWAY. The area of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base (100-year) flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height. Also referred to as “Regulatory Floodway.”.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   GOVERNING BODY. The local governing unit, i.e. county or municipality, that
is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public
health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.
   HARDSHIP. As related to variances, meaning the exceptional hardship that
would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The Town Council
of Colorado City requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and
peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is
not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps,
personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as
a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be
resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the
alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build
elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)    By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area including the
basement. See BASEMENT. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided,
that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle”.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent.
   MARKET VALUE. Defined in the substantial damage and substantial improvement
procedures.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial Flood Insurance Rate Map or after December 31,
1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures. For floodplain management purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTION means
structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the
effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   OBSTRUCTION. Including, but not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel,
refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or
projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the
direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its
propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.
   ONE-HUNDRED -YEAR FLOOD or 100 YEAR FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year. See BASE FLOOD.
   PERSON. An individual or his or her agent, a firm, partnership, association
or corporation, or an agent of the aforementioned groups, or this state or its
agencies or political subdivisions.
   PROGRAM. The National Flood Insurance Program authorized by 42 U.S.C. §§
4001 through 4128.
   PROGRAM DEFICIENCY. A defect in a community’s floodplain management
regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation
of those floodplain management regulations or of the NFIP standards.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION (RFE). An elevation one foot above the base flood
elevation for a watercourse for which the base flood elevation has been
determined and shall be determined by the criteria developed by the Director of
the Arizona Department of Water Resources for all other watercourses.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this
is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts
may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development
from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or
otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial
exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc and the like.
   SHEET FLOW AREA. See AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). An area in the floodplain subject to a 1%
or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map as Zone A, AO, A1 A30, AE, A99, or, AH.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and other proposed
new development, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided
the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of
the permit. The actual START means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial
damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure.”
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in
VIOLATION until such time as that documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or
other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains
of coastal or riverine areas.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.20 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Colorado City.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 151.21 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   (A)   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) for Mohave County and Incorporated Areas” dated November
18, 2009,” with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated November
18, 2009, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The FIS and FIRM panels
are on file at the Town Hall, 25 South Central Street, Colorado City, Arizona
86021.
   (B)   The flood insurance study and attached mapping is the minimum area of
applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other
areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to
the Floodplain Board by the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Board,
within its area of jurisdiction, shall delineate (or may, by rule, require
developers of land to delineate) for areas where development is ongoing or
imminent, and thereafter as development becomes imminent, floodplains
consistent with the criteria developed by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and the Director of the Arizona Department of Water Resources.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 151.22 COMPLIANCE.
   All development of land, construction of residential, commercial or
industrial structures, or future development within delineated floodplain areas
is subject to the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018) Penalty,
see §
151.99
§ 151.23 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 151.24 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 151.25 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes.
   (B)   This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within those areas will be free from flooding
or flood damages.
   (C)   This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Town of
Colorado City, any officer or employee thereof, the State of Arizona or the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 151.26 STATUTORY EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   In accordance with A.R.S. § 48-3609(H), unless expressly provided,
this and any regulation adopted pursuant to this article do not affect:
      (1)   Existing uses of property or the right to continuation of such
legal use under conditions which existed on the effective date of this chapter.
However, if a nonconforming use of land or a building or structure is
discontinued for twelve months, or destroyed to the extent of 50% of its value
as determined by a competent appraiser, any further use shall comply with this
article and regulations of the Town Council of Colorado City;
      (2)   Reasonable repair or alteration of property for the purposes for
which the property was used on the effective date of this chapter; or any
regulations affecting such property takes effect, except that any alteration,
addition or repair to a nonconforming building or structure which would result
in increasing its flood damage potential by 50% or more shall be either
floodproofed or elevated to or above the regulatory flood elevation; or
      (3)   Reasonable repair of structures constructed with written
authorization required by A.R.S. § 48-3613; and
      (4)   Facilities constructed or installed pursuant to a Certificate of
Environmental Compatibility issued pursuant to A.R.S. Title 40, Chapter 2,
Article 6.2.
   (B)   Before any authorized construction begins for the exceptions listed
below, the responsible person must submit plans for the construction to the
Town for review and comment. In accordance with A.R.S. § 48-3613, written
authorization shall not be required, nor shall the Floodplain Board prohibit:
      (1)   The construction of bridges, culverts, dikes and other structures
necessary to the construction of public highways, roads and streets
intersecting or crossing a watercourse;
      (2)   The construction of storage dams for watering livestock or
wildlife, structures on banks of a creek, stream, river, wash, arroyo or other
watercourse to prevent erosion of or damage to adjoining land if the structure
will not divert, retard or obstruct the natural channel of the watercourse, or
dams for the conservation of floodwaters as permitted by A.R.S. Title 45,
Chapter 6;
      (3)   Construction of tailing dams and waste disposal areas for use in
connection with mining and metallurgical operations. This paragraph does not
exempt those sand and gravel operations that will divert, retard or obstruct
the flow of waters in any watercourse from complying with and acquiring
authorization from the Floodplain Board pursuant to regulations adopted by the
Floodplain Board under this article; or
      (4)   Other construction upon determination by the Floodplain Board that
written authorization is unnecessary;
      (5)   Any flood control district, county, city, town or other political
subdivision, from exercising powers granted to it under A.R.S. Title 48,
Chapter 21, Article 1;
      (6)   The construction of streams, waterways, lakes and other auxiliary
facilities in conjunction with development of public parks and recreation
facilities by a public agency or political subdivision; and
      (7)   The construction and erection of poles, towers, foundations,
support structures, guy wires and other facilities related to power
transmission as constructed by any utility whether a public service corporation
or a political subdivision.
   (C)   In addition to other penalties or remedies otherwise provided by law,
this state, a political subdivision or a person who may be damaged or has been
damaged as a result of the unauthorized diversion, retardation or obstruction
of a watercourse has the right to commence, maintain and prosecute any
appropriate action or pursue any remedy to enjoin, abate or otherwise prevent
any person from violating or continuing to violate this section or regulations
adopted pursuant to this article. If a person is found to be in violation of
this Section, the court shall require the violator to either comply with this
Section if authorized by the Floodplain Board or remove the obstruction and
restore the watercourse to its original state. The court may also award such
monetary damages as are appropriate to the injured parties resulting from the
violation including reasonable costs and attorney fees.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 151.27 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   All development located or maintained within any area of special flood
hazard after August 8, 1973 in violation of this chapter is a public nuisance
per se and may be abated, prevented or restrained by action of this political
subdivision.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018) Penalty,
see §
151.99
§ 151.28 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Within 30 days of discovery of a violation of this chapter, the
Floodplain Administrator shall submit a report to the Floodplain Board which
shall include all information available to the Floodplain Administrator which
is pertinent to the violation.
   (B)   Within 30 days of receipt of the report, the Floodplain Board shall
either:
      (1)   Take any necessary action to effect the abatement of the violation;
      (2)   Recommend that the property owner apply for a variance to the
Hearing Officer in accordance with the provisions of §§
151.60 through
151.62;
      (3)   Order the owner of the property upon which the violation exists to
provide whatever additional information may be required, for determination. The
information must be provided to the Floodplain Administrator within 30 days of
the order, and he or she shall submit an amended report to the Floodplain Board
within 20 days. At their next regularly scheduled public meeting, the
Floodplain Board shall either order the abatement of the violation or they
shall recommend that the property owner apply for a variance in accordance with
the provisions of §§
151.60 through
151.62; or
      (4)   Submit to the Administrator of Federal Insurance Administration a
declaration for denial of insurance, stating that the property is in violation
of a cited state or local law, regulation or ordinance, pursuant to Section
1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, being U.S.C. §§ 4001 et seq.,
as amended.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2017-03, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord.
2018-01, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 151.29 SEVERABILITY.
   This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be
severable. Should any Section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the Section so declared
to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 151.30 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for a person to engage in any development or to divert,
retard or obstruct the flow of waters in a watercourse if it creates a hazard
to life or property without securing the written authorization required by
A.R.S. § 48-3613. Where the watercourse is a delineated floodplain, it is
unlawful to engage in any development affecting the flow of waters without
securing written authorization required by A.R.S. § 48-3613.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of
a Class 2 misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate
offense punishable as hereinabove described.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018) Penalty,
see §
151.99
ADMINISTRATION; FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 151.40 DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Public Works Director or The Town Council Designated Floodplain
Administrator is hereby appointed to administer, implement and enforce this
ordinance by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its
provisions.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 151.41 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   Duties of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
   (A)   Permit review. Review all development permits to determine that:
      (1)   The permit requirements of this code have been satisfied;
      (2)   All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;
      (3)   The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and
      (4)   The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying
capacity of the areas where BFE’s have been determined but a floodway has not
been designated. For purposes of this code, ADVERSELY AFFECTS means that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
   (B)   Substantial improvement and substantial damage procedures.
      (1)   Develop detailed procedures for identifying and administering
requirements for substantial improvement and substantial damage, to include
defining “Market Value.”
      (2)   Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments and
divisions and implemented by community staff
   (C)   Use of other flood data. When base flood elevation data has not been
provided in accordance with §
151.21 above, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer §§
151.42 through
151.49 below. Any such information shall be consistent with the requirements of
the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Director of the Arizona
Department of Water Resources and shall be submitted to the Floodplain Board
for adoption;
   (D)   Obtain and maintain for public inspection.
      (1)   The certified regulatory flood elevation required in §
151.43(C)(1) below, and §
151.43(C)(4);
      (2)   The floodproofing certification required in §
151.43(C)(2) below;
      (3)   The flood vent certification required in §
151.43(C)(3) below;
      (4)   The elevation certification required for additional development
standards, including subdivisions, in §
151.46 below;
      (5)   The floodway encroachment certification required in §
151.49(A);
      (6)   Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification
for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report
submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
      (7)   Obtain and maintain improvement calculations.
   (E)   Notification of other entities.
      (1)   Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated:
         (a)   Notify adjacent communities and the Arizona Department of Water
Resources prior to the alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit
evidence of the notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency through
appropriate notification means; and
         (b)   Require that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or
relocated portion of the watercourse is maintained.
      (2)   Base flood elevation and rate of flow due to physical alterations:
         (a)   Base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting from
physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but not
later than six months after the date such information becomes available, the
Floodplain Administrator shall notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency
of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data in accordance with
Volume 44 Code of Federal Regulations section 65.3. Such a submission is
necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting
flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements
will be based upon current data.
         (b)   Within 120 days after completion of construction of any flood
control protective works which changes the rate of flow during the flood or the
configuration of the floodplain upstream or downstream from or adjacent to the
project, the person or agency responsible for installation of the project shall
provide to the governing bodies of all jurisdictions affected by the project a
new delineation of all floodplains affected by the project. The new delineation
shall be done according to the criteria adopted by the Director of the Arizona
Department of Water Resources.
      (3)   Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency of acquisition by
means of annexation, incorporation or otherwise, of additional areas of
jurisdiction.
   (F)   Map determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact
location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example,
where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given
a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in §§
151.60,
151.61 and
151.62 below; and
   (G)   Take actions on violations of this code as required in §
151.28 above.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 151.42 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins, including the placement of manufactured homes, within any
area of special flood hazard established in §
151.21 above.
   (B)   Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the Floodplain Administrator and may include, but not be limited to; plans
in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and
elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
   (C)   Specifically, the following information is required:
      (1)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all structures; in Zone AO, elevation of existing
highest adjacent natural grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all
structures;
      (2)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-
residential structure will be floodproofed;
      (3)   Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in §
151.43(C)(3) below; and
      (4)   Base flood elevation data for subdivision proposals or other
development greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is less; and
      (5)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 151.43 STANDARDS OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required.
   (A)   Anchoring.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
and.
      (2)   All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of §
151.47 below.
   (B)   Construction materials and methods.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
      (3)   New construction and substantial improvement and other proposed new
development shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding; and
      (4)   Within Zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths shall be constructed
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
   (C)   Elevation and floodproofing.
      (1)   Residential construction. 
         (a)   Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall
have the lowest floor, including basement:
            1.   In an AO Zone, elevated to or above the regulatory flood
elevation, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no
depth number is specified.
            2.   In an A Zone where a BFE has not been determined, elevated to
or above the regulatory flood elevation or be elevated in accordance with the
criteria developed by the Director of the Arizona Department of Water
Resources.
            3.   In Zones AE, AH and A1-30, elevated to or above the regulatory
flood elevation.
            4.   A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with
the garage floor slab below the Regulatory Flood Elevation, must be designed to
allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood waters.
         (b)   Upon the completion of the structure the elevation of the lowest
floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community’s building inspector to be
properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the
Floodplain Administrator.
      (2)   Nonresidential construction. Nonresidential construction, new or
substantial improvement, shall either be elevated in conformance with §
151.43 (C)(1) and (2) above, or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities:
         (a)   Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under§
151.43 (C)(1) so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;
         (b)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
         (c)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the standards of this section are satisfied. Such certification shall be
provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
      (3)   Flood openings. All new construction and substantial improvement
with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which
are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood
waters. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet or exceed the following
criteria:
         (a)   Must have a minimum of two openings, on different sides of each
enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwater; or
         (c)   Alternatively, a registered engineer or architect may design and
certify the openings.
      (4)   Manufactured homes. Manufactured homes shall meet the standards in
§
151.47.
      (5)   Garages and accessory structures. 
         (a)   A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with
the garage floor slab below the regulatory flood elevation, must be designed to
allow for the automatic entry of flood waters. See §
151.43 (C)(3). Areas of the garage below the regulatory flood elevation must be
constructed with flood resistant materials. See §
151.43 (B).
         (b)   A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the
above requirements or be dry floodproofed.
         (c)   “Accessory structure” used solely for parking or storage, as
defined in §
151.05, may be constructed such that its floor is below the regulatory flood
elevation, provided the structure is designed and constructed in accordance
with the following requirements:
            1.   Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or
limited storage;
            2.   The portions of the accessory structure located below the
regulatory flood elevation must be built using flood-resistant materials;
            3.   The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse and lateral movement;
            4.   Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory
structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the regulatory flood
elevation;
            5.   The accessory structure must comply with floodway encroachment
provisions in §
151.49; and
            6.   The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the
automatic entry of flood waters in accordance with §
151.43 (C)(3).
         (d)   Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the above
standards must be constructed in accordance with all other applicable standards
in §
151.43.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018) Penalty,
see §
151.99
§ 151.44 STORAGE OF MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding,
buoyant, flammable, explosive or could be injurious to human, animal or plant
life if released due to damage from flooding is prohibited in special flood
hazard areas.
   (B)   Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject
to major damage by floods and if firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if
readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018) Penalty,
see §
151.99
§ 151.45 STANDARDS FOR UTILITIES.
   (A)   All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system and discharge from systems into flood waters.
   (B)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (C)   Waste disposal systems shall not be installed wholly or partially in a
regulatory floodway.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018) Penalty,
see §
151.99
§ 151.46 ADDITIONAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS, INCLUDING SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   All new subdivision proposals and other proposed development
(including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions), greater
than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, shall:
      (1)   Identify the area of the special flood hazard and the elevation of
the base flood.
      (2)   All final plans will provide the elevation(s) of the proposed
structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood elevation,
the final lowest floor and grade elevations shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
   (B)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. All subdivision proposals
and other proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities such
as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage. All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall
provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 151.47 STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   All manufactured homes that are placed on site or substantially improved
shall:
   (A)   Be elevated so that the bottom of the structural frame or the lowest
point of any attached appliances, whichever is lower, is at or above the
regulatory flood elevation; and
   (B)   Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 151.48 STANDARDS FOR RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   All recreational vehicles placed on site shall:
   (A)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
   (B)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has
no permanently attached additions; or
   (C)   Meet the permit requirements of the Administrative Section of this
ordinance and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes
in §
151.47.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 151.49 FLOODWAYS.
   Located within areas of special flood hazard established in §
151.21 above are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris,
potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
   (A)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered
professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments
shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge; and
   (B)   If division (A) above is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of §§
151.43 through
151.49.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018)
VARIANCE PROCEDURE
§ 151.60 NATURE OF VARIANCES.
   (A)   The variance criteria set forth in this section of the chapter are
based on the general principle of law that variances pertain to a piece of
property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel
of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the
requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the
applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be
unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique
characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its
inhabitants or the property owners.
   (B)   It is the duty of the Town Council of Colorado City to help protect
its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of
the cost of insuring a structure built below the regulatory flood elevation are
so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements
in the flood chapter are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and
reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly
limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more
detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can
be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations
in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 151.61 APPEALS.
   (A)   The Hearing Officer of Colorado City shall hear and decide appeals and
requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter as outlined in
Town Code
Chapter 153.
   (B)   The Hearing Officer shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the
Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
   (C)   In passing upon the applications, the Hearing Officer, shall consider
all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of the damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water system, and streets and
bridges.
   (D)   Upon consideration of the factors of division (C) above and the
purposes of this chapter, the Hearing Officer may attach the conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this
chapter.
   (E)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
      (2)   Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property; and
      (3)   The land upon which the variance is granted shall be ineligible for
exchange of state land pursuant to any flood relocation and land exchange
program. A copy of the notice shall be recorded in the office of the Mohave
County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the
chain of title of the affected parcel of land.
   (F)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance and report such variances
issued in its biennial report submitted to Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2017-03, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord.
2018-01, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 151.62 CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.
   (A)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood elevation, providing §§
151.40 through
151.49 above have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond 1/
2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
   (B)   Variances may be issued for the repair, rehabilitation or restoration
of structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the State
Inventory of Historic Places, upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structures continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
   (C)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (D)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   (E)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
      (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant;
      (3)   Showing that the use cannot perform its intended purpose unless it
is located or carried out in close proximity to water. This includes only
facilities defined in §
151.05 of this chapter in the definition of FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE; and
      (4)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of, the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a
fine of not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six
months, or by both the fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation
continues shall be a separate offense punishable as herein above described.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-17-2018)
CHAPTER 152: ZONING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Authority
   
152.002   Title
   
152.003   Purpose
   
152.004   Consistency with the general plan and other adopted regulations
   
152.005   Applicability
   
152.006   Conflicting provisions
   
152.007   Transitional provisions
   
152.008   Rules for interpretation
Zoning Districts
   
152.025   Zoning districts and map established
   
152.026   Agricultural/Residential Districts
   
152.027   Residential Districts
   
152.028   Commercial and Mixed-Use Overlay Districts
   
152.029   Business and Industrial Districts
   
152.030   Planned Area Development (PAD) District
   
152.031   Airport Districts
   
152.032   Special Districts
   
152.033   Measurements and exceptions
Supplementary Use Standards
   
152.045   Title and authority
   
152.046   Accessory buildings, structures and uses
   
152.047   Temporary uses and structures
General Development Regulations
   
152.055   Performance standards
   
152.056   Off-street parking and loading
   
152.057   Landscape, walls, and screening
   
152.058   Signage
   
152.059   Outdoor lighting
Administration
   
152.070   Purpose
   
152.071   Town Council
   
152.072   Planning and Zoning Commission
   
152.073   Board of Adjustment
   
152.074   Zoning Administrator
Zoning Procedures
   
152.085   Purpose
   
152.086   Common procedures
   
152.087   Review authority
   
152.088   General plan amendment
   
152.089   Amendments to zoning code text
   
152.090   Amendments to zoning map (rezone)
   
152.091   Conditional use permit
   
152.092   Temporary use permit
   
152.093   Variance
   
152.094   Sign permit, comprehensive sign plan and master sign program
   
152.095   Site plan review
   
152.096   Annexation
Enforcement
   
152.105   Purpose
   
152.106   Enforcement responsibilities
   
152.107   Enforcement general
   
152.108   Types of violations and offenses
   
152.109   Violation remedies
   
152.110   Criminal and civil penalties
   
152.111   Continuation of prior enforcement actions
   
152.112   Cumulative procedures and remedies
Nonconformities
   
152.120   Purpose
   
152.121   General provisions
   
152.122   Nonconforming uses
   
152.123   Nonconforming structures
   
152.124   Nonconforming lots of record
   
152.125   Nonconforming signs
Definitions
   
152.135   Purpose
   
152.136   General rules
   
152.137   Specific definitions
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 AUTHORITY.
   This zoning chapter is enacted based on the authority granted by this Town
code and the laws of the State of Arizona, including but not limited to A.R.S.
§ 9-461 and § 9-462, which provide for the regulation of land use and
structures by municipalities in Arizona.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.002 TITLE.
   This zoning chapter shall be known as the Town of Colorado Town Zoning
Chapter and is referred to throughout this document as “this chapter” or “this
code.”
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.003 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to:
   (A)   Promote the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the
citizens of the town;
   (B)   Facilitate the orderly growth of the town and to ensure the adequate
provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public
facilities;
   (C)   Prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of
population;
   (D)   Secure safety from fire, flood and other dangers;
   (E)   Lessen or avoid congestion in the streets;
   (F)   Secure adequate light, air and privacy;
   (G)   Protect the character and the social and economic stability of all
parts of the community; and
   (H)   Promote development in accordance with the town general plan.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.004 CONSISTENCY WITH THE GENERAL PLAN AND OTHER ADOPTED REGULATIONS.
   This chapter is intended to implement the planning goals and objectives of
the town general plan and other applicable adopted regulations. Any amendments
to, or actions pursuant to, this code shall be consistent with the general plan
and all applicable adopted regulations.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.005 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this zoning code apply to all use and development of
properties within the municipal limits of the town, except for exempted
government owned property as provided by state or Federal law or as otherwise
expressly stated in this zoning code.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.006 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Provisions interpreted as minimum requirements. The standards and
regulations established by this chapter shall be construed to be the minimum
requirements necessary for the promotion of public health, safety, or other
general welfare. Minimum values are not intended to be target values. In some
instances, conditions may create the need to exceed stated minimum standards.
   (B)   Relation to other regulations.  The regulations of this chapter and
requirements or conditions imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not supersede
any other regulations or requirements adopted or imposed by the State of
Arizona, or any federal agency that has jurisdiction by law over uses and
development authorized by this chapter. All uses and development authorized by
this chapter shall comply with all other such regulations and requirements.
Where conflict occurs within this chapter or between the provisions of this
chapter and any other town ordinance, chapter, resolution, guideline or
regulation, (such as, but not limited to, fire codes, building codes, or
engineering standards) the more restrictive provisions shall control, as
determined by the Zoning Administrator, unless otherwise specified herein.
   (C)   Relation to private agreements. The provisions of this chapter shall
apply regardless of any private agreements in the event that the provisions of
this chapter are more restrictive. Otherwise, this chapter shall not interfere
with, affect or annul any recorded easement, covenant, or other private
agreement now in effect, unless a development agreement has been authorized by
the Town Council and executed by recording the development agreement with the
County Recorder's office, pursuant to A.R.S § 9-500.05.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.007 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   The following rules shall apply to all properties in the town on the
effective date of this code:
   (A)   Violations continue. Any violation of the zoning code previously in
effect May 13, 2020 will continue to be a violation under this code and shall
be subject to the penalties and enforcement provisions provided in §§
152.105 through
152.112, unless the use, development, construction or other activity complies
with the provisions of this code.
   (B)   Uses rendered nonconforming under prior ordinance. Any legal
nonconformity under the previous zoning ordinance also will be a legal
nonconformity under this chapter, so long as the situation that resulted in the
legal nonconforming status under the previous chapter continues to exist. If a
legal nonconformity under the previous chapter becomes conforming because of
the adoption of this chapter, then said use or structure will no longer be
considered a nonconformity.
   (C)   Uses rendered nonconforming under this chapter.
      (1)   When a building, structure, or lot is used for a purpose that was a
lawful use before the effective date of this zoning chapter, and this zoning
chapter no longer classifies such use as an allowed use in the zoning district
in which it is located, such use shall be considered nonconforming and shall be
controlled by §§
152.120 through
152.125.
      (2)   Where any building, structure, or lot that legally existed on the
effective date of this zoning chapter does not meet all standards set forth in
this zoning chapter, such building, structure, or lot shall be considered
nonconforming and shall be controlled by §§
152.120 through
152.125.
   (D)   Applications filed prior to the effective date.
      (1)   Pending applications filed prior to the effective date.
         (a)   Complete applications for new developments or amendments
including, but not limited to site plan review and approval, conditional use
permits, and rezones filed prior to the effective date of this code may be
approved under the provisions of the zoning code previously in effect.
         (b)   Applicants with a complete application that has been submitted
for approval, but upon which no final action has been taken prior to the
effective date of this zoning chapter, may request review under this zoning
chapter by a written letter to the Zoning Administrator.
         (c)   If the applicant fails to comply with any applicable required
period for submittal or other procedural requirements in accordance with the
zoning chapter in effect on the date the application was deemed complete, the
application shall expire and subsequent applications shall be subject to the
requirements of this zoning chapter.
      (2)   Planning applications filed after the effective date. All
applications for new developments including, but not limited to, site plan
review and approval, conditional use permits, and rezones, filed on or after
the effective date of this zoning chapter, including modifications and
amendments, shall conform to the provisions of this zoning chapter.
   (E)   Developments with approvals or permits.
      (1)   Conditional use permit approved prior to effective date. An
applicant for a use for which a conditional use permit has been approved prior
to the effective date of this chapter may file an application for a building
permit, even if the use does not fully comply with the provisions of this
chapter. If a building permit application is not filed within one year of the
date of approval of the conditional use permit, it shall expire. No time
extensions shall be permitted. Any re-application for an expired project
approval shall meet the standards in effect at the time of re-application.
      (2)   Final site plan approved prior to effective date. An applicant
whose development has received site plan approval prior to the effective date
of this chapter may file an application for a building permit in compliance
with the approved site plan and any conditions of approval, even if the
development does not comply with the provisions of this chapter. Upon approval
of construction plans for the development, a building permit may be issued.
Site plan approval for developments approved prior to the effective date of
this chapter shall be valid for one year from the date of approval. No time
extensions shall be permitted. Any re-application for an expired project
approval shall meet the standards in effect at the time of re-application.
      (3)   Preliminary subdivision plat approved prior to effective date. A
project which has a preliminary plat approved prior to the effective date of
this chapter may file an application for a final subdivision plat and
improvement plan approval, even if the subdivision does not fully comply with
the provisions of this chapter. If a final plat application is not filed within
18 months as provided by the general development and subdivision regulations,
of the date of preliminary plat approval, the preliminary plat shall expire. No
time extensions shall be permitted. Subsequent preliminary plat applications
shall comply with this zoning chapter and the town general development and
subdivision regulations.
      (4)   Building permit issued prior to effective date. Any building,
structure, or sign for which a lawful building permit is issued or for which a
complete building permit or sign permit application as determined by the Zoning
Administrator has been filed prior to the effective date of this chapter, may
be constructed and completed in conformance with the permit and other
applicable approvals, permits and conditions, even if such building, structure
or sign does not fully comply with this chapter. If construction is not
commenced in compliance with the applicable permit terms, the Building Official
may grant an extension in compliance with the provisions of the building code.
If the building, structure, or sign has not been completed before the building
permit or any extension of the permit expires, then the building, structure, or
sign shall be constructed, completed or occupied only in compliance with this
chapter.
   (F)   Waiver of requirements.
      (1)   Properties for which the owner believes the adoption of this
chapter has a direct effect upon and has caused a diminution of value. (A.R.S.
§ 12-1134)
      (2)   If a property owner has reason to believe the adoption of this
chapter and the requirement(s) related to this chapter have directly reduced
the fair market value of their property, a waiver of requirements from this
chapter, in favor of all requirements of the zoning chapter in effect previous
to May 13, 2020, may be applied. Actions establishing the initiation of this
waiver must be made before May 13, 2023.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.008 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Zoning land use regulations. Where uncertainty exists regarding the
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or its application to a
specific site, the Zoning Administrator shall determine the intent of the
provision as defined under §
152.074. The determination of the Zoning Administrator may be appealed in
accordance with the provisions of §
152.086(K).
   (B)   Official zoning map. Where uncertainty exists regarding the boundary
of a zoning district, the provisions and rules set forth in §
152.025(C) shall apply.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 152.025 ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   This chapter establishes the zoning districts applied to property
within the town, determines how the zoning districts are applied on the zoning
map, and identifies general permitted land uses and development standards for
each zoning district.
   (B)   Zoning Districts established. To classify and separate the uses of
land, buildings, and structures for implementing the town zoning chapter, the
town is divided into the zoning and overlay districts listed below.
Table 2.1-1: Zoning Districts Established
Abbreviation Zoning District Legacy Zoning
Table 2.1-1: Zoning Districts Established
Abbreviation Zoning District                            Legacy Zoning
Residential Agricultural Districts
AR-5         Agricultural Residential 5 Acre Minimum   
Residential Districts
RE-2A        Residential-Estate/Two-Acre
RE-1A        Residential-Estate/One-Acre
R1-20        Single Family Residential 20,000
R1-12        Single Family Residential 12,000
R1-8         Single-Family Residential 8,000
R-2          Small-Lot Residential 2
RM           Multi-Family Residential 3
MHS          Manufactured Home
MHP          Manufactured Home Park
Commercial Districts and Mixed-Use Overlay
C-1          Neighborhood Commercial
C-2          Community Commercial
C-3          Regional Commercial
CBD          Central Business District
MU           Mixed-Use Overlay
Business and Industrial Districts
BP           Business Park
SC           Service Commercial
IP           Industrial Park
Planned Area Development District
PAD          Planned Area Development
Airport Districts
AP           Airport Property
AA           Airport Approach Zone Overlay
ACZ          Airport Clear Zone Overlay
Special Districts
FD           Future Development District
FL           Federal Lands District
POS          Parks/Open Space
 
   (B)   Map established.
      (1)   The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by
this code shall be designated upon the official “Zoning Map of the Town of
Colorado City.” The zoning map, together with all data shown on the map and all
amendments hereafter adopted, is by reference made a part of this code.
      (2)   The official zoning map shall be located in and maintained by the
Community Development Department and made available for inspection at Town
Hall.
         (a)   Any changes to the official zoning map shall be considered an
amendment to the official zoning map and filed in accordance with §
152.090.
         (b)   The official zoning map may, from time to time, be republished
to delineate any change of zoning approved pursuant to §
152.090 or any other amendments thereto.
   (C)   Boundary determination. Where uncertainty exists concerning the
boundaries of any zoning district shown on the official zoning map, the
following rules shall apply:
      (1)   Where zoning district boundaries are indicated as approximately
following street or alley center lines, such center lines shall be construed to
be the district boundary.
      (2)   Where zoning district boundaries are so indicated that they
approximately follow property lines, such property lines shall be construed to
be the district boundary.
      (3)   Where zoning district boundaries divide a lot or parcel, the zoning
boundary shall be determined by using the scale of the zoning map, unless
indicated by legal description with distance and bearing or other dimension.
Such zoning district boundary shall be considered a "lot line" as defined
herein. If the area created by such lot line does not comply with the
designated district lot area and lot width requirements, zoning for the entire
parcel shall be that which is applied to the largest portion of the property.
      (4)   Where existing development has occurred across zoning lines, zoning
for the entire parcel shall be that which is applied to the largest portion of
the property.
      (5)   Where a public street or alley, railroad, or utility right-of-way
is officially vacated or abandoned, the property that was formerly in the
right-of-way will be included within the zoning district of the adjoining
property on either side of the centerline of the vacated or abandoned right-of-
way or easement.
      (6)   In case of doubt or disagreement concerning the exact location of a
district line, determination shall lie with the Zoning Administrator as defined
under §
152.074. The determination of the Zoning Administrator may be appealed in
accordance with the provisions of §
152.086(K).
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.026 AGRICULTURAL/RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   General purpose. Agricultural/Residential Districts are primarily
intended to provide for the continuation and preservation of rural living
quality on parcels of sufficient area to produce farm crops (and specified
compatible principal or accessory uses and structures) including related
agricultural business and support uses.
   (B)   Agricultural/Residential 5 (AR-5).  This district is intended to
promote and preserve low-density single-family residential and agricultural
development. Single family homes in this district may include site built,
manufactured, or modular. Mobile home prohibited.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.027 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   General purpose. Residential zoning districts are primarily intended
to create, maintain and promote a variety of neighborhoods that are comprised
of a range of compatible densities to accommodate the desired physical
character of the town. These districts primarily accommodate residential uses,
however some nonresidential uses are also allowed to provide public facilities
necessary to create a healthy and safe environment to live in.
   (B)   Residential districts.
      (1)   Residential-Estate/Two-Acre (RE-2A). This district is intended to
provide an open, country residential atmosphere on large lots. Lots are
typically larger than in the developed portion of the town and include keeping
large livestock. Single-family detached homes in this district may include site
built, manufactured, or modular. Mobile homes prohibited.
      (2)   Residential-Estate/One-Acre District (RE-1A). This district is
similar in intent and purpose to the Residential-Estate District, except that
the lot sizes are smaller. In general, the intent is to allow conventional
single-family detached housing, with large livestock. Single-family homes in
this district may include site built, manufactured, or modular. Mobile homes
prohibited.   
      (3)   Single-Family Residential-20 (R1-20). The intent of this district
is to provide a transition from rural residential estate development to more
urban residential neighborhoods. Development in this district is generally
comprised of large-lot single-family detached homes with more conventional
residential amenities such as sidewalks, public utility services and other
improvements. Single-family homes in this district may include site built,
manufactured, or modular. Mobile homes prohibited.   
      (4)   Single-Family Residential-12 (R1-12). The intent of this district
is to provide a transition from rural residential estate development to more
urban residential neighborhoods. Development in this district is generally
comprised of large-lot single-family detached homes with more conventional
residential amenities such as sidewalks, public utility services and other
improvements. Single-family homes in this district may include site built,
manufactured, or modular. Mobile homes prohibited.      
      (5)   Single-Family Residential-8 (R1-8). This district is intended to
promote and protect the single-family character of a neighborhood and to
prohibit incompatible activities. Development in this district should afford
non-motorized linkages to community and neighborhood services such as schools,
parks and shopping areas. All public utilities and facilities must be present.
Certain essential and complementary uses are permitted under conditions and
standards which ensure their compatibility with the character of the district.
Single-family homes in this district may include site built, manufactured, or
modular. Mobile homes prohibited.      
      (6)   Small-Lot Residential-2 (R-2). The intent of this district is to
provide for neighborhoods comprised of a mixture of single-family detached
homes and small-lot residential dwellings such as duplexes, townhomes, or patio
homes together with schools, parks, trails and other public facilities. This
district may serve as a transition between higher-density multi-family
residential districts and low-density single-family residential districts.
Single-family homes in this district may include site built, manufactured, or
modular. Mobile homes prohibited.      
      (7)   Multiple Family Residential-3 (RM). This district allows the
broadest range of multi-family residential types and is intended for locations
closer to primary intensity generators, such as large shopping areas or
employment centers. The district requires direct connection to higher volume
roadways and all public utilities. Provisions for various modes of travel and
pedestrian linkages are also critical.
      (8)   Manufactured Home Subdivision (MHS). The intent of this district is
to provide an alternative single-family living style for those families who
choose a manufactured home environment. Development in this district consists
of subdivisions where residents own individual lots. The development standards
of this district are intended to be consistent with the standards for other
single-family neighborhoods developed at similar densities. All public
utilities and facilities must be present.
      (9)   Manufactured Home Park (MHP). The intent of this district is to
provide an alternative single-family living style for those families who choose
a manufactured home environment, but lease or rent spaces rather than own
individual lots. Recreational vehicle parks developed in a safe and attractive
manner may also be located in this district. The development standards of this
district are intended to be consistent with the standards for other single-
family neighborhoods developed at similar densities. All public utilities and
facilities must be present.
   (C)   Residential use standards. Table 2.1-1: Table of Allowed Uses for
Residential Districts, lists land uses and indicates whether they are permitted
by right or with approval of a conditional use permit, or prohibited in each
zoning district. The Use Table also includes references to additional use-
specific standards that may be applicable to that use. The organization
headings and individual abbreviations utilized in the table are explained as
follows:
      (1)   Use category. The “use categories” are intended merely as an
organizational tool and are not regulatory. These use categories simply help to
organize the list of “specific use types” into common groupings for ease of
reference.
      (2)   Specific use type. The “specific use types” are regulatory and
function as the basis for defining present and future land uses that are
appropriate in each zoning district. Rather than list every possible individual
land use type, this list classifies individual land uses and activities into
specific use types based on common functional, product or physical
characteristics; such as the type and amount of activity, the type of customers
or residents, and how goods or services are sold or delivered and site
conditions. Further definitions of each specific use type can be found in §§
152.135 through
152.137.
      (3)   Permitted uses. "P" in a cell indicates that the use is allowed by
right in that zoning district.
      (4)   Conditional uses. "C" in a cell indicates that the use is allowed
in the respective zoning district only if reviewed and approved in accordance
with the procedures of §
152.091.
      (5)   Not permitted. "NP" in a cell indicates that the use is not
permitted/prohibited in that zoning district.
      (6)   Use-specific standards. Section numbers listed in the "Supplemental
Use Regulations" column denote the location of additional regulations that are
applicable to the specific use type; however, provisions in other sections of
this chapter may also apply.
      (7)   Non-specified uses. When a use cannot be reasonably classified into
a specific use type, or appears to fit into multiple specific use types, the
Zoning Administrator is authorized to determine the most similar and thus most
appropriate specific use type based on the actual or projected characteristics
of the individual use or activity (including but not limited to size, scale,
operating characteristics and external impacts) in relationship to the specific
use type definitions provided in §§
152.135 through
152.137. Appeal of the Administrator's decision may be made to the Board of
Adjustment following the procedures under §
152.086(K).
   Table 2.2-1: Table of Allowed Uses for Residential Districts
                           P = Permitted Use   C = Conditional Use   NP = Not
Use      Specific Permitted
Category Use Type       RE- RE- R1-                                 Suppleme
                  AR- 5 2A  1A  2 0 R1-1 2 R1- 8 R- 2 R M MH S MH P ntal Use
                                                                    Regulations
   Table 2.2-1: Table of Allowed Uses for Residential Districts
                                              P = Permitted Use   C = Conditional
                         Specific    Use   NP = Not Permitted
Use Category             Use Type    AR- RE- RE- R1- R1- R1- R- R MH MH Suppleme
                                     5   2A  1A  2 0 1 2 8   2  M S  P  ntal Use
                                                                        Regulations
                         Assisted                            N          §
                         Living      NP  NP  NP  NP  NP  NP  P  C NP NP 152.045(D)
                         Center
                         Assisted    P   P   P   P   P   P   P  N NP NP  
                         Living Home                            P
                         Child Care, P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P P  P  §
                         Home                                           152.045(K)
                         Dwelling ,  NP  NP  NP  NP  NP  NP  P  P NP NP  
                         Duplex
                         Dwelling ,                             N       §
                         Manufact    P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P P  P  152.045(O)
                         ured Home
                         Dwelling ,                             N
                         Modular     P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P P  C   
                         Home
                         Dwelling ,                          N          §
                         Multi-Fa    C   C   C   C   C   NP  P  P NP NP 152.045(CC)
Resident ial Use         mily
Category                 Dwelling ,
                         Single-Fa   NP  NP  NP  NP  NP  NP  P  P NP NP  
                         mily
                         Attached
                         Dwelling ,
                         Single-Fa   P   P   P   P   P   P   P  N P  P   
                         mily                                   P
                         Detached
                         Group Care  P   P   P   P   P   P   N  N NP NP §
                         Home                                P  P       152.045(N)
                         Manufact                            N  N       §
                         ured Home,  NP  NP  NP  NP  NP  NP  P  P NP P  152.045(P)
                         Park
                         Nursing     NP  NP  NP  NP  NP  NP  N  C NP NP §
                         Home                                P          152.045(D)
                         Recreatio
                         nal         NP  NP  NP  NP  NP  NP  N  N NP P  §
                         Vehicle,                            P  P       152.045(U)
                         Park
                         Resident    P   P   P   P   P   P   P  N NP NP §
                         Care Home                              P       152.045(W)
                         Vacation                                       §
                         Home        P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P P  P  152.045(BB)
                         Rentals
                         Assembl y                           N
                         Hall/       NP  NP  NP  NP  NP  NP  P  C C  C   
                         Auditori um
                         Campgro und C   NP  NP  NP  NP  NP  N  N NP C  §
                                                             P  P       152.045(I)
                         Child Care, NP  NP  NP  NP  NP  NP  C  C NP NP §
                         Center                                         152.045(J)
                         College or  NP  NP  NP  NP  NP  NP  N  C NP NP §
                         Universit y                         P          152.045(X)
                         Commun ity
                         Playfield s P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P P  P   
                         and Parks
                         Commun ity
                         Recreatio n P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P P  P   
                         Center
                         Country
                         Club,       P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P P  P   
                         Private
                         Fraternal
Public and Semi-Pu blic  or Social   NP  NP  NP  NP  NP  N-P C  C NP NP  
Use Categor y            Club,
                         Nonprofi t
                         Library     P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P NP NP  
                         Public
                         Safety      P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P P  P   
                         Facility
                         Religious   P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P P  P  §
                         Assembl y                                      152.045(V)
                         School,     C   C   C   C   C   NP  N  C NP NP §
                         Boarding                            P          152.045(X)
                         School,
                         Public or   C   C   C   C   C   C   C  C NP NP §
                         Private, K-                                    152.045(X)
                         8
                         School,
                         Public or   C   C   C   C   C   C   C  C NP NP §
                         Private, 9-                                    152.045(X)
                         12
                         Social                              N
                         Service     NP  NP  NP  NP  NP  NP  P  C NP NP  
                         Facility
                         Solar                               N  N
                         Generati on C   C   NP  NP  NP  NP  P  P NP NP  
                         Facility
                         Utility
                         Facility    C   C   NP  NP  NP  NP  N  N NP NP  
                         and Service                         P  P
                         Yard, Major
Public and Semi-Pu blic  Utility
Use Categor y (Cont’d) Facility,   P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P P  P   
                         Minor
                         Wireless
                         Facility
                         (includin g C   C   C   C   C   C   C  C C  C  §
                         tower and                                      152.045(CC)
                         supportin g
                         facilities)
                         Agricultu   P   P   C   NP  NP  NP  N  N NP NP  
                         re, General                         P  P
Agricult ure Use Categor Market      P   P   P   C   C   C   C  C C  NP  
y                        Garden
                         Ranching ,  P   P   C   NP  NP  NP  N  N NP NP  
                         Commer cial                         P  P
                         Farmers                             N  N
                         Market,     C   C   C   NP  NP  NP  P  P NP NP  
                         Permane nt
                         Feed Store  C   C   NP  NP  NP  NP  N  N NP NP  
                                                             P  P
Commer cial Use Categor  Golf
y                        Course,     P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P C  C   
                         Unlighte d
                         Parking
                         Lots and    NP  NP  NP  NP  NP  NP  N  P NP NP  
                         Parking                             P
                         Structure
 
   (D)   Residential development standards. The following development standards
identified in Table 2.2-2 apply to all principal uses and structures in
residential districts, except as otherwise expressly stated in this code.
General exceptions to these regulations and rules for measuring compliance can
be found in §§
152.135 through
152.137. Regulations governing accessory uses and structures can be found in §
152.046.
Table 2.2-2: Residential District Development Standards
         Density,  Lot Dimensions,      Setbacks
         Maximu m  minimum                                   Lot      Building
Zoning   (dwelling Lot size                                  coverage height.
District units/    (square   Lot Width  Front  Side   Rear   maximum  maximum
         gross     feet)     (feet)1    (feet) (feet) (feet) (%)      (feet)
         acre)
Table 2.2-2: Residential District Development Standards
                            Density,  Lot Dimensions, Setbacks
                            Maximu m  minimum                               Lot      Building
Zoning District             (dwelling Lot     Lot                           coverage height.
                            units/    size    Width   Front  Side    Rear   maximum  maximum
                            gross     (square (feet)1 (feet) (feet)  (feet) (%)      (feet)
                            acre)     feet)
              RA-5         -         5 acres 200     25     10      25     -        35
              RE-2A        -         87,120  200     25     10      25     15       35
              RE-1A        -         43,560  150     25     10      25     20       35
              R1-20        -         20,000  75      202    10      20     35       30
Single-       R1-12        -         12,000  75      202    10      20     35       30
Family                                                       5 w/15
Residential   R1-8         -         8,000   55      202    aggrega 20     35       30
                                                             te4
                                      3
              MHS          10        acres/  40      153    54      10     45       30
                                      5,000
                                      lot
                            10        3 acres
            MP Manufactured (spaces/  / 3,000 40      153    54      10     50       30
            H  Home Park    gross     lot                                   (space)
                            acre)
               Recreatio    18        2
            MP nal Vehicle  (spaces/  acres/  28      10     5       5      -        20
Multi-      H  Park         g ross    1,200
Family                      acre)
Residential R- Single-
            2  Fa mily      7         6,000   35      153    54      10     50       30
               Detached
            R- All other    12        7,000   -       20     155     155    507      30
            2  uses                   site6
              RM           12 (min)  7,000   -       20     155     155    507      358
                                      site6
1   Lot width is measured at front setback.
2   Front setback shall be 15 feet for side entry garages and/or covered front porch.
3   Front setback shall be 20 feet for front entry garages and carports.
4   For all corner lots adjacent to a public right-of-way, the minimum street side yard
setback shall be ten feet.
5   Zero feet for dwelling units with common walls.
6   For Single-Family Attached uses within a common site, the minimum individual lot/dwelling
unit size shall be 1,500 square feet.
7   For Single-Family Attached uses within a common site, the maximum individual lot/dwelling
unit coverage shall be 95%.
 
   (E)   Residential site and architectural design guidelines. The purpose of
this section is to help provide a pleasant residential environment within the
context of higher density development. By applying principles of good design to
aspects and components of multi-family residential development, the town can
protect the fabric of existing neighborhoods as well as maintain the
community's overall high intrinsic value.
      (1)   Applicability.
         (a)   These requirements shall apply to development of new multi-
family dwellings or renovation of existing multi-family dwellings within the
Multiple Family Residential-3 (RM) Zoning District that has frontage along
State Route 389 in the town.
         (b)   These guidelines will be used by town staff and decision-making
bodies as a framework for evaluating residential development proposals and for
commenting on the design aspects of those proposed projects. The general
development and subdivision regulations should also be referenced for
additional site design standards specifically applicable to residential
subdivision developments.
      (2)   Architectural guidelines.
         (a)   Natural materials and deep earthtone colors are preferred, and
design elements should not consist primarily of metal, glass, plastic, highly
reflective materials and bright colors. Such materials may have limited
application in trim or accent areas, but should not be predominant visual
elements of the building(s) or site improvements.
         (b)   Large bland monolithic facades or rooflines and repetition of
very simple details which become monotonous in character should be avoided.
Building elevations should create a unique character which is emphasized
through interesting architectural details or façade articulation in each
component. For example, windows may be arched or rectangular, bayed out or
recessed, have raised borders, awnings, planter boxes or shutters.
         (c)   Simple, clean, bold projections of stairways are required to
complement the architectural massing and form of the multi-family structure.
Stairways should be of an approved building material as listed in §
152.026(E)(2)(d). Thin-looking, open metal, prefabricated stairs are not
recommended.
         (d)   All building facades should be designed with architecturally
finished materials, with the following recommended primary façade building
materials:
            1.   Modular masonry materials such as brick, block, and stone;
            2.   Precast concrete or aggregate panels with a decorative finish;
            3.   Stucco or stucco-like materials;
            4.   Wood, provided the surfaces are finished for exterior use and
wood of proven exterior durability; or
            5.   Other materials as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
      (3)   Site design/orientation guidelines.
         (a)   Buildings, structures, open space areas and other features shall
be oriented to protect and/or enhance major vistas and panoramas that give
special emphasis to mountains, and special man-made or natural landmarks.
         (b)   A system of attractive and safe pedestrian ways shall be
provided which link the various components of the development with each other
and link the site's pedestrian system with adjacent public pedestrian ways.
They shall also link the dwellings with adjacent land uses such as parks,
shopping centers, or schools, which are likely to be used by the residents of
the development.
      (4)   Circulation.
         (a)   The primary vehicular access into a multi-family residential
project shall be through an entry drive rather than a parking lot drive.
         (b)   Developments along ADOT controlled roadways shall complete a
traffic study analysis, including access needs, traffic control needs, highway
expansion needs, drainage management plan, and/or a cost sharing plan. ADOT
approval will be required as part of the development plan approval process.
         (c)   Access points along primary gateway roadways shall be placed and
designed in accordance with ADOT and/or town requirements.
      (5)   Utilities. All on-site electric utility and all other communication
and utility lines for buildings shall be placed underground.
   (F)   Additional development standards.
      (1)   Setback and height exceptions.  See §§
152.135 through
152.137 for additional development and design regulations.
      (2)   Parking and loading requirements. See §
152.056 for additional development and design regulations.
      (3)   Landscaping and screening requirements. See §
152.057 for additional development and design regulations.
      (4)   Signage requirements. See §
152.058 for additional development and design regulations.
      (5)   Exterior lighting requirements. See §
152.059 for additional development and design regulations.
      (6)   Further reference, as appropriate, should be given to the town
Uniform Building and Fire Codes, general development and subdivision
guidelines, floodplain management ordinance, and engineering design standards.
   (G)   Flag lots. A flag lot for one single-family dwelling may be allowed to
accommodate the development of property that otherwise could not reasonably be
developed under the regulations contained in this chapter or other titles
adopted by the city. The primary purpose of this section is not to make
development of property easier and more profitable. Rather, it is to serve as a
"last resort" for property which may not otherwise be reasonably developed.
      (1)   Factors. When property is subdivided, flag lots shall not be
approved by right but may be allowed after considering the following:
         (a)   More than two flag lots with contiguous staffs should be
avoided;
         (b)   Whether development of the property in question under normal
city land use and subdivision regulations is reasonable and practical;
         (c)   Creation of a flag lot should not foreclose the possibility of
future development of other large interior parcels that are not developable
unless a street is extended to them across other adjacent properties;
         (d)   A flag lot will only be considered for approval in the area of
the original Short Creek Subdivision (SCSD) sheets 5-28 recorded September 26,
2017, and not in any other parcels or developments;
         (e)   Flag lots will not be approved in any new subdivisions even in
the area of SCSD sheets 5-28; and
         (f)   Flag lots may not be further subdivided following initial
approval.
      (2)   Development standards. When flag lots are permitted, they shall be
subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   A flag lot shall be comprised of a staff (narrow) portion that
is contiguous with a flag (wide) portion.
         (b)   The staff portion of the lot shall front on and be contiguous to
a public street. The minimum width of the staff portion at any point shall be
26 feet. However, a greater staff width for lots within the sensitive lands
overlay zone may be required. The maximum length of a staff shall be 150 feet.
The maximum grade of a staff shall not exceed 12%.
         (c)   The minimum size of the flag lot shall be R1-12 single-family
residential.
         (d)   The size of the flag portion of a lot shall conform to the
minimum lot size requirement of the zone in which the lot is located.
         (e)   No building or structure shall be located within the staff
portion of a flag lot.
         (f)   The front yard of a flag lot shall be on the side of the flag
portion which connects to the staff. Yard setbacks shall conform to the setback
requirements of the zone in which the flag lot is located.
         (g)   A main building shall be located no more than 250 feet from a
fire hydrant, measured along a public or private right-of-way or along the
staff portion of a flag lot. An easement for any fire hydrant located on
private property shall be provided to the city for access to and maintenance of
the hydrant.
         (h)   Upon review the city may require installation of curb, gutter
and other drainage control measures in the staff portion of a flag lot to
prevent runoff from entering neighboring properties.
         (i)   Clear address signage shall be installed and maintained at the
street by the owner, including notice that the driveway is a private right-of-
way.
         (j)   Before a flag lot is approved the town's Utility Department must
approve the design and location of all facilities needed to accommodate a
single-family dwelling. Construction of the approved facilities must be
complete before a building permit will be issued for the lot.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020; Am. Ord. 2021-05, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2022-
10, passed 6-13-2022; Am. Ord. 2023-08, passed 4-10-2023; Am. Ord. 2024-07,
passed 3-11-2024; Am. Ord. 2024-16, passed 9-16-2024)
§ 152.028 COMMERCIAL AND MIXED-USE OVERLAY DISTRICTS.
   (A)   General purpose. The purpose of the Commercial and Mixed-Use Districts
is to provide for a variety of commercial and select residential areas, each
suited to specific retail, service, entertainment, and residential uses in
order to maintain compatibility with adjacent uses. These districts are
intended to provide attractive, well-designed developments that are
appropriately located along primary roadways and pedestrian facilitates to
serve large volumes of customers.
   (B)   Commercial and Mixed-Use Overlay Districts.
      (1)   Neighborhood Commercial District (C-1). This district is intended
to provide convenient locations for small scale retail or service related
establishments. These locations are to provide services and goods primarily for
the surrounding neighborhood and are not intended to draw customers from the
entire community. The location of uses in this district are limited to the
intersection of a collector street and local street or greater.
      (2)   Community Commercial District (C-2). This district is intended to
provide a range of retail sales and personal, professional and business
services required to meet the daily demands of the larger community. This
district may also act as a transition between high-density, centrally located
commercial activities customarily found in the Central Business District, and
heavier commercial/business uses found along the major highways. Businesses in
this district require high visibility and access along primary roadways.
      (3)   Regional Commercial District (C-3). This district is intended to
provide for major business groupings and regional-size shopping centers that
serve a population ranging from the overall community to the traveling public.
These centers may feature a flexible mix of large traffic generators such as
home improvement stores, department stores, restaurants, lodging and offices.
Businesses in this district are predominantly located along major highways,
maintain sufficient parking, and are buffered from traditional residential
neighborhoods.
      (4)   Central Business District (CBD). This district provides an office,
retail and business services area that serves the entire community. Uses are
allowed which complement the central downtown area and are suited to high
vehicular and pedestrian traffic areas. The CBD should also be a focal point
for meeting the needs of tourists visiting the community and provide a strong
community identity through design standards and main street activities.
      (5)   Mixed-Use Overlay District (MU).
         (a)   This overlay district is intended to require both residential
and non-residential uses, either vertically or horizontally, and to promote
site and building design that accommodates multimodal travel that creates
opportunities to live and work within the central downtown area.
         (b)   The mixed-use overlay district shall be utilized as an overlay
zone. Land classified in the mixed-use overlay district shall be limited to
those areas located within the CBD zoning district. Property so classified
shall be identified on the zoning map by both the underlying CBD district and
the mixed-use overlay designation. The mixed-use regulations set forth in this
section shall be in addition to those regulations set forth in the underlying
CBD district. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the mixed-
use overlay district and the provisions of the CBD district, the provisions of
the mixed-use overlay district shall prevail. If the mixed-use overlay district
is silent in relation to any development standard, the development standard
identified in the underlying CBD zone shall prevail.
   (C)   Commercial use and mixed-use overlay standards.
Table 2.3-1: Table of Allowed Uses for Commercial and Mixed-Use Overlay
Districts, lists land uses and indicates whether they are permitted by right or
with approval of a conditional use permit, or prohibited in each zoning
district. The Use Table also includes references to additional use-specific
standards that may be applicable to that use. The organization headings and
individual abbreviations utilized in the table are explained as follows:
      (1)   Use category. The "use categories" are intended merely as an
organizational tool and are not regulatory. These use categories simply help to
organize the list of "specific use types" into common groupings for ease of
reference.
      (2)   Specific use type. The "specific use types" are regulatory and
function as the basis for defining present and future land uses that are
appropriate in each zoning district. Rather than list every possible individual
land use type, this list classifies individual land uses and activities into
specific use types based on common functional, product or physical
characteristics; such as the type and amount of activity, the type of customers
or residents, and how goods or services are sold or delivered and site
conditions. Further definitions of each specific use type can be found in §§
152.035 through 152.037.
      (3)   Permitted uses. "P" in a cell indicates that the use is allowed by
right in that zoning district.
      (4)   Conditional uses. "C" in a cell indicates that the use is allowed
in the respective zoning district only if reviewed and approved in accordance
with the procedures of §
152.091.
      (5)   Not permitted. "NP" in a cell indicates that the use is prohibited
in that zoning district.
      (6)   Use-specific standards. Section numbers listed in the "Supplemental
Use Regulations" column denote the location of additional regulations that are
applicable to the specific use type; however, provisions in other sections of
this chapter may also apply.
      (7)   Non-specified uses. When a use cannot be reasonably classified into
a specific use type, or appears to fit into multiple specific use types, the
Zoning Administrator is authorized to determine the most similar and thus most
appropriate specific use type based on the actual or projected characteristics
of the individual use or activity (including but not limited to size, scale,
operating characteristics and external impacts) in relationship to the specific
use type definitions provided in §§ 152.035 through 152.037. Appeal of the
Administrator's decision may be made to the Board of Adjustment following the
procedures under §
152.086(K).
Table 2.3-1: Table of Allowed Uses for Commercial and Mixed-Use Overlay
Districts
                               P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use
Use Category Specific Use Type NP = Not Permitted
                               Commercial and Mixed-Use Zoning Districts
                               C-1 C-2 C-3 CBD MU Supplemental Use Regulations
Table 2.3-1: Table of Allowed Uses for Commercial and Mixed-Use Overlay Districts
                                                     P = Permitted Use C =
                                                     Conditional Use
                                                     NP = Not Permitted
Use Category                          Specific Use   Commercial and Mixed-Use
                                      Type           Zoning Districts
                                                     C- C- C-        Supplemental
                                                     1  2  3  CBD MU Use
                                                                     Regulations
                                      Assisted       P  P  NP C   P  §
                                      Living Center                  152.045(D)
                                      Boarding/      NP P  C  NP  NP  
                                      Shelter Care
                                      Dwelling,      P  P  NP C   P   
                                      Live/Work
                                      Dwelling,      NP NP NP C   P   
Residential Use Category              Multi-Family
                                      Dwelling,
                                      Single-Family  NP NP NP NP  P   
                                      Attached
                                      Nursing Home   P  P  NP C   P  §
                                                                     152.045(D)
                                      Vacation Home  NP NP NP C   P  §
                                      Rentals                        152.045(BB)
                                      Arboretum or
                                      Botanical      NP P  P  P   P   
                                      Garden
                                      Assembly Hall/ NP P  P  P   P   
                                      Auditorium
                                      Bus Terminal   NP C  C  C   C   
                                      Campground     NP C  P  NP  NP §
                                                                     152.045(I)
                                      Cemetery       NP C  C  NP  NP  
                                      Child Care,    C  P  P  P   P  §
                                      Center                         152.045(J)
                                      College or     NP P  P  P   P  §
                                      University                     152.045(X)
                                      Community
                                      Playfields and NP P  P  P   P   
                                      Parks
Public and Semi-Public Use Category   Community
                                      Recreation     P  P  P  P   P   
                                      Center
                                      Crematorium or NP P  P  NP  NP  
                                      Funeral Parlor
                                      Fraternal or
                                      Social Club,   C  P  P  P   P   
                                      Nonprofit
                                      Government
                                      Offices and    P  P  P  P   P   
                                      Civic
                                      Buildings
                                      Health Care/
                                      Medical        NP P  P  P   P   
                                      Facility or
                                      Clinic
                                      Hospitals      NP P  P  P   P   
                                      Library        P  P  P  P   P   
                                      Museum,
                                      Cultural       NP P  P  P   P   
                                      Facility
                                      Public Safety  P  P  P  P   P   
                                      Facility
                                      Religious      P  P  P  P   P  §
                                      Assembly                       152.045(V)
                                      School,        C  C  C  C   C  §
                                      Boarding                       152.045(X)
                                      School, Public                 §
                                      or Private, K- C  C  C  C   C  152.045(X)
                                      8
                                      School, Public                 §
                                      or Private, 9- C  C  C  C   C  152.045(X)
Public and Semi-Public Use Category  12
(Cont.)                               Social Service C  C  C  C   C   
                                      Facility
                                      Utility
                                      Facility and   C  C  C  C   C   
                                      Service Yard,
                                      Major
                                      Utility
                                      Facility,      P  P  P  P   P   
                                      Minor
                                      Wireless
                                      Facility
                                      (including     C  C  C  C   C  §
                                      Tower and                      152.045(CC)
                                      Supporting
                                      Facilities)
                                      Alcoholic
                                      Beverages,     NP P  P  P   P   
                                      Retail Sale
                                      Animal Kennel/ NP C  P  NP  NP §
                                      Shelter                        152.045(C)
                                      Animal,                        §
                                      Hospital/      NP C  C  C   NP 152.045(C)
                                      Veterinarian
                                      Vehicle/Boat,  NP P  P  P   P  §
                                      Rentals                        152.045(G)
                                      Vehicle/Boat,  NP C  P  NP  NP §
                                      Repair Minor                   152.045(F)
                                      Vehicle/Boat,                  §
                                      Sales and      NP C  P  NP  NP 152.045(G)
                                      Leasing
                                      Bar, Lounge,   NP P  P  P   P   
                                      or Tavern
                                      Business       C  P  P  P   P   
                                      Services
                                      Car Wash       NP P  P  NP  NP  
                                      Coffee Shop/   P  P  P  P   P   
Commercial Use Category               Cafe
                                      Coffee Shop/                   §
                                      Cafe with      NP P  P  C   C  152.045(M)
                                      Drive Through
                                      Commercial
                                      Entertainment, NP C  P  C   C   
                                      Indoor
                                      Commercial
                                      Entertainment, NP C  C  C   C   
                                      Outdoor
                                      Convenience    P  P  P  P   P  §
                                      Store                          152.045(L)
                                      Farmers
                                      Market,        C  P  P  P   P   
                                      Permanent
                                      Feed Store     C  P  P  NP  NP  
                                      Financial      C  P  P  P   P   
                                      Institution
                                      Financial
                                      Institution,   NP P  P  C   P  §
                                      with Drive                     152.045(M)
                                      Through
                                      Fitness and    C  P  P  P   P   
                                      Sports Center
                                      General
                                      Personal       P  P  P  P   P   
                                      Services
                                      General
                                      Personal       NP P  P  C   P  §
                                      Services with                  152.045(M)
                                      Drive Through
                                      General
                                      Recreation,    NP C  P  P   P   
                                      Indoor
                                      Hotel or Motel NP P  P  P   P   
                                      Instructional
                                      Services or    NP P  P  C   C   
                                      Trade Schools
                                      Microbrewery,
                                      Craft          NP P  P  P   P  §
                                      Distillery or                  152.045(R)
                                      Tasting Room
                                      Movie Theater  NP P  P  P   P   
                                      Nightclub      NP C  C  C   C   
                                      Non-Chartered
                                      Financial
                                      Institution    NP P  P  C   C   
                                      (Check
                                      Cashing)
                                      Nursery,       NP C  C  NP  NP  
Commercial Use Category (Cont.        Commercial
                                      Office
                                      Business or    C  P  P  P   P   
                                      Professional
                                      Parking Lots
                                      and Parking    NP P  P  P   P   
                                      Structure
                                      Restaurant     C  P  P  P   P   
                                      Restaurant,                    §
                                      with Drive     NP P  P  C   C  152.045(M)
                                      Through
                                      Retail,        P  P  P  P   P   
                                      General
                                      Retail,                        §
                                      General with   NP P  P  C   C  152.045(M)
                                      Drive Through
                                      Retail, Large  NP P  P  C   C   
                                      Retail, Smoke/ NP P  P  P   P   
                                      Vape Shop
                                      Recreational   NP C  C  NP  NP §
                                      Vehicle Park                   152.045(U)
                                      Self-Storage,  NP C  C  NP  NP §
                                      Indoor                         152.045(Y)
                                      Service        NP P  P  P   P  §
                                      Station                        152.045(Z)
                                      Service                        §
                                      Station with   NP C  P  C   C  152.045(Z)
                                      Car Wash
                                      Tour Services  NP P  P  P   P  §
                                                                     152.045(AA)
                                      Building
                                      Materials      NP P  P  C   C   
                                      Sales, Indoor
                                      Retail
Industrial Use Category               Building
                                      Materials      NP C  C  NP  NP  
                                      Sales, Outdoor
                                      or Wholesale
                                      Heavy Rental,  NP C  C  NP  NP  
                                      Outdoor
 
   (D)   Commercial and mixed-use development standards. The following
development standards identified in
Table 2.3-2 apply to all principal uses and structures in commercial and mixed-
use overlay districts, except as otherwise expressly stated in this code.
Table 2.3-2: Commercial and Mixed-Use Overlay Districts Development
Standards
Zoning District C-1 C-2 C-3 CBD MU
Table 2.3-2: Commercial and Mixed-Use Overlay Districts Development Standards
Zoning District                         C-1    C-2   C-3   CBD    MU
Lot Dimensions,   Size of Use or User   25,000 -     -     -      7,000 (min)
maximum           (square feet)
Residential Density, minimum            X      X     X     w/ CUP 3 units
                  Front, (feet)         15     20[1] 20[1] 15[2]  0[1]
                  Side, (feet)          10[2]  15[2] 15[2] 15[2]  0[1]
                  Side, (feet) Adjacent 20[1]  30[1] 30[1] 30[1]  30[1][3]
Setbacks, minimum to Residential
                  Rear, (feet)          10     20    20    10[4]  10[4]
                  Rear, (feet) Adjacent 20     30    30    30     30[3]
                  to Residential
Lot Coverage, maximum (%)               35     50    50    -      -
Building Height, maximum (feet)         30     35    45    30     35[5]
[1]    Front and side setback for street facing parking areas shall be a
minimum of 15 feet.
[2]    Zero setbacks are permitted for structures if adjacent structures also
have zero setbacks and regulations of the building code in force at the time
of the review are met.
[3]    Fifteen foot setbacks are permitted if adjacent parcel is zoned RM.
[4]    Rear setback can be reduced to five feet if adjacent to a public
alley.
[5]    Building height may be increased to 45 feet for development that
contains vertical mixed-use with residential above ground floor commercial
uses.
   (E)   Commercial and mixed-use site and architectural design guidelines. The
commercial and mixed-use design guidelines contained in this section have been
established to: create an attractive and functional setting for businesses
located along primary gateway roadway corridors; create and maintain an
efficient, functional, safe and pleasant built environment for residents and
visitors; and promote attractive, high quality development that will support
and enhance the greater community.
      (1)   Applicability.
         (a)   These requirements shall apply to development of new buildings
or renovation of existing buildings within any Commercial and Mixed-Use Overlay
Zoning District that has frontage along State Route 389 in the town, unless
otherwise specified within this section. In the case of mixed-use buildings,
the standards of this section and the standards of §
152.045(E), shall both apply.
         (b)   These guidelines will be used by town staff and decision-making
bodies as a framework for evaluating development proposals and for commenting
on the design aspects of those proposed projects. The town general development
and subdivision regulations should also be referenced for additional site
design standards specifically applicable to multi-family and commercial
subdivision developments.
      (2)   Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited within any
Commercial and Mixed-Use Overlay Zoning District that has frontage, or abuts,
along State Route 389 or Airport Avenue from State Route 389 to the Colorado
City Municipal Airport:
         (a)   Adult entertainment businesses;
         (b)   Marijuana dispensary;
         (c) Tobacco/Vape Shops;
         (d)   Massage parlors; and
         (e)   Tattoo parlors.
      (3)   Architectural guidelines.
         (a)   Natural materials and deep earthtone colors are preferred, and
design elements should not consist primarily of metal, glass, plastic, highly
reflective materials and bright colors. Such materials may have limited
application in trim or accent areas, but should not be predominant visual
elements of the building(s) or site improvements.
         (b)   Large bland monolithic facades or rooflines and repetition of
very simple details which become monotonous in character should be avoided.
Building elevations should create a unique character which is emphasized
through interesting architectural details or façade articulation in each
component. For example, windows may be arched or rectangular, bayed out or
recessed, have raised borders, awnings, planter boxes or shutters.
         (c)   All building facades should be designed with architecturally
finished materials, with the following recommended primary façade building
materials:
            1.   Modular masonry materials such as brick, block, and stone;
            2.   Precast concrete or aggregate panels with a decorative finish;
            3.   Stucco or stucco-like materials;
            4.   Wood, provided the surfaces are finished for exterior use and
wood of proven exterior durability; or
            5.   Other materials as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
      (4)   Site design/orientation guidelines.
         (a)   Buildings, structures, open space areas and other features shall
be oriented to protect and/or enhance major vistas and panoramas that give
special emphasis to mountains, mesas, and special man-made or natural
landmarks.
         (b)   On-site pedestrian walks shall be provided to connect street
sidewalks to primary commercial and mixed-use building entries by the most
direct route practicable. Multi-building developments shall minimize auto/
pedestrian conflicts and maximize convenient pedestrian access between
buildings.
         (c)   Openings for vehicular uses, such as garage door bays used to
access vehicles into and out of a building for repair or storage, must be
located on facades that do not face the primary street.
      (5)   Circulation.
         (a)   Developments along ADOT controlled roadways shall complete a
traffic study analysis, including access needs, traffic control needs, highway
expansion needs, drainage management plan, and/or a cost sharing plan. ADOT
approval will be required as part of the development plan approval process.
         (b)   Access points along primary gateway roadways shall be placed and
designed in accordance with ADOT and/or town requirements.
      (6)   Utilities. All on-site electric utility and all other communication
and utility lines for buildings shall be placed underground.
   (F)   Additional development standards.
      (1)   Setback and height exceptions. See §§ 152.035 through 152.037 for
additional development and design regulations.
      (2)   Parking and loading requirements. See §
152.056 for additional development and design regulations.
      (3)   Landscaping and screening requirements. See §
152.057 for additional development and design regulations.
      (4)   Signage requirements. See §
152.058 for additional development and design regulations.
      (5)   Exterior lighting requirements. See §
152.059 for additional development and design regulations.
      (6)   Further reference, as appropriate, should be given to the town
Uniform Building and Fire Codes, general development and subdivision
guidelines, floodplain management ordinance, and engineering design standards.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020; Am. Ord. 2021-05, passed - -)
§ 152.029 BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   General purpose. The purpose of the Business and Industrial Districts
is to provide areas that promote employment opportunities for existing and
future residents of the town and surrounding communities, while also protecting
desired or established residential and commercial areas from the potential
objectionable influences these uses may create.
   (B)   Business and Industrial Districts.
      (1)   Business Park District (BP). This district is intended to provide
sites for a range of business research and business park uses, including office
and administrative uses, designed to be conducted wholly within enclosed
buildings. Light manufacturing uses that complement the business park or
research park use that are free from nuisance factors may be permitted if
pertinent to the primary use. This district encourages the development of
attractive buildings in a campus type setting on well-landscaped sites which
may be close to residential areas.
      (2)   Service Commercial District (SC). This district is intended to
allow more intense business uses which are compatible with the developed local
economy. These uses generally require unique services such as truck delivery,
outdoor storage, major motor vehicle or boat repair, light manufacturing, or
other activities or operations conducted outside an enclosed building or
structure. Because of the character and intensity of these uses, this district
requires public services and should be appropriately located on primary
roadways or near major highways.
      (3)   Industrial Park District (IP). The intent of this district is to
provide for heavier or more intense industrial uses in areas which do not
encroach on the community's residential environment. Uses in this district
generally include manufacturing and industrial activities that may generate
nuisances that cannot be adequately mitigated on site. The IP district is not
appropriate adjacent to any residential district.
   (C)   Business and industrial use standards. Table 2.4-1: Table of Allowed
Uses for Business and Industrial Districts, lists land uses and indicates
whether they are permitted by right or with approval of a conditional use
permit, or prohibited in each zoning district. The Use Table also includes
references to additional use-specific standards that may be applicable to that
use. The organization headings and individual abbreviations utilized in the
table are explained as follows:
      (1)   Use category. The “use categories” are intended merely as an
organizational tool and are not regulatory. These use categories simply help to
organize the list of “specific use types” into common groupings for ease of
reference.
      (2)   Specific use type. The “specific use types” are regulatory and
function as the basis for defining present and future land uses that are
appropriate in each zoning district. Rather than list every possible individual
land use type, this list classifies individual land uses and activities into
specific use types based on common functional, product or physical
characteristics; such as the type and amount of activity, the type of customers
or residents, and how goods or services are sold or delivered and site
conditions. Further definitions of each specific use type can be found in §§
152.135 through
152.137.
      (3)   Permitted uses. “P” in a cell indicates that the use is allowed by
right in that zoning district.
      (4)   Conditional uses. “C” in a cell indicates that the use is allowed
in the respective zoning district only if reviewed and approved in accordance
with the procedures of §
152.091.
      (5)   Not permitted. “NP” in a cell indicates that the use is prohibited
in that zoning district.
      (6)   Use-specific standards. Section numbers listed in the “Supplemental
Use Regulations” column denote the location of additional regulations that are
applicable to the specific use type; however, provisions in other sections of
this chapter may also apply.
      (7)   Non-specified uses. When a use cannot be reasonably classified into
a specific use type, or appears to fit into multiple specific use types, the
Zoning Administrator is authorized to determine the most similar and thus most
appropriate specific use type based on the actual or projected characteristics
of the individual use or activity (including but not limited to size, scale,
operating characteristics and external impacts) in relationship to the specific
use type definitions provided in §§
152.135 through
152.137. Appeal of the Administrator's decision may be made to the Board of
Adjustment following the procedures under §
152.086(K).
Table 2.4-1: Table of Allowed Uses for Business and Industrial Districts
                               P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use NP = Not
Use Category Specific Use Type Permitted
                               Business and Industrial Zoning Districts
                               BP SC IP Supplemental Use Regulations
Table 2.4-1: Table of Allowed Uses for Business and Industrial Districts
                                                P = Permitted Use C =
                                                Conditional Use NP = Not
                                                Permitted
Use Category            Specific Use Type       Business and Industrial Zoning
                                                Districts
                                                BP SC IP Supplemental Use
                                                         Regulations
Residential Use         Dwelling, Live/Work     NP C  NP  
Category
                        Bus Terminal            P  P  P   
                        Campground              NP C  NP §
                                                         152.045(I)
                        Cemetery                P  P  NP  
                        Crematorium or Funeral  P  P  NP  
                        Parlor
                        Government Offices and  P  P  P   
                        Civic Buildings
                        Hospitals               P  P  NP  
Public and Semi Public  Public Safety Facility  P  P  P   
Use Category            Religious Assembly      P  P  P  §
                                                         152.045(V)
                        Solar Generation        P  P  P   
                        Facility
                        Utility Facility and    C  C  P   
                        Service Yard, Major
                        Utility Facility, Minor P  P  P   
                        Wireless Facility                §
                        (including Tower and    P  P  P  152.045(CC)
                        Supporting Facilities)
                        Adult Entertainment     NP NP C  §
                        Business                         152.045(B)
                        Animal Training         NP P  P  §
                                                         152.045(C)
                        Animal Kennel/Shelter   NP P  P  §
                                                         152.045(C)
                        Animal Hospital/        C  P  P  §
                        Veterinarian                     152.045(C)
                        Vehicle/Boat, Rentals   P  P  NP §
                                                         152.045(G)
                        Vehicle/Boat, Repair    NP P  P  §
                        Major                            152.045(E)
                        Vehicle/Boat, Repair    P  P  P  §
                        Minor                            152.045(F)
                        Vehicle/Boat, Sales and P  P  NP §
                        Leasing                          152.045(G)
                        Bar, Lounge, or Tavern  P  P  C   
                        Business Services       P  P  C   
                        Car Wash                P  P  NP  
                        Commercial              P  P  NP  
                        Entertainment, Indoor
                        Commercial              C  C  P   
                        Entertainment, Outdoor
                        Convenience Store       P  P  P  §
                                                         152.045(L)
                        Farmers Market,         P  P  P   
                        Permanent
                        Feed Store              P  P  P   
                        Fitness and Sports      P  P  NP  
                        Center
                        Flea Market             P  P  P   
                        General Personal        C  P  NP  
                        Services
                        General Recreation,     P  P  C   
Commercial Use Category Indoor
                        General Recreation,     NP C  P   
                        Outdoor
                        Instructional Services  P  P  P   
                        or Trade Schools
                        Medical Marijuana                §
                        Dispensary, Operation   NP C  NP 152.045(Q)
                        or Cultivation
                        Microbrewery or Craft   NP P  C  §
                        Distillery                       152.045(R)
                        Non-Chartered Financial
                        Institution (Check      NP P  NP  
                        Cashing)
                        Nursery, Commercial     NP P  P   
                        Office Business or      P  P  P   
                        Professional
                        Parking Lots and        P  P  P   
                        Parking Structure
                        Restaurant              P  P  P   
                        Restaurant, with Drive  P  P  P  §
                        Through                          152.045(M)
                        Retail, General         NP P  C   
                        Retail, General with    NP P  C  §
                        Drive Through                    152.045(M)
                        Retail, Large           C  P  NP  
                        Retail, Smoke/Vape Shop NP P  NP  
                        Retail, Pawn Shop       NP P  NP  
                        Self-Storage, Indoor    P  P  P  §
                                                         152.045(Y)
                        Service Station         P  P  NP §
                                                         152.045(Z)
                        Service Station with    P  P  NP §
                        Car Wash                         152.045(Z)
                        Tour Services           P  P  P  §
                                                         152.045(AA)
                        Wholesale Establishment P  P  P   
                        Assembly, Light         P  P  P   
                        Auctions, Indoor        P  P  P   
                        Auto Wrecking and       NP NP P   
                        Salvage Yard
                        Building Materials      P  P  P   
                        Sales, Indoor Retail
                        Building Materials
                        Sales, Outdoor or       NP P  P   
                        Wholesale
                        Distribution Yard,      NP NP P   
                        Outdoor
                        Distribution/
                        Warehousing Center,     C  NP P   
                        Indoor
Industrial Use Category Heavy Rental, Outdoor   NP P  P   
                        Indoor Storage (Boat,   P  P  P  §
                        RV)                              152.045(F)(3)
                        Manufacturing, Heavy    NP NP P   
                        Manufacturing, Light    P  P  P   
                        Outside Storage (Boat,  NP C  P  §
                        RV)                              152.045(T)
                        Recycling Center        NP NP P   
                        Research Laboratory     P  P  P   
                        Resource Extraction     NP NP C   
                        Truck Stop              NP P  P   
                        Waste Facility,         NP NP C   
                        Landfill
                        Waste Facility,         NP NP C   
                        Transfer Station
                        Wholesale Establishment P  P  P   
   
   (D)   Business and industrial development standards. The following
development standards identified in Table 2.4-2 apply to all principal uses and
structures in Business and Industrial Districts, except as otherwise expressly
stated in this code. General exceptions to these regulations and rules for
measuring compliance can be found in §§
152.135 through
152.137. Regulations governing accessory uses and structures can be found in §
152.046.
Table 2.4-2: Business and Industrial Districts Development Standards
Zoning District BP SC IP
Table 2.4-2: Business and Industrial Districts Development Standards
Zoning District                                 BP  SC  IP
Lot Dimensions, minimum Lot width (feet)        60  -   75
                        Front, (feet)           201 201 301
                        Side, (feet)            152 152 201, 2
                        Side, (feet)            301 501 NP
Setbacks, minimum       Adjacent to Residential
                        Rear, (feet)            15  15  20
                        Rear, (feet)            30  50  75
                        Adjacent to Residential
Lot Coverage, maximum (%)                       50  60  -
Building Height, maximum (feet)                 30  40  50
1   Front and side setback for street facing parking areas shall be a minimum
of 15 feet.
2   Zero setbacks are permitted for structures if adjacent structures also
have zero setbacks and regulations of the building code in force at the time
of the review are met.
 
   (E)   Business and industrial site and architectural design guidelines. The
business and industrial design guidelines contained in this section have been
established to: recognize the unique needs and characteristics of development
in business and industrial use settings; protect and promote long-term economic
vitality through the promotion of high quality development; and minimize
adverse impacts to existing neighborhoods and anticipated growth areas.
      (1)   Applicability.
         (a)   These requirements shall apply to development of new buildings
or renovation of existing buildings within any Business and Industrial Zoning
District, unless otherwise specified within this section.
         (b)   These guidelines will be used by town staff and decision-making
bodies as a framework for evaluating development proposals and for commenting
on the design aspects of those proposed projects. The town general development
and subdivision regulations should also be referenced for additional site
design standards specifically applicable to commercial subdivision
developments.
      (2)   Service Commercial (SC) Zoning District development guidelines. The
Service Commercial Zoning District allows for the placement of a wide range of
business and employment type uses. Given its service related function, this
district is often found in close proximity to established residential
neighborhoods. For these reasons, there is a greater degree of attention given
to how this district relates to adjacent uses. The following concepts shall
serve as a framework to guide development within the Service Commercial Zoning
District.
         (a)   Screening adjacent to residential. Any uses in an SC Zoning
District which abuts or is across a street from a residential use or zone shall
provide a landscape buffer at least 15 feet in width. The landscape buffer
shall include a minimum of one, 24-inch box, spreading tree per 30 linear feet.
A 100% opaque fence or engineered concrete/masonry block wall shall also be
installed on the residential side of the landscape buffer along all common
parcel boundaries.
      (3)   Industrial Park (IP) Zoning District development guidelines.
Development adjacent to residential. The designation of an IP zoning district
adjacent to a residential development or zoning district is prohibited.
      (4)   Properties with frontage along primary gateway roadway corridors.
Development of new buildings or renovation of existing buildings within any
Business and Industrial Zoning District that has frontage along State Route 389
in the town shall adhere to the following guidelines:
         (a)   Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited within any
Commercial and Mixed-Use Overlay Zoning District that has frontage, or abuts,
along State Route 389 or Airport Avenue from State Route 389 to the Colorado
City Municipal Airport:
            1.   Adult entertainment businesses;
            2.   Auto wrecking and salvage yard;
            3.   Marijuana Dispensaries;
            4.   Tobacco/Vape Shops;
            5.   Massage parlors; and
            6.   Tattoo parlors.
         (b)   Architectural guidelines.
            1.   Natural materials and deep earthtone colors are preferred, and
design elements should not consist primarily of metal, glass, plastic, highly
reflective materials and bright colors. Such materials may have limited
application in trim or accent areas, but should not be predominant visual
elements of the building(s) or site improvements.
            2.   Large bland monolithic façades or rooflines and repetition of
very simple details which become monotonous in character should be avoided.
Building elevations should create a unique character which is emphasized
through interesting architectural details or façade articulation in each
component. For example, windows may be arched or rectangular, bayed out or
recessed, have raised borders, awnings, planter boxes or shutters.
            3.   All building facades should be designed with architecturally
finished materials, with the following recommended primary façade building
materials:
               a.   Modular masonry materials such as brick, block, and stone;
               b.   Precast concrete or aggregate panels with a decorative
finish;
               c.   Stucco or stucco-like materials;
               d.   Wood, provided the surfaces are finished for exterior use
and wood of proven exterior durability; or
               e.   Other materials as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
         (c)   Site design/orientation guidelines.
            1.   Buildings, structures, open space areas and other features
shall be oriented to protect and/or enhance major vistas and panoramas that
give special emphasis to mountains, mesas, and special man-made or natural
landmarks.
            2.   Multi-building developments shall minimize auto/pedestrian
conflicts and maximize convenient pedestrian access between buildings.
         (d)   Circulation.
            1.   Developments along ADOT controlled roadways shall complete a
traffic study analysis, including access needs, traffic control needs, highway
expansion needs, drainage management plan, and/or a cost sharing plan. ADOT
approval will be required as part of the development plan approval process.
            2.   Access points along primary gateway roadways shall be placed
and designed in accordance with ADOT and/or town requirements.
   (F)   Additional development standards.
      (1)   Setback and height exceptions. See §§
152.135 through
152.137 for additional development and design regulations.
      (2)   Parking and loading requirements. See §
152.056 for additional development and design regulations.
      (3)   Landscaping and screening requirements. See §
152.057 for additional development and design regulations.
      (4)   Signage requirements. See §
152.058 for additional development and design regulations.
      (5)   Exterior lighting requirements. See §
152.059 for additional development and design regulations.
      (6)   Further reference, as appropriate, should be given to the town
Uniform Building and Fire Codes, general development and subdivision
guidelines, floodplain management ordinance, and engineering design standards.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020; Am. Ord. 2021-05, passed - -)
§ 152.030 PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT (PAD) DISTRICT.
   (A)   Request on or after May 13, 2020. On or after May 13, 2020, any
request for a Planned Development (PD) zoning district or for modification or
change in an approved PD zoning district shall be made pursuant to this
section.
   (B)   General purpose. A Planned Area Development (PAD) is intended to allow
an applicant maximum flexibility in exchange for a more creative approach to
land planning and building design that could not be achieved through strict
adherence to the terms of this code. PADs may be approved pursuant to the
procedure and approval criteria in §
152.090.
   (C)   Applicability.
      (1)   A Planned Area Development District shall conform to the general
plan as adopted or amended from time to time, shall conform to all regulations
pertaining to land development within this code and the subdivision ordinance,
and all other rules, regulations, specifications and standards set forth in all
other applicable town codes, unless specific deviations are approved by the
Town Council during the PAD approval process.
      (2)   The area for a PAD shall consist of a single parcel of land or a
contiguous group of parcels with a combined minimum size of five acres.
   (D)   Standards eligible for modification. Unless otherwise expressly
modified as part of the PAD approval process, PADs shall utilize the base
zoning districts and all applicable standards established in this code to
regulate all proposed uses and development. The Town Council is authorized to
approve PADs that deviate from strict compliance with specified standards if
they determine that the resulting development satisfies the approval criteria
of division (E) below. The PAD standards may be more or less restrictive than
those in the code. PAD zoning may be used to:
      (1)   Specify the location of base zoning districts and define standards
for the modification of these locations within the specified PAD area.
      (2)   Define which uses permitted by right or by conditional use permit
within a base zoning district (as specified in Tables 2.2-1, 2.3-1, 2.4-1, and
2.5-1) will be permitted within said PAD zoning districts. PAD zoning districts
may not include uses that are not permitted within a base zoning district, but
may modify or define standards for the operation and performance of permitted
uses within PAD zoning districts.
      (3)   Define development standards pertaining to the size, dimensions,
height, lot coverage, placement, or setback of uses. However, the total number
of dwelling units in a PAD plan shall not exceed the maximum number permitted
by the general plan density for the total area of the PAD designated for
residential use.
      (4)   Specify the location, extent, and design standards for open space,
landscaping, amenities, screening and buffers, and signage.
      (5)   Specify the location and design of public/private streets, drives,
parking, pedestrian, and bikeways.
      (6)   Specify the timing, sequencing, and phasing of development,
including coordinating the type, location, and intensity of development
permitted with the construction and availability of public facilities and
services.
      (7)   Provide for the construction of public improvements and facilities
onsite or within public easements and rights-of-way abutting the site as
required to serve and benefit development within the PAD area or as may be
required to mitigate impacts resulting from the development on other properties
and uses outside of the PAD area.
   (E)   Approval criteria.
      (1)   Before approving a preliminary PAD, the Commission will ensure that
the application meets the following standards:
         (a)   Conformance to the general plan. The development must conform
with the objectives of the general plan.
         (b)   Balance and integration with the neighborhood. The design shall
be integrated and compatible with the neighborhood and shall strive to be in
harmony with the scale and bulk of surrounding properties.
         (c)   Adequacy of street network. The proposed streets are suitable
and adequate to carry anticipated traffic and that the density will not
generate traffic in such amounts to overload the street network outside of the
PAD area.
         (d)   Adequacy of infrastructure. That the impact created by the
development can be accommodated by the existing infrastructure system (police
and fire protection, parks, schools, water supply, sanitary sewer, solid waste
disposal, etc.)
         (e)   Relationship to physical features. The location of buildings and
structures shall respect the natural terrain of the site and shall be
functionally integrated with any natural features of the landscape to include
the preservation of views and vistas.
         (f)   Environmental impacts. Management of environmental impacts,
including drainage, soils, and archaeological.
         (g)   Upon approval through §
152.090, the preliminary PAD shall be placed on file in the Planning Department
pending approval of the final PAD.
      (2)   (a)   Application for final PAD approval shall follow the
requirements of §
152.090 process and contain the following:
            1.   Final legal documents specifying control of common areas;
            2.   If applicable, a plat of the property as required by the
general development and subdivision regulations of the town and plan of
required documents; and
            3.   If applicable, assurance of construction and completion of
required public and private improvements in the form as specified in § 413 of
the General Development and Subdivision Regulations of the town.
         (b)   The final development plan shall include any changes,
alterations, additions or deletions requested by the Planning Commission and/or
Town Council in its grant of Preliminary PAD approval. Except for these
modifications, the final PAD shall not deviate from the approved Preliminary
PAD.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.031 AIRPORT DISTRICTS.
   (A)   General purpose. The purpose of the airport districts is to promote
and develop compatibility between airport activity and the surrounding area in
the vicinity of the town municipal airport. These districts are designed to
prohibit potential hazards and maintain public health and safety in the
vicinity of the airport by minimizing exposure to crash hazards and high noise
levels generated by airport operations and to encourage future development
which is compatible with the continued operations of the airport.
   (B)   Airport Districts and overlay zones.
      (1)   Airport Property District (AP). It is the intent of this district
to encourage utilization patterns which promote viable and long-term growth of
the town municipal airport and of airport-related business and industry.
Utilization and development patterns must be amenable to regulations, purposes
and directions of the town airport master plan plus all applicable federal,
state and local laws, ordinances and regulations.
      (2)   Colorado City Airport Overlay Zoning.  The Town of Colorado City
Municipal Airport Overlay Zones are in
Chapter 156 of the Town of Colorado City Code of Ordinances.
   (C)   Airport use standards.
      (1)   The following airport related uses shall be permitted within the AP
zoning district:
         (a)   Airport structures and facilities that are necessary for the
operation of the airport and for the control of air traffic therefrom;
         (b)   Fixed base operators (FBOs); and
         (c)   Heliports, tourism operators, and ground school training.
      (2)   All other uses in the AP district and the Colorado City Municipal
Airport overlay zones shall require a conditional use permit, special event
permit or a temporary use permit that are consistent with the Airport Master
Plan. As part of the approval process, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
give strong consideration to the recommendations and conditions forwarded to it
by the Airport Advisory Board.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use may be
made of land or water within any zone established by this chapter in such a
manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio
communication between the airport and aircraft; make it difficult for pilots to
distinguish between airport lights and others; result in glare in the eyes of
pilots using the airport; impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport or
otherwise in any way create a hazard or endanger the landing, takeoff, or
maneuvering of aircraft, intending to use the airport.
   (D)   Airport development standards.
      (1)   Site plan review and approval, as outlined in §
152.095 of this code, shall be required for all development and construction
within the specific boundaries of the airport districts and zones. All
development standards such as setbacks, heights, and lot coverage shall be
shown on the approved site plan, unless otherwise stated herein. It is required
that the Airport Advisory Board review all site plans and conditional use
permit requests and advise the Planning and Zoning Commission of any known or
potential impacts or conditions that might be caused by the proposed
development or the conditional use permit.
      (2)   Building heights within the boundaries of the airport districts and
zones shall be as set forth in the federal aviation regulations (FAR) part 77
airspace plan, the town airport master plan, and the underlying zoning
district, with no allowances for exceptions to the building height unless a
variance is granted by the town. The most restrictive guidelines shall apply.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no vegetation or tree
shall be planted or allowed to grow, or be maintained in any airport district
created by this chapter to a height in excess of the applicable height limit
herein established.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.032 SPECIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   General purpose. The purpose of the special districts is to recognize
there are unique areas within the town that require special treatment to
provide for their continuance or preservation. Unlike residential, commercial
or industrial zoning districts that exist to regulate development, special
districts provide mechanisms for the protection of undeveloped areas, federal
lands, or recreational resources that are located within the town.
   (B)   Special Districts.
      (1)   Future Development District (FD). The intent of the Future
Development District is to recognize that many areas of the town are not likely
to develop in the near future and possibly cannot be served at present with
public facilities. Therefore, any uses would require that conditions change
significantly and a change to another district would then be justified. Some
outdoor recreational uses that require minimal facilities can be permitted in
these outlying areas when properly developed and controlled.
      (2)   Federal Lands District (FL). The intent and purpose of the Federal
Lands District is to conserve natural resources, protect scenic vistas, and
provide recreational opportunities for undeveloped federal lands that are
administered by the Bureau of Land Management or other federal agencies. Land
within this district shall preclude future development, unless a significant
change in conditions occurs, and only if a change to another district is
approved pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or as directed by and
pursuant to applicable Federal law and jurisdiction. This district shall in no
way diminish, modify, amend, interfere with, or change the rights, duties and
privileges of the lands federal ownership and enjoyment as property of the
United States.
      (3)   Parks/Open Space District (POS). The intent of this district is to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the community by
protecting and preserving open space as a limited and valuable resource which
conserves natural resources, protects scenic vistas, provides recreational
opportunities, and contributes to the overall quality of life in the town.
   (C)   Parks/open space use standards.
Table 2.5-1: Table of Allowed Uses for Parks/Open Space District
                               P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use NP = Not
Use Category Specific Use Type Permitted
                               Parks/Open Space Zoning District
                               POS Supplemental Use Regulations
Table 2.5-1: Table of Allowed Uses for Parks/Open Space District
                                                       P = Permitted Use C =
                                                       Conditional Use NP = Not
                                                       Permitted
Use Category               Specific Use Type           Parks/Open Space Zoning
                                                       District
                                                       POS Supplemental Use
                                                           Regulations
                           Arboretum or Botanical      P    
                           Garden
                           Campground                  P   §
                                                           152.045(I)
                           Cemetery                    C    
                           Community Playfields and    P    
                           Parks
Public and Semi Public Use Community Recreation Center C    
Category                   Museum, Cultural Facility   C    
                           (Public)
                           Nature Preserves, Trails,   P    
                           and Trailheads
                           Public Safety Facility      P    
                           Wireless Facility               §
                           (including Tower and        C   152.045(CC)
                           Supporting Facilities)
                           Agribusiness, Entertainment C    
Agriculture Use Category   Farming
                           Agriculture, General        C    
Commercial Use Category    Golf Course, Unlighted      C    
                           Resort, Cabins, Lodges      C    
 
   (D)   Park/open space development standards.
Table 2.5-2: Park/Open Space District Development Standards
Zoning District POS
Table 2.5-2: Park/Open Space District Development Standards
Zoning District                                           POS
Lot Dimensions, maximum Size of Use or User (square feet) -
                        Front (feet)                      25
Setbacks, minimum       Side (feet)                       25
                        Rear (feet)                       25
Lot Coverage, maximum (%)                                 -
Building Height, maximum (feet)                           40
 
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.033 MEASUREMENTS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   General purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide uniform
measures for interpretation and enforcement of this code.
   (B)   Setback regulations. This section establishes setback standards to
ensure the provision of open areas for access to and around structures,
maintain natural light and ventilation for individual properties, separation of
incompatible land uses, and space for landscaping, privacy, traffic safety, and
visibility.
      (1)   Setback requirements. All structures shall conform to the setback
requirements as provided within this chapter, unless otherwise provided in
division (B)(3) below.
      (2)   Setback measurement.  Setbacks shall be measured as follows:
         (a)   Front setback. The front setback shall be measured at right
angles from the nearest point on the front property line (or edge of pavement
for lots along private streets) to the nearest wall of the structure.
         (b)   Side and street side setback. The side and street side setbacks
shall be measured at right angles from the nearest point on the side property
line to the nearest wall of the structure, establishing a setback line parallel
to the side property line, that extends between the front and rear yards.
         (c)   Rear setback. The rear setback shall be measured at right angles
from the nearest point on the rear property line to the nearest wall of the
structure, establishing a setback line parallel to the rear property line that
extends between the side yards.
      (3)   Setback encroachment. Every part of a required yard shall be
unobstructed from ground level to the sky, except as follows:
         (a)   Setback restrictions do not apply to: slabs, uncovered patios,
walks, steps, fences, hedges, or freestanding walls. Freestanding walls are
subject to any sight triangle regulations; or
         (b)   Certain architectural features and improvements may encroach
into required setbacks as follows:
            1.   Ordinary projections of window sills, cornices, eaves and
other ornamental features may project a distance not exceeding two feet into
any required yard.
            2.   Patio covers and ornamental features may project into any
required side yard, provided such features shall be a distance of at least
three feet from any lot line or setback line whichever is most restrictive.
            3.   Air conditioning units, pool pumps or similar mechanical
equipment may project into any required side yard, provided such features shall
be a distance of at least three feet from any lot line or setback line
whichever is most restrictive. Any mechanical equipment located in a required
side yard, based on the minimum requirements above, should be placed within a
side yard with no gate access to the front yard.
            4.   Vestibules, bay windows, nooks, chimneys or similar wall
projections with or without footings may encroach not more than three feet into
any required front or rear yard and not more than three feet into any required
side yard, provided the aggregate width of all such projections adjacent to any
yard does not exceed ten feet.
            5.   Uncovered open decks, patios and terraces less than 30 inches
in height may encroach into any required yard by not more than three feet.
   (C)   Height regulations. This section establishes height standards to
promote compatible transitions between differing land uses, ensure adequate
light and air to individual properties, and to accommodate good design.
      (1)   Maximum height. All structures and appurtenances shall conform to
the height requirements as provided within this chapter, unless otherwise
provided in division (C)(3) below.
      (2)   Height measurement. The maximum allowable height shall be measured
as follows:
         (a)   The vertical distance measured from the average finished grade
at the perimeter of the base of a building and/or structure to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to
the highest point of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
         (b)   For lots with slopes of 5% or more, the height of a building
and/or structure is measured as the vertical distance from the foundation point
of the front elevation to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to
the deck line of a mansard roof or to the highest point of the highest gable of
a pitch or hip roof.
      (3)   Height exceptions. Notwithstanding specific regulations provided
elsewhere in this chapter, the following uses are permitted to exceed the
height limits within any district where the use is allowed, subject to the
following requirements:
         (a)   Parapet walls or cornices may extend to a maximum of three feet
above the building height limit;
         (b)   Private communication, radio and television antennas, or
satellite dishes attached to the principal structure may only extend five feet
above the allowed maximum height of the underlying base zoning district;
         (c)   Cupolas, chimneys may project up to five feet above the allowed
maximum height of the underlying base zoning district or as required to meet
applicable building code requirements;
         (d)   Heating and ventilation equipment and all other mechanical
equipment may extend up to five feet above the maximum height limit provided
the equipment complies with screening requirements set forth in §
152.057;
         (e)   Church spires or belfries may be up to 25% or ten feet greater
than the maximum allowed height provided they are designed without provision
for occupancy and plans receive prior approval of the town;
         (f)   Flagpoles may extend to a maximum of ten feet above the allowed
maximum height of the underlying base zoning district;
         (g)   Wind generating systems and solar panels attached to a building
may extend up to five feet above the allowed maximum height of the underlying
base zoning district;
         (h)   Commercial communication facilities shall be developed in
accordance with the provisions of §
152.045(CC); and
         (i)   All appurtenances shall not be constructed for the purpose of
providing additional floor area in the building.
         (j)   Notwithstanding the height limitations shown in §
152.027, table 2.2-2 of this chapter a greater building height may be allowed
in multi-family residential RM zones pursuant to a conditional use permit in
accordance with the standards in §
152.091.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020; Am. Ord. 2022-10, passed 6-13-2022)
SUPPLEMENTARY USE STANDARDS
§ 152.045 TITLE AND AUTHORITY.
   A vibrant, dynamic community needs a variety of land use activities to
satisfy the needs of its inhabitants. Because of their particular dynamics, a
number of uses require special standards to mitigate their potential adverse
impacts on adjacent properties. It is the intent of this section to identify
those land uses and to provide specific criterion and conditions to ensure
that, if permitted, they will contribute to the health, safety, and general
welfare of the town. The requirements specified herein are in addition to those
specified in the corresponding zoning district. In the event of conflict
between these standards and the underlying zoning district standards, the
provisions of this section shall apply.
   (A)   Purpose. This section details additional site planning, development
standards, and performance standards for specific land uses listed within §§
152.025 through
152.033.
   (B)   Adult entertainment business. In addition to the requirements of §
152.091 , no conditional use permit shall be issued for an adult entertainment
business, which shall be allowed in the IP zone, unless it meets the following
additional conditions:
      (1)   The adult entertainment business is located no closer than 1,200
feet from the exterior boundaries of a Residential Zoning District or use.
      (2)   The adult entertainment business is located no closer than 1,200
feet from the exterior property lines of any public or private school having a
pre-school or kindergarten curriculum or any one or more of grades one through
12.
      (3)   The adult entertainment business is located no closer than 1,200
feet from the exterior boundaries of any park or playground.
      (4)   The adult entertainment business is located no closer than 1,200
feet from any church or non-commercial establishment owned or operated by a
bona fide religious organization.
      (5)   The adult entertainment business is located no closer than 2,000
feet from any other adult entertainment business.
      (6)   The adult entertainment business displays no sign visible from the
exterior of the business except for a sign identifying the business as an adult
entertainment business.
      (7)   The adult entertainment business excludes from its premises persons
less than 18 years of age or 21 years of age if alcohol is served.
      (8)   No materials depicting specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas shall be visible from the exterior of the adult entertainment
business.
      (9)   All distances specified in this section shall be measured in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
property line of any adult entertainment business to the nearest property line
of any other adult entertainment business, school, church, public facility,
residential district or other land use specified in this section.
   (C)   Animal kennel/shelter, hospital/veterinarian clinic, training school.
      (1)   No animals under care may be boarded outside, except for facilities
located in the IP district. Those areas in which animals are boarded shall be
fully enclosed structures and shall be sufficiently insulated so no
unreasonable noise or odor can be detected off the premises.
      (2)   All boarded animals shall be kept within a totally enclosed part of
a structure between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. except with direct
supervision associated with non-exercise or training related activities. All
outside exercise or training of animals shall be prohibited during these hours.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to facilities located in the IP
district.
      (3)   Outdoor dog runs, exercise, or training activity areas shall not be
located within 200 feet from a residentially zoned property or use.
      (4)   Outdoor runs and exercise areas shall be enclosed by a minimum six
foot fence.
      (5)   Suitable control and maintenance shall be exercised over the use,
structure or animals so that a nuisance condition is not created in terms of
excessive noise, dirt, or odor.
      (6)   In association with a required conditional use permit approval
process, the town may establish other conditions and requirements necessary to
prevent possible nuisances (i.e., location and/or size of activity areas,
fencing height and/or material, screening, sound-proofing, sanitary
requirements, or limits on the number of animals that are serviced or boarded).
      (7)   Special events such as shows, exhibitions, and contests shall only
be permitted when a temporary use permit has been secured.
   (D)   Assisted living center and nursing home.
      (1)   All facilities shall comply with all applicable federal, state and
local requirements for the location and operation of such facilities and the
provision of safe outdoor recreation areas and gross floor areas for every
person that the facility is licensed to accommodate.
      (2)   The facility shall have direct access from an arterial or collector
street.
      (3)   Facilities within any residential district shall not be located
within 1,200 feet (as measured from the property lines) of a child care
facility, a nursing home, a resident care home or a group care home facility
that are also located within any residential district.
      (4)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the state has adopted laws or
rules for the regulation of an assisted living center, then any such state law
or rule shall apply in addition to the conditions listed herein and shall
preempt any conflicting condition listed herein.
   (E)   Vehicle/boat repair, major.
      (1)   All major repair facilities shall be subject to the site plan
review and/or CUP process. In addition to standard site plan information, the
applicant shall provide a plan which shows an ability to control on-site and
prevent off-site nuisance conditions such as noise, dust, odors, vectors and
wind-blown debris.
      (2)   Accessory uses may include assembly and repair buildings, machine
shops, paint facilities, fueling and supply facilities, parking areas, vehicle/
boat lifts and incidental retail sales associated with the principal uses.
      (3)   A use may combine major repair with vehicle/boat sales, outside
storage or service stations only if these uses are permitted or conditionally
permitted and approved in that district. If combined with said uses, major
repair facilities shall additionally comply with the provisions of divisions
(G), (S), and/or (Y) of this section.
      (4)   Major repair facilities shall be located with direct access to
paved roadways that are suitable in size to allow for the efficient delivery of
vehicle and boats for repair. The paved roadway requirement of this section
shall not apply to major repair facilities located in the IP district.
      (5)   Outdoor repair areas shall be paved with concrete, asphalt, pavers,
or gravel. The provisions of this section shall not apply to major repair
facilities located in the IP district.
      (6)   Major repair facilities must be fully screened from view by a 100%
opaque fence or engineered concrete/masonry block wall that is no less than six
feet, but no more than eight feet in height.
      (7)   As part of the conditional use permit process within the BP
District, a landscaped screen of plantings may be required in combination with
a required fence or wall to further buffer and/or shield repair activities from
public view or adjacent residential districts. See §
152.057(C) for additional screening regulations. The provisions of this
division shall not apply to major repair facilities located in the IP district.
      (8)   No temporary or long-term repair parking, outdoor repair
activities, or outdoor supply/material storage that exceed the height of the
screen wall may occur within the required setback areas of the zoning district
in which the major repair facility is located. The provisions of this division
shall not apply to major repair facilities located in the IP district.
      (9)   Outdoor repair related activities shall be limited to 6:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m. within the SC district, unless modified through the CUP process.
      (10)   No pending, under repair, or repaired vehicle/boat shall be
utilized for overnight sleeping or as living accommodations.
      (11)   All exterior lighting shall comply with the lighting standards
provided within §
152.059.
      (12)   Any lawful major repair facility in existence as of May 13, 2020,
that could not be permitted or rebuilt thereafter because of zoning district
requirements shall be considered a permitted use and, accordingly, shall not be
subject to this section, unless the facility is proposed to be expanded beyond
the building or facility use footprint, whichever is greater, that existed as
of May 13, 2020. If the building or facility use footprint exceeds the allowed
threshold or if the intensity of uses increases beyond that which existed as of
May 13, 2020, the major repair facility shall be required to be brought into
compliance with all current, applicable zoning ordinance provisions.
   (F)   Vehicle/boat repair, minor.
      (1)   A use may combine a minor repair facility with a service station
only if the uses are permitted or conditionally permitted and approved in that
district. If combined with said uses, minor repair facilities shall
additionally comply with the provisions of division (Y) of this section.
      (2)   Service bay doors for minor repair facilities may not face
residential neighborhoods.
      (3)   Service and repair of boats onsite that exceed nine feet in width
by 30 feet in length is prohibited.
      (4)   Any lawful minor repair facility in existence as of May 13, 2020,
that could not be permitted or rebuilt thereafter because of zoning district
requirements shall be considered a permitted use and, accordingly, shall not be
subject to this section and/or shall not be required to obtain conditional
approval, unless the facility is proposed to be expanded beyond the building or
facility use footprint, whichever is greater, that existed as of May 13, 2020.
If the building or facility use footprint exceeds the allowed threshold or if
the intensity of uses increases beyond that which existed as of May 13, 2020,
the minor repair facility shall be required to be brought into compliance with
all current, applicable zoning ordinance provisions.
   (G)   Vehicle/boat, sales and leasing; vehicle/boat, rentals.
      (1)   A use may combine vehicle/boat sales and leasing with vehicle/boat
repair major, vehicle/boat minor or outside storage only if these uses are
permitted or conditionally permitted and approved in that district. If combined
with said uses, sales and leasing facilities shall additionally comply with the
provisions of divisions (E), (F), and (S) of this section.
      (2)   The sale and/or leasing of vehicles or boats physically onsite that
exceed nine feet in width by 30 feet in length is prohibited within the C-
2 District.
      (3)   The placement, display or storage of vehicles or boats for sale or
lease within the public right-of-way shall be prohibited.
      (4)   Sale and/or leasing areas shall be paved or graveled in compliance
with town engineering standards. The provisions of this division shall not
apply to sale and/or leasing facilities located in the IP district.
      (5)   Facilities that sell and/or lease, physically onsite, vehicles or
boats that exceed nine feet in width by 30 feet in length shall be required to
adhere to the provisions of division (T), except any part of the use fronting
on a public street shall not be required to meet the screening requirements of
said section.
      (6)   No pending, under repair, or repaired vehicle/boat shall be
utilized for overnight sleeping or as living accommodations.
      (7)   Any lawful sale and/or leasing facility in existence as of May 13,
2020, that could not be permitted or rebuilt thereafter because of zoning
district requirements shall be considered a permitted use and, accordingly,
shall not be subject to this section, unless the facility is proposed to be
expanded beyond the building or facility use footprint, whichever is greater,
that existed as of May 13, 2020. If the building or facility use footprint
exceeds the allowed threshold or if the intensity of uses increases beyond that
which existed as of May 13, 2020, the sale and/or leasing facility shall be
required to be brought into compliance with all current, applicable zoning
ordinance provisions.
   (H)   Campground. These regulations apply to campgrounds where campsites are
rented for the placement and occupancy of tents, recreational vehicles, or
camping cabins on a temporary or seasonal basis. The installation or
development of any campground shall comply with the following minimum criteria:
      (1)   All campgrounds shall be designed in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and administered through the conditional use permit and/or site
plan review process.
      (2)   Campgrounds shall not be used as permanent residences except for
that of the owner, manager or permanent maintenance personnel. In establishing
the temporary or seasonal nature of the campground, no single camping site
shall be occupied by the same party for a period of time longer than nine
continuous months in any 12 month period.
      (3)   One RV or camping cabin shall be permitted on each allowed camp
site. Camping cabins shall be designed not for use as a permanent dwelling but
as a temporary shelter for recreational camping and vacation use by visitors,
tourists, or campers. No manufactured homes or dwelling units of conventional
construction shall be permitted within the campground for living purposes
except for that of the owner, manager, or permanent maintenance personnel.
      (4)   The minimum lot or parcel size for a campground shall be five gross
acres.
      (5)   The maximum number of individual camping sites allowed shall be ten
per gross acre.
      (6)   Each camp site shall be clearly marked with an alpha or numeric
symbol on a sign which is clearly visible from an access road. All camp sites
shall be labeled on a map, which shall be provided to each campground occupant;
local police, fire, and emergency service provider; and 911 dispatch center.
      (7)   All private roads within a campground shall be well-drained,
graveled or paved, and maintained in good condition by the park owner or
manager. One-way roads shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width, all other roads
shall have a minimum travel surface of 18 feet or as required by the
International Fire Code, whichever is greater. Parking shall be prohibited on
both sides of all roads within the park.
      (8)   Each camp site shall be provided with at least one off-street
parking space.
      (9)   Street improvements for any public roads bounding the campground
shall be made as required by the Town Engineer.
      (10)   Access to all camp sites shall be from the interior of the
campground. There shall be no individual access to any camp site from a public
street.
      (11)   Required setback areas shall be preserved in their natural
condition or landscaped to provide a visual buffer to minimize any adverse
impact on abutting land uses. All camping shall be prohibited from occurring
within required setback areas.
      (12)   Each campground must provide an adequate and easily identifiable
office or registration area. The location of the office shall not interfere
with the normal flow of traffic into and out of the campground.
      (13)   Recreational amenities or social centers, which may be used for
crafts, hobbies, games, meetings, banquets and similar recreational uses shall
be of conventional site-built construction.
      (14)   Each campground may provide a place to procure food, drink,
sundries, or souvenirs to patrons of the campground only.
      (15)   Service buildings with toilet, bathing and other sanitation
facilities and utilities shall be provided as required by the town.
      (16)   Provision for on-site storm water retention / drainage and off-
site storm water drainage both entering and leaving the property shall be as
required by the Town Engineer.
      (17)   All utilities shall be placed underground. The placement of
utilities will be up to the developer. However, all utilities services shall
meet all requirements specified by the town, as well as the respective utility
companies.
      (18)   All lighting shall be in conformance with §
152.059.
      (19)   Each campground shall provide fire protection facilities as set
forth in the International Fire Code.
      (20)   Designated areas for boat and recreational vehicle storage within
the park shall be for the sole use of tenants of the campground.
      (21)   All refuse collection areas shall be completely enclosed via a
solid six-foot wall and view obstructing gate and located on a concrete
surface. Refuse collection areas shall be readily accessible to collection
vehicles, without substantially encumbering adjacent parking and vehicular
access. If the refuse collection area can be seen from the exterior of the
park, the enclosure should be softened with landscaping on its most visible
sides.
      (22)   A site plan approval application for a campground shall include
the following information:
         (a)   A written description of the proposed operation, including
proposed months of operation; desired number, types, and characteristics of
different desired camping sites; other ancillary uses existing or proposed for
the site; operational procedures (e.g., noise and nuisance control, clean-up);
and emergency access plan.
         (b)   A campground plan map, drawn to scale, and including the
existing and proposed layout; location of camp sites and camping units, roads,
parking areas, and site boundaries; existing and proposed topography (grading);
minimum required yards; existing and proposed buildings and other structures;
common recreational facilities; water and sewer systems; and stormwater
management.
   (I)   Child care, center.
      (1)   A child care center shall be licensed, certified or approved by the
State of Arizona.
      (2)   A child care home shall meet Fire Code, Building Code, zoning
ordinance and any other applicable regulations.
      (3)   Adequate off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with §
152.056.
      (4)   All child care centers shall provide adequate drop-off and waiting
space so that parents' cars are not required to stand in a public right-of-way.
At least one drop-off space, or its equivalent shall be provided for each five
children enrolled or cared for at the facility during the largest scheduled
class. Child drop-off areas shall have direct pedestrian access to the building
entrance.
      (5)   A minimum of 100 square feet of outdoor play area shall be provided
per child utilizing the outdoor play area at any given time. The total outdoor
play area shall not be less than 1,200 square feet, unless a greater amount is
required by the state. Outdoor play areas shall be in the rear or side yard,
fenced and screened in accordance with §
152.057(C).
   (J)   Child care, home.
      (1)   A child care home shall be licensed, certified or approved by the
State of Arizona.
      (2)   Child care home vehicles belonging to employees and residents are
required to park onsite, in the garage or on an approved paved driveway.
      (3)   No signage for advertising or notification of use shall be
permitted on or off the site.
      (4)   A minimum of 600 square feet of open space shall be provided for an
outdoor play area, none of which shall be located in the required front
setback.
      (5)   All outdoor recreation areas shall be completely screened and
enclosed by a six-foot-high vision obscuring fence with self-closing and self-
latching gates.
   (K)   Convenience store.
      (1)   The maximum total square footage of the building shall be 5,000
square feet; unless modified through the CUP process.
      (2)   A use may combine a convenience store with a drive-through facility
and/or service station only if both uses are permitted or conditionally
permitted and approved in that district. If combined with said uses,
convenience stores shall additionally comply with the provisions of division
(M) and/or division (Z) of this section.
   (L)   Drive-through facility. This section shall apply to all principal uses
that include a drive-through facility.
      (1)   Drive-through aisles that face or are adjacent to public streets
shall be screened from public view by a minimum three-foot tall masonry wall
that matches the primary structure.
      (2)   No drive-through aisles shall exit directly onto a public right-of-
way.
      (3)   Drive-through queuing length shall be approved in accordance with §
152.056(K)(6).
      (4)   Clearly marked pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided for each
walk-in customer access point to the facility that is located adjacent to a
drive-through lane(s).
   (M)   Group care home.
      (1)   A completed registration form shall be submitted to the Community
Development Department on a form established by the Zoning Administrator.
Registration shall become effective upon issuance of zoning clearance for the
home and shall terminate when the home use ceases. No registration/clearance
shall be accepted or approved for a home that does not comply with the
conditions listed within this section.
      (2)   Group care homes shall comply with all applicable federal, state
and local requirements for the location, development and operation of such
homes and the provision of safe outdoor recreation areas and gross floor areas
for every person that the home is licensed to accommodate.
      (3)   Group care homes shall not be located within 1,200 feet, as
measured from the property lines, of another group care home or a residential
care home facility.
      (4)   The group care home shall not involve changes in the exterior
appearance of any structure or necessitate equipment that is not related to the
primary residential use.
      (5)   All administrative activities, including staffing, counseling, and
other visitations, shall serve only residents of the group care home.
   (N)   Manufactured home. These regulations apply to all manufactured homes
in any permitted zone. The installation or construction of any dwelling unit,
factory-built or manufactured, shall comply with the following minimum
criteria:
      (1)   A manufactured home is subject to all standards contained in Table
2.2-2, Residential District Development Standards for the zoning district(s) in
which the home is situated, unless otherwise stated within this section.
      (2)   All newly placed manufactured homes shall be required to meet the
most current HUD Code standards, be certified under the National Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, and comply with State of
Arizona Office of Manufactured Housing regulations and all the provisions
outlined in this chapter.
      (3)   The exterior building façade, including trim, doors, windows, roof
fascia and the like, shall consist of wood, stucco, horizontal siding, brick,
masonry veneer, or other similar building material commonly used in site-built
residential construction; provided, however, that metal siding, other than
aluminum lap siding, shall be prohibited. Patio covers and detached storage
buildings shall be exempt from this requirement.
      (4)   All manufactured homes placed in a subdivision or on a single tract
of land shall be set upon a permanent foundation or footing for the purpose of
a permanent installation. Such installation shall render the dwelling no more
portable than if it were constructed totally on site.
      (5)   All manufactured homes placed in a manufactured home park shall
utilize a finished building material to surround the entire perimeter of the
dwelling and completely enclose the space between the exterior façade of the
dwelling and the ground. Such foundation siding shall be properly vented,
harmonious, and compatible with the dwelling.
      (6)   Any device used to transport a manufactured home to the site of
installation, including the hitch, wheels, axles, or other devices used
primarily for transport other than a chassis, shall be detached from the
dwelling as part of the installation procedure in any zoning district.
      (7)   All manufactured home installations must follow the Arizona
Department of Building and Fire Safety Statutes and Rules.
   (O)   Manufactured home, park. These regulations apply to manufactured home
parks. The development or construction of any factory-built or manufactured
home park, shall comply with the following minimum criteria:
      (1)   The minimum distance between manufactured homes or attached/
detached accessory structures in the same manufactured home parks shall be ten
feet. Manufactured homes or attached/detached accessory structure may not be
closer than ten feet to the exterior boundary or five feet to individual space
lines of the park.
      (2)   There shall be a minimum distance of ten feet between the front of
the manufactured home and any private street or private sidewalk, including
tongue and bay windows or any other attached projection.
      (3)   A minimum of 10% of the total park area shall be designated as
permanent open space. Where phases are proposed for the manufactured home park,
the percentage of open space in each phase shall meet or exceed the minimum
total for the specified phase area. The open space shall be available through
the use of easements to all residents of the development. Streets, driveways,
parking areas, buffer areas, recreation vehicle storage, and buildings shall
not be included in calculating the size of open space.
      (4)   A ten foot landscape area shall be required where the park is
adjacent to a public street/sidewalk.
      (5)   Two paved off-street parking spaces of nine feet by 18 feet shall
be required for each manufactured home space.
      (6)   One nine-foot by 20-foot visitor parking space shall be required
for each eight manufactured home spaces. Common lots spaced evenly throughout
the park may be employed to provide off-street parking.
      (7)   Designated areas for boat and recreational vehicle storage within
the park shall be for the sole use of the residents of the park. Storage areas
shall be completely screened from outside park boundaries by a six-foot-high
wall or fence.
      (8)   Street improvements for any public roads bounding or within the
manufactured home park shall be made as required by the Town Engineer.
      (9)   All interior drives or roadways within the mobile home park shall
be a minimum width of 24 feet or as required by the Uniform Fire Code,
whichever is greater. Width of roadway is exclusive of curbs and walkways,
measured from edge of pavement to edge of pavement. The interior drives or
roadways shall be paved in accordance with town engineering standards.
      (10)   Provision for on-site storm water retention/drainage and off-site
storm water drainage both entering and leaving the property shall be as
required by the Town Engineer.
      (11)   Each manufactured home park shall provide fire protection
facilities as set forth in the Uniform Fire Code.
      (12)   The manufactured home park shall be permanently screened from
adjacent properties by a vision obscuring fence, six feet in height.
      (13)   One manufactured home shall be permitted on each approved space.
No recreational vehicles or dwelling units of conventional construction shall
be permitted on a manufactured home space for living purposes except for that
of the owner, manager, or permanent maintenance personnel.
      (14)   Access to all manufactured home spaces shall be from the interior
of the park. There shall be no individual access to any manufactured home space
from a public street.
      (15)   Manufactured home parks with more than 100 lots shall have a
minimum of two separate access entry drives connecting the park to public
streets. Access to the development shall not be through a residential area to
reach a collector route.
      (16)   All refuse collection areas shall be completely enclosed via a
solid six-foot wall and view obstructing gate and located on a concrete
surface. Refuse collection areas shall be readily accessible to collection
vehicles, without substantially encumbering adjacent parking and vehicular
access. If the refuse collection area can be seen from the exterior of the
park, the enclosure shall be softened with landscaping on its most visible
sides.
      (17)   All lighting shall be in conformance with §
152.059.
      (18)   All utilities shall be placed underground. Placement of utilities,
including master meters, shall meet all requirements of the town, as well as
the respective utility companies.
      (19)   The site plan shall provide for a system of pedestrian circulation
within the development. The system shall connect with existing sidewalks, if
any are adjacent to the property. The pedestrian access may be located either
in the street right-of-way or in common open space. The system shall be
designed to link residential units with recreation facilities, school bus
stops, and existing sidewalks in the neighborhood. Pedestrian ways may take the
form of sidewalks or walking paths with a minimum width of five feet.
   (P)   Medical marijuana dispensary, cultivation site.
      (1)   To obtain a conditional use permit, the medical marijuana
dispensary, or medical marijuana cultivation location shall not be closer than
1,200 feet from the boundaries of a Residential Zoning District or use, the
property lines of any public or private school, public park or playground, or
church or non-commercial establishment owned or operated by a bona fide
religious organization.
      (2)   The business shall not be located within 2,000 feet of any other
adult entertainment businesses, medical marijuana dispensary or medical
marijuana cultivation location and shall display no sign visible from the
exterior except for a sign identifying the business as a medical marijuana
dispensary or medical marijuana cultivation location. All signage shall also
adhere to the requirements of §
152.058. The business shall exclude persons less than 18 years of age from its
premises. No materials depicting marijuana plants or marijuana use shall be
visible from the exterior of the business.
      (3)   All distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard
to intervening structures or objects, from the property line of the business to
the nearest property line of another adult entertainment business, medical
marijuana dispensary, medical marijuana cultivation location, school, church,
public facility, residential district or use or other use specified in this
regulation.
      (4)   Medical marijuana cultivation site. With regard to a medical
marijuana cultivation location, applicants seeking a conditional use permit
shall provide the name and location of the off-site dispensary, a copy of
operating procedures adopted in compliance with A.R.S. § 36-2804(B)(1)(c),
procedures for proper disposal of marijuana remnants or by-products (not to be
the facility's exterior refuse container), a security plan, and a plan to
prohibit the emission of odors from the facility into the environment. The
cultivation location must be a permanent building (not a habitable trailer,
cargo container or motor vehicle) with a maximum area not to exceed 2,000
square feet unless otherwise shown by the applicant and approved through the
conditional use permit process that additional area is needed to provide
necessary medical marijuana to the identified dispensary. The cultivation
location shall not be open to the public and retail sales are prohibited.
Marijuana shall not be consumed on the premises, including any accessory
structures, parking lot or parking areas. Caregivers, as authorized by AZ DHS
to cultivate medical marijuana, shall be restricted to cultivation of medical
marijuana in the Service Commercial Zoning District.
      (5)   Medical marijuana dispensary. With regard to a medical marijuana
dispensary, on-site and drive through services are prohibited. Applicants
seeking a conditional use permit shall provide the name and location of the
off-site cultivation location or source, a copy of operating procedures adopted
in compliance with A.R.S. § 36-2804(B)(1)(c), procedures for proper disposal of
marijuana remnants or by-products (not to be the facility's exterior refuse
container), a security plan, and a plan to prohibit the emission of odors from
the facility into the environment. The dispensary must be a permanent building
(not a habitable trailer, cargo container or motor vehicle) with a maximum area
not to exceed 1,000 square feet. Operating hours shall not be earlier than 8:00
a.m. and not later than 8:00 p.m. Marijuana shall not be consumed on the
premises of the dispensary, including any accessory structures, parking lot or
parking areas.
   (Q)   Microbrewery, craft distillery, or tasting room.
      (1)   Must provide evidence of valid state license before commencing
operations or at any time upon the request of the Zoning Administrator and the
conditions of any such license shall be adhered to by the operator of the
establishment at all times.
      (2)   Pure manufacturing and storage uses not associated with a retail or
restaurant function are not allowed in the C-2, C-3, CBD or MU Districts.
      (3)   All manufacturing and processing activity shall be conducted within
a completely enclosed building.
      (4)   In the C-2, C-3, CBD and MU Districts outdoor storage shall be
limited to grain silos designed to be screened from public view or integrated
into the design of the principal building through the use of compatible
materials and colors. No other materials, including products ready for
shipping, or equipment shall be stored outdoors unless approved through a
conditional use permit.
      (5)   Outdoor seating and serving is permitted. The location and
placement of outdoor dining and serving facilities shall meet all performance
standards in §
152.055.
      (6)   Shall meet all performance standards in § 152.055, including but
not limited to odor standards in §
152.055(G).
   (R)   Mobile homes. After the effective date of this chapter, the following
regulations shall apply to all mobile homes:
      (1)   Only pre-existing, in place mobile homes shall be allowed for
residential or non-residential use on an existing lot or within an existing
mobile home park, subject to all applicable A.R.S. The relocation of a pre-
existing mobile home from its current location, lot or mobile home park shall
be prohibited.
      (2)   The placement and residential or non-residential use of mobile
homes constructed prior to 1976 is prohibited, unless in place and in use on
the effective date of this chapter.
   (S)   Outside storage.
      (1)   All outside storage facilities shall be subject to the site plan
review and/or CUP process. In addition to standard site plan information, the
applicant shall provide a plan which shows an ability to control on-site and
prevent off-site nuisance conditions such as noise, dust, odors, vectors and
wind-blown debris.
      (2)   A use may combine outside storage with vehicle/boat major repair
and vehicle/boat sales only if both uses are permitted or conditionally
permitted and approved in that district. If combined with said uses, outside
storage facilities shall additionally comply with the provisions of divisions
(E) and/or (G) of this section.
      (3)   Outside storage facilities shall be located with direct access to
paved roadways that are suitable in size to allow for the efficient delivery of
vehicles and boats for storage. The paved roadway requirement of this section
shall not apply to outside storage facilities located in the IP district.
      (4)   Outside storage areas shall be paved with concrete, asphalt,
pavers, or gravel. The provisions of this division shall not apply to outside
storage facilities located in the IP district.
      (5)   Outside storage facilities must be fully screened from view by a
100% opaque fence or engineered concrete/masonry block wall that is no less
than six feet, but no more than eight feet in height.
      (6)   As part of the conditional use permit process within the SC
District, a landscaped screen of plantings may be required in combination with
a required fence or wall to further buffer and/or shield storage activities
from public view or adjacent residential districts. See §
152.057(C) for additional screening regulations. The provisions of this
division shall not apply to major repair facilities located in the IP district.
      (7)   No outside storage that exceeds the height of the screen wall may
occur within the required setback areas. The provisions of this section shall
not apply to outside storage facilities located in the IP district.
      (8)   No stored vehicle/boat shall be utilized for overnight sleeping or
as living accommodations.
      (9)   All exterior lighting shall comply with the lighting standards
provided within §
152.059.
      (10)   Any lawful outside storage facility in existence as of May 13,
2020, that could not be permitted or rebuilt thereafter because of zoning
district requirements shall be considered a permitted use and, accordingly,
shall not be subject to this section, unless the facility is proposed to be
expanded beyond the building or facility use footprint, whichever is greater,
that existed as of May 13, 2020. If the building or facility use footprint
exceeds the allowed threshold or if the intensity of uses increases beyond that
which existed as of May 13, 2020, the outside storage facility shall be
required to be brought into compliance with all current, applicable provisions
of this zoning chapter.
   (T)   Recreational vehicle, park. These regulations apply to recreational
vehicle (RV) parks. The installation or development of any recreational vehicle
park shall comply with the following minimum criteria:
      (1)   All RV parks shall be designed in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter and administered through the conditional use permit and/or site
plan review process.
      (2)   Within the MHP District, RV parks must be developed as a stand-
alone development or one contiguous designated area within a MHP. RV park
spaces shall be prohibited from being individually dispersed within a MHP. Any
RV park located within a MHP shall be owned and operated by the same owner and
operator of the MHP.
      (3)   One RV shall be permitted on each approved space. No manufactured
homes or dwelling units of conventional construction shall be permitted on a RV
space or within the RV park for living purposes except for that of the owner,
manager, or permanent maintenance personnel.
      (4)   A recreation or common area shall be provided at a ratio of 100
square feet of recreation or common area for each space. All common areas shall
adhere to the provisions outlined in §
152.057.
      (5)   One nine foot by 18 foot visitor parking space shall be required
for each eight RV spaces. Common areas spaced evenly throughout the park may be
employed to provide off-street parking.
      (6)   The minimum distance between RV's or detached accessory structures
in the same RV park shall be ten feet.
      (7)   Minimum distances or setbacks shall be the shortest horizontal
dimensions measured from the nearest portion of the sidewall of an RV including
pull-outs, tip-outs, or portable affixed awnings.
      (8)   All interior drives or roadways within the RV park shall be paved
private streets a minimum width of 24 feet or as required by the International
Fire Code, whichever is greater. Width of roadway is exclusive of curbs and
walkways, measured from edge of pavement to edge of pavement. The interior
drives or roadways shall be paved in accordance with town engineering
standards.
      (9)   Street improvements for any public roads bounding the RV park shall
be made as required by the Town Engineer.
      (10)   There shall be a minimum distance of five feet between the front
of the RV and any private street or sidewalk, including any attached
projections.
      (11)   The RV park shall be permanently screened from adjacent properties
or public right-of-ways by an opaque screening fence or solid engineered wall,
six feet in height.
      (12)   Any part of the RV park fronting on a public street shall meet the
setback requirements of the zoning district in which it is located as well as
the screening and landscaping requirements as outlined in §
152.057.
      (13)   Access to all RV spaces shall be from the interior of the park.
There shall be no individual access to any RV space from a public street.
      (14)   RV parks with more than 50 spaces shall have a minimum of two
separate access entry drives connecting the park to public streets. Access to
the development shall not be through a residential area to reach an arterial or
collector roadway.
      (15)   Each RV park must provide an adequate and easily identifiable
office or registration area. The location of the office shall not interfere
with the normal flow of traffic into and out of the RV park.
      (16)   Recreational amenities or social centers, which may be used for
crafts, hobbies, games, meeting, banquets and similar recreational uses shall
be of conventional site-built construction.
      (17)   Service buildings with toilet, bathing and other sanitation
facilities and utilities shall be provided.
      (18)   Each space shall have water, sewer and electrical hook-ups as
required by the town.
      (19)   Provision for on-site storm water retention / drainage and off-
site storm water drainage both entering and leaving the property shall be as
required by the Town Engineer.
      (20)   All utilities shall be placed underground. The placement of
utilities will be up to the developer. However, all utilities services shall
meet all requirements specified by the town, as well as the respective utility
companies.
      (21)   All lighting shall be in conformance with §
152.059.
      (22)   Each RV park shall provide fire protection facilities as set forth
in the International Fire Code.
      (23)   Designated areas for boat and recreational vehicle storage within
the park shall be for the sole use of the residents of the park.
      (24)   RV spaces or units will not be available for individual sale.
      (25)   All refuse collection areas shall be completely enclosed via a
solid six foot wall or fence and view obstructing gate and located on a
concrete surface. Refuse collection areas shall be readily accessible to
collection vehicles, without substantially encumbering adjacent parking and
vehicular access. If the refuse collection area can be seen from the exterior
of the park, the enclosure should be softened with landscaping on its most
visible sides.
      (26)   The site plan shall provide for a system of pedestrian circulation
within the development. The system shall connect with existing sidewalks, if
any are adjacent to the property. The pedestrian access may be located either
adjacent to private streets, drives or in common open space. The system shall
be designed to link RV spaces with recreation facilities and existing sidewalks
in the surrounding neighborhood. Internal pedestrian ways may take the form of
sidewalks or walking paths.
   (U)   Religious assembly.
      (1)   All vehicular access to the facility shall be onto an arterial or
collector road.
      (2)   Wherever an off-street parking area is adjacent to a residential
use, a continuous obscuring wall, fence and/or landscaped area at least six
feet in height shall be provided.
   (V)   Resident care home.
      (1)   A completed registration form shall be submitted to the Community
Development Department on a form established by the Zoning Administrator.
Registration shall become effective upon issuance of zoning clearance for the
home and shall terminate when the home use ceases. No registration/clearance
shall be accepted or approved for a home that does not comply with the
conditions listed within this division.
      (2)   Resident care homes shall comply with all applicable federal, state
and local requirements for the location, development and operation of such
homes and the provision of safe outdoor recreation areas and gross floor areas
for every person that the home is licensed to accommodate.
      (3)   Resident care homes shall not be located within 1,200 feet, as
measured from the property lines, of another resident care home or a group care
home facility.
      (4)   All administrative activities, including staffing, counseling, and
other visitations, shall serve only residents of the residential care home.
      (5)   As a reasonable accommodation for persons with a disability, strict
compliance with the standards set out in this section may be waived by the
Zoning Administrator in accordance with the requirements stated herein. A
request for such a reasonable accommodation waiver must be in writing and filed
with the Zoning Administrator. In all cases, the Zoning Administrator, or his/
her designee, shall make findings of fact in support of his/her determination
and shall render his/her decision in writing. The Zoning Administrator may meet
with and interview the person making the request in order to ascertain or
clarify information sufficiently to make the required findings and/or may
request additional information such as a site plan, floor plan, maximum number
of residents, transportation methods or description of daily activities. To
grant a reasonable accommodation waiver, the Zoning Administrator shall find
affirmatively all of the following:
         (a)   The request will be in compliance with all applicable building
and fire codes;
         (b)   The request will not create traffic impacts, parking impacts,
impacts on water or sewer systems, or other similar adverse impacts; and
         (c)   Profitability or financial hardship of the owner/service
provider of a facility shall not be considered by the Zoning Administrator in
determining to grant a reasonable accommodation waiver. An appeal of the
decision of the Zoning Administrator may be made regarding reasonable
accommodation to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to §
152.086(K).
   (W)   School, public or private; school, boarding and college or university.
      (1)   The facility shall meet fire code, building code and any other
applicable regulations.
      (2)   All access for high schools, middle schools, boarding schools, or
colleges shall be from an arterial or collector roadway; vehicular ingress and
egress to local streets is prohibited.
      (3)   Elementary schools shall not be located adjacent to arterial roads
or roads with higher classifications.
      (4)   A separate conditional use permit shall be required for any
additional accessory uses customarily found in conjunction with schools,
including dormitories, stadiums, outdoor recreational lighting, and auditoriums
which were not specifically described when the CUP was originally approved.
      (5)   Schools shall comply with the building setback and building height
requirements established by the zoning district for which the school is
located; unless modified as part of the CUP process.
   (X)   Self-storage, indoor.
      (1)   All storage shall be completely within enclosed buildings.
      (2)   A use may combine indoor storage with outside storage only if both
uses are permitted or conditionally permitted and approved in that district. If
combined with said use, indoor storage facilities shall additionally comply
with the provisions of division (T) of this section.
      (3)   Doors to individual storage units shall not face any abutting
public street frontage, or, if the site is located on a corner parcel, shall
not face the primary public street frontage.
      (4)   No business activity other than rental of storage units shall be
conducted on the premises.
      (5)   All self-storage rental contracts shall include clauses
prohibiting:
         (a)   The storage of flammable liquids, highly combustible or
explosive materials, or hazardous chemicals; and
         (b)   The use of the property for purposes other than dead storage.
      (6)   An accessory structure for a management office may be allowed on
site, subject to regulations specified in §
152.046.
   (Y)   Service station.
      (1)   Service stations shall not include:
         (a)   Any outdoor service or repair operations, other than the
dispensing or installation of gasoline or other minor services for customers as
related to such dispensing or installation;
         (b)   There shall be no sale, rental, display, long-term parking, or
storage of vehicles, boats, trailers, machinery or other similar equipment; or
         (c)   There shall be no outdoor storage or display of vehicle
components and parts, supplies or equipment, except within an area defined on
the project approved site plan and which extends no more than ten feet beyond
the building.
      (2)   All fuel pumps and/or pump islands shall be covered by a canopy
that matches or complements the design of the main structure.
      (3)   Electric charging stations may count towards required parking
spaces.
      (4)   Under canopy mounted lights shall be flush with the underside of
the canopy. All additional outdoor lighting shall be subject to the
requirements of §
152.059.
      (5)   Any signs logo or identifying paint scheme on the primary building,
canopy or gas price signs shall adhere to the applicable sign regulations
provided in §
152.058.
   (Z)   Tour services.
      (1)   All tour operators are required to conduct business out of a
physical office space located within permitted districts as identified in
Tables 2.3-1 and 2.4-1. Sales are not permitted on public right-of-way.
      (2)   All parking, queuing, and loading/unloading of tour vehicles shall
be conducted on the subject property or within approved areas as defined
through the site plan approval and conditional use permit process.
      (3)   All tour operators shall be prohibited from utilizing local streets
within residential zoned districts to conduct any part of standard tour
operations. This includes utilizing local residential streets for tour
departure and return routes.
      (4)   All maintenance, repairs, and service washing areas shall be fully
screened from view by a 100% opaque fence or engineered concrete/masonry block
wall that is no less than six feet in height.
      (5)   Any heliport, associated with a helicopter tour operator, located
outside the AP Zoning District shall be required to obtain a conditional use
permit. No conditional use permit for a heliport in association with a tour
operator shall be considered for approval unless and until the location, site
plan and operation standards comply with all the provisions of this division
(AA) and have provided a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airspace letter-
of-determination stating no objection, with or without conditions, to the
proposed facility.
      (6)   If the Zoning Administrator determines a proposed operation has the
potential to create a significant negative impact in the surrounding area, the
town may establish other conditions and requirements necessary to prevent
possible nuisances (i.e., control number of allowed tours per day, define hours
of operation, specify tour routes or deny the CUP).
      (7)   Outdoor storage of materials which might cause fumes, odors, dust,
fire hazard, or health hazards is prohibited unless such storage is within
enclosed containers or unless otherwise complies with applicable law.
      (8)   All tour service facilities shall comply with all applicable
federal, state and local laws for the operation of such a facility. Copies of
permits or letters of approval shall be submitted to the town prior to
operations.
   (AA)   Vacation home rentals.
      (1)   Purpose.
         (a)   The purpose of this section is to establish minimum regulations
for the use of residential dwellings utilized as vacation rentals.
         (b)   This section is not intended to provide any owner of residential
property with the right or privilege to violate any private conditions,
covenants and restrictions applicable to the owner's property that may prohibit
the use of such owner's residential property for short term rental purposes as
defined herein.
         (c)   Vacation home rentals are limited to individually or
collectively owned single-family or one-to-four-family house or dwelling units
or any unit or group of units in a condominium, cooperative or timeshare, that
is also a transient public lodging establishment or owner-occupied residential
home offered for transient use if the accommodations are not classified for
property taxation under A.R.S. § 42-12001. Use of any other unit, dwelling or
group of units or dwellings as a vacation rental or short-term rental is
prohibited. Vacation rentals do not include a unit that is used for any
nonresidential use, including retail, restaurant, banquet space, event center
or other similar use.
      (2)   Applicability. The provisions of this section apply within the
incorporated boundaries of the town.
      (3)   Vacation home rentals are subject to all laws relating to noise,
building and fire codes, protection of welfare, parking, property maintenance
and nuisance and may not be used for the purposes of housing sex offenders,
operating or maintaining a structured sober living home, selling illegal drugs,
liquor control or pornography, obscenity, nude or topless dancing and other
adult-oriented businesses.
      (4)   Emergency point of contact. An owner of a vacation home rental
shall designate an emergency point of contact. Said point of contact shall be
filed with the Town Clerk.
   (BB)   Wireless telecommunication facilities.
      (1)   This section is to provide a uniform and comprehensive set of
standards for the placement, construction and modification of wireless
communication facilities (WCF). To protect and promote public health, safety,
general welfare and the visual quality of the town while at the same time not
unduly restricting the development of needed communication facilities and
important amateur radio installations and encouraging managed development of
communication infrastructure. It is also the stated intent of this section to
provide a public forum to insure a balance between public concerns and private
interest in establishing communication and related facilities. The regulations
in this section are established to:
         (a)   Provide guidelines for siting and design of wireless
communication facilities;
         (b)   Minimize adverse visual impacts of towers and wireless
communication facilities through careful design, siting, landscaping and
camouflaging techniques;
         (c)   Enhance the ability to provide wireless services to town
residents, businesses and visitors;
         (d)   Simplify and shorten the process for obtaining necessary
permits, while protecting the interests of town residents;
         (e)   Promote and encourage co-location of towers and attached
wireless communication facilities as a primary option;
         (f)   Ensure that wireless communication facilities are compatible
with adjacent land uses; and
         (g)   Avoid potential damage to property caused by towers and
communications facilities by ensuring that structures are correctly designed
and are removed when no longer used or are structurally unsafe.
      (2)   Amendments. For the purpose of protecting the public health safety
and general welfare, the Planning and Zoning Commission may from time to time
propose amendments to these regulations which shall be approved or disapproved
by the Town Council at a public meeting following public notice. Realizing that
communication technologies are evolving and changing quickly, future
innovations may reduce the impacts of individual facilities and render portions
of these regulations obsolete. Therefore, periodic review and revision of these
regulations will be necessary.
      (3)   Applicability.
         (a)   Commercial wireless communication facilities are permitted as a
conditional use (CUP) in all zoning districts with the exception of small
wireless facilities, certain antennas, or public safety communication
facilities as described in division (BB)(5) and residential districts or
planned development/planned area development districts.
         (b)   No person shall build, construct or erect a wireless
communication facility upon any parcel of land in a residential or planned
development/planned area development district until a review process has
determined the site is properly camouflaged and integrated with and/or screened
by a non-antenna support structure (street light, utility pole, building
feature, landscape feature, etc.).
         (c)   All antenna support structures and wireless communication
facilities, any portion of which are located within the town, are subject to
this section. Except as provided in this section, any use being made of an
existing antenna support structure or attached wireless communication facility
shall be deemed a nonconforming structure and allowed to continue, even if in
conflict with the terms of this section.
         (d)   The Zoning Administrator, by administrative review, may approve
(without obtaining a CUP) the proposed construction or development of a
camouflaged facility or a co-located facility provided that a building permit
is obtained and the proposal meets the minimum requirements of this chapter.
      (4)   Exceptions.
         (a)   Small wireless facilities. The construction, improvement, co-
location, modification, repair or operation of small wireless facilities may be
located within any town right-of-way or any areas outside of the right-of-way
that are not zoned exclusively for residential uses. Said small wireless
facilities shall be permitted by right and not subject to any zoning or CUP
review and approval. Additional town permits may apply for the construction,
improvement, co-location, modification, repair or operation of small wireless
facilities;
         (b)   Public safety communications facilities;
         (c)   The provisions of this section do not apply to radio or
television reception antennas, receive only antennas, citizen band antennas,
marine band antennas and satellite or microwave parabolic antennas
(Residential: one meter or less in diameter) (Industrial/Commercial: two meters
or less in diameter) not used by commercial carriers. The height of the antenna
shall not exceed the roof line of the primary structure on the parcel and shall
be placed on the rear or side of the parcel;
         (d)   The provisions of this section do not apply to FCC licensed
amateur stations as part of the amateur service with a single antenna support
structure. Amateur station antennas shall not be subject to the requirements of
this section except as follows;
         (e)   No outdoor amateur station antenna shall be installed until and
unless an amateur station antenna permit has been approved and issued by the
Zoning Administrator. Amateur station antenna permits are not transferable and
shall automatically expire when the person issued the permit no longer owns the
property involved or that persons license from the FCC is no longer valid. The
Zoning Administrator shall not issue an amateur station antenna permit until
the applicant has presented proof of a current FCC license;
         (f)   All new antenna support structure and attached antenna shall not
exceed 90 feet in height above ground level. The tower and antenna shall meet
the setback requirements for the zoning district in which it is located and
shall require an additional setback of one foot for every foot the tower and
antenna exceeds the height limits of the zoning district in which it is
located;
         (g)   The tower and antenna shall be installed in the rear of the
parcel and shall meet all local, state and federal regulations and manufacturer
specifications. Guy wires, if used, shall meet the setback requirements of the
underlying zoning district;
         (h)   Temporary mobile services providing public information coverage
of news events;
         (i)   Minor modifications of existing wireless communications
facilities and attached wireless communications facilities, whether emergency
or routine, provided there is little or no change in the visual appearance; and
         (j)   Minor modifications are those modifications, including the
addition of antennas, to conforming wireless and attached wireless
communications facilities that meet the performance standards set forth in this
document. Antennas and equipment cabinets or rooms completely located inside of
structures and whose purpose is to enhance communications within the
structures.
      (5)   Performance standards and requirements.
         (a)   Construction standards. All commercial wireless communication
facilities and antenna support structures shall be certified by a licensed
engineer to be structurally sound and in conformance with applicable building
code(s).
         (b)   Natural resource protection standards. The location of the
wireless communication facilities shall comply with all-natural resource
protection standards established either in this chapter or in other applicable
county, state and federal regulations, including those for flood plains,
wetlands, groundwater protection, and steep slopes.
         (c)   Color and appearance standards. All wireless communication
facilities shall blend into the surrounding environment through the use of
color and camouflaging architectural treatment, except where the color is
dictated by the FCC or FAA.
         (d)   Advertising prohibited. No advertising is permitted anywhere
upon or attached to the wireless communication facility.
         (e)   Illumination of antenna support structures. Antenna support
structures/towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not
display strobe lights unless such lighting is specifically required by the FAA
or other federal or state authority.
         (f)   Co-location. All wireless communication facilities shall be
subject to the co-location requirements set forth in division (BB)(6).
         (g)   Abandonment. All wireless telecommunication facilities shall be
subject to the abandonment requirements set forth in division (BB)(7).
         (h)   Setback requirements for wireless communication facilities
(WCF):
            1.   Wireless communication facilities. Minimum setbacks for these
facilities are the same as underlying zoning districts.
            2.   Broadcast and other facilities. For zoning districts CBD, MU,
C-1, C-2, C-3, SC, BP and IP, the setback requirements are 30% of the support
structure height, but not less than the minimum setbacks of the underlying
zoning district.
            3.   Guy wires. Setbacks for guy wires are the same as the minimum
setbacks for the underlying zoning district.
            4.   Security enclosure required. All towers and equipment shelters
shall be enclosed either completely or individual as determined by the Zoning
Administrator. The town and co-located carriers shall have reasonable access.
No fence shall be required on top of a building or other structure if access to
the roof or top of the structure or building is secure. Dependent on the
location, plants or landscaping may be required as a buffer around the
perimeter of the security enclosure as deemed appropriate by the Zoning
Administrator.
            5.   Existing vegetation. Existing vegetation (trees, shrubs, etc.)
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
      (6)   Co-location requirements.
         (a)   Any antenna support structure/tower erected for commercial
purposes shall be designed to permit future co-location of facilities. No
proposed antenna support structure/tower shall be erected unless such structure
is capable of supporting a minimum of one additional carrier's wireless
communication facility.
         (b)   Commercial carriers who own an existing support structure shall
negotiate in good faith with other carriers that request co-location. Documents
showing good faith efforts to co-locate shall be provided by the applicant.
         (c)   Carriers who co-locate on an approved antenna support structure
are not subject to the conditional use permit requirements of this section. The
application may be approved by the Zoning Administrator if all other
requirements of this section are met.
      (7)   Abandoned facilities. A wireless communication facility shall be
considered abandoned after 60 consecutive days of non-use. The town may seek to
revoke the conditional use permit by the same process with which it was
approved.
      (8)   Application process.
         (a)   Applications for wireless communication facilities and major
additions or modifications to existing facilities shall include:
            1.   Copies of the proposed site plan as required by the Zoning
Director (may be submitted electronically) specifying the location and legal
description of the site: on site land uses and zoning; adjacent roadways;
access and parking; vegetation and landscaping to be added, retained, replaced
or removed; setbacks; and the location of the facility, including all related
improvements and equipment.
            2.   A vicinity map specifying adjacent properties, land uses,
zoning and roadways within 300 feet of the proposed facility. Elevation
drawings of the proposed facility specifying all antennas, antenna support
structures / towers, structures, equipment facilities, fencing, screening,
landscaping, lighting and other improvements related to the facility,
specifying materials, placement and colors.
            3.   Photorealistic image of the proposed site after antenna
support structure erection demonstrating the true impact of the facility on the
surrounding visual environment. The Zoning Administrator may request
photorealistic images of the site from specific vantage points. This
requirement does not apply to facilities permitted under the administrative
review process, unless requested by the Zoning Administrator.
            4.   A report shall be prepared describing the facility and why it
is needed, the technical and economic reasons for the site design and location,
and the quantity of antenna arrays the structure can support.
         (b)   A report shall be prepared that addresses the evaluation
criteria. The criteria used in evaluation shall consist of the following:
            1.   Description of the facility and why it is needed;
            2.   Technical and economic reasons for the site design and
location; and
            3.   The quantity of antenna the structure can support.
         (c)   A detailed inventory of all the carrier's existing and approved
facilities within the town and within five miles of the corporate boundaries.
      (9)   Application review.
         (a)   Administrative review. Applications for proposed camouflaged
wireless communications facilities and co-location of wireless communication
facilities which do not change the antenna support structure height are subject
to administrative review. The applications shall be examined for conformance to
the requirements in this section by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning
Administrator, within 21 days of receipt of the application, shall render a
decision to approve, deny or delay approval of the proposed wireless
communication facility. Any decision to delay approval or deny a request shall
be in writing and shall include specific reasons for the action. If the
applicant has not been notified in writing of a decision after 21 days the
application will be deemed approved. A decision by the Zoning Administrator may
be appealed by the applicant within 30 days to the Board of Adjustment. The fee
for administrative review of a proposed wireless facility shall be collected
when the application is submitted.
         (b)   Except for administrative review of camouflaged facilities and
co-location of facilities, all proposals for wireless communication facilities
shall be processed under the requirements of §
152.091.
         (c)   Access control and emergency contact. No trespassing signs shall
be posted around the wireless communication facility as deemed appropriate,
along with emergency contact telephone number.
   (CC)   Multi-family use in certain single-family residential zones. Multi-
family dwelling may be conditionally permitted, pursuant to a conditional use
permit in accordance with the standards in §
152.091, in R1-12 or larger single-family residential zones to accommodate the
reuse development of property that otherwise could not reasonably be developed
under the regulations contained in this chapter or other titles adopted by the
city.
      (1)   Factors. Multi-family development, pursuant to this section shall
not be approved by right, but may be allowed after considering the following:
         (a)   Building was occupied as a residential unit prior to the
adoption of the zoning code April 13, 2020, occupancy to be verified by utility
service to building;
         (b)   A multi-family use pursuant to this section will only be
considered for approval in the area of the original Short Creek Subdivision
(SCSD) sheets 5-28 recorded September 26, 2017, and not in any other parcels or
developments; and
         (c)   Multi-family use, pursuant to this section, will not be approved
in any new single-family subdivisions even in the area of SCSD sheets 5-28
recorded September 26, 2017.
      (2)   Development standards. When multi-family dwellings are permitted
pursuant to this section, they shall be subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   The proposed use shall be residential units;
         (b)   The overall size of the finished building shall not increase the
residential area for the total building by more than 10%;
         (c)   Additional residential buildings will not be permitted on the
parcel, with the exception of an auxiliary dwelling unit(s) that would
otherwise be permitted in the single-family zone;
         (d)   A site plan, meeting the development standards of the town, will
have to be completed and approved per §
152.095 prior to issuance of a building or remodel permit;
         (e)   The finished structure will have to meet the applicable building
and fire codes for the size and number of residential units created; and
         (f)   Clear address signage shall be installed in compliance with the
town addressing regulations.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020; Am. Ord. 2021-05, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2024-
16, passed 9-16-2024)
§ 152.046 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to identify and regulate
accessory buildings, structures and uses in all zoning districts that are
incidental and customarily subordinate to principal uses.
   (B)   Establishment of accessory buildings, structures and uses.
      (1)   All principal uses allowed in a zoning district shall be deemed to
include those accessory buildings, uses, structures, and activities typically
associated with the use as described in the principal uses definition provided
in §§
152.135 through
152.137, unless otherwise specified or specifically prohibited within this
section.
      (2)   Accessory buildings, uses or structures not specifically defined
within this code, shall be subject to §
152.026(C)(7) and §
152.027(C)(7).
      (3)   No accessory building, structure, use or conditional use, shall be
erected or permitted on any lot or parcel until the principal building or use
has been established or erected; unless both principal and accessory buildings
and conditional uses are being established simultaneously.
   (C)   General development standards for accessory buildings, structures and
uses.
      (1)   Unless otherwise expressly stated, accessory buildings, structures
and uses are subject to the same lot and building regulations as apply to
principal uses and buildings.
      (2)   Accessory structures and uses should be similar in color to the
principal structure.
      (3)   Accessory buildings and structures, except for accessory dwelling
units defined in §
152.046(F)(1), shall not be used for living or sleeping quarters.
      (4)   If the principal building or use is destroyed, removed or ceases to
exist, the utilization of the accessory building, use or structure shall no
longer be allowed.
      (5)   In the case of any conflict between the accessory building, use or
structure standards of this section and any other requirement of this code, the
more restrictive standards shall control.
   (D)   Location standards for accessory buildings, structures and uses.
      (1)   Accessory uses and structures must be operated and maintained under
the same ownership and located on the same lot as the principal use to which
they are accessory, unless otherwise expressly stated.
      (2)   Accessory buildings, uses or structures shall not be erected in any
right-of-way, easement, street side yard building setback, or required front
yard setback.
      (3)   No accessory building (e.g. freestanding garage, carport, workshop,
pool house, etc.) shall be located within six feet if fire rated and ten feet
if not fire rated of the site's principal building. If attached by any part of
a common wall or covered roof to the principal building, said building shall be
deemed a part of the principal building and shall conform to the development
standards of the principal building.
      (4)   Accessory structures (e.g. fence, deck, trellis, sun shade, etc.)
may be attached or detached from the principal building. All required
separation for applicable building and fire codes shall also be met.
      (5)   The accessory building, use or structure shall have a setback of at
least three feet if fire rated and five feet if not fire rated from every side
and rear property line, except that the setback shall be the same as required
for the principal building in the zoning district in which the accessory
building or structure is located whenever the accessory building or structure
exceeds 15 feet in height.
         (a)   Exceptions. The following structures are exempt from the
accessory structure setback requirements:
            1.   Movable structures, for single-family residential lots, such
as children's play equipment, trash enclosures, tool sheds, and pet shelters
may be placed within a required rear or side yard setback without limitation on
location, provided in no event shall the roof of said structures be designed to
allow water to drain onto adjacent property.
      (6)   In the AR-5, RE-1A and RE-2A zoning districts, the accessory
building, use or structure shall have a setback of at least three feet if fire
rated and five feet if not fire rated from every side and rear property line
and shall meet the front setback if located in the required front yard.
   (E)   Size standards for accessory buildings and structures.
      (1)   The maximum gross floor area of any accessory building or structure
shall not exceed the building footprint of the principal building. However, the
provisions of this division shall not apply to the AR-5, RE-1A, RE-2A or
Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts, which may exceed the building
footprint of the principal building.
      (2)   Both principal and accessory buildings/structures together must
comply with the applicable lot coverage requirements established by this code.
   (F)   Additional standards for specific accessory buildings, structures and
uses.
      (1)   Accessory dwelling unit.
         (a)   No more than one accessory dwelling unit may be located on any
lot.
         (b)   For residential uses, an accessory dwelling unit shall be
permitted only on a lot having 12,000 square feet or more in area. The
accessory dwelling unit shall have an architectural design and exterior
building materials that are compatible with the principal building.
         (c)   Accessory dwelling units shall be single level and not exceed
50% of the size of the primary dwelling with a maximum size of 900 square feet
on 12,000 square foot lots and 1,200 square feet on lots larger than 12,000
square feet.
         (d)   Mobile homes, and recreational vehicles shall not be used as
accessory dwelling units.
         (e)   The accessory dwelling unit and the principal residence shall
share utilities. Separate utility meters shall not be allowed.    
         (f)   At least one off-street parking space shall be provided for each
accessory dwelling unit.
      (2)   Watchman's quarters. In order to provide increased security within
the industrial zoning districts a watchman's quarters may be provided as an
accessory use under the following conditions:
         (a)   Watchman's quarters shall only be permitted within the BP, SC
and IP zoning districts subject to the approval of a conditional use permit.
Before granting a CUP, the Council shall determine that there is a direct link
to the principal use and there is a bona fide need for the increased
residential presence. Additional conditions of approval beyond those listed in
this section may be required to ensure compatibility with adjacent uses;
         (b)   The watchman's quarters must clearly be accessory to the
principal use, which must also be active at the time of CUP application and
approval;
         (c)   Only one watchman's quarters per lot shall be permitted;
         (d)   Watchman's quarters shall be attached units and must be an
integral part of the principal building and may not exceed 40% of building
floor area, with a maximum quarter's size of 1,000 square feet;
         (e)   Watchman's quarters shall meet fire code, residential building
code and any other applicable codes or regulations;
         (f)   A watchman's quarters shall consist of sleeping, kitchen, and
bathroom facilities, and for the purposes of this section shall not be
considered an accessory dwelling unit;
         (g)   There shall be no payment of rent by the occupant of the
quarters;
         (h)   The watchman's quarters and the principal building or use shall
share utilities. Separate utility meters shall not be allowed;
         (i)   At least one off-street parking space shall be provided for a
watchman's quarters; and
         (j)   If the principal building or use is destroyed, removed or ceases
to exist, the utilization of the watchman's quarters shall no longer be
allowed.
      (3)   Store/stay quarters.
         (a)   Store/stay quarters shall only be permitted for individual
storage spaces located within an indoor storage (boat, RV) facility in the C-2,
C-3 and SC zoning districts subject to the approval of a conditional use
permit.
         (b)   A store/stay quarters conditional use permit shall only be
issued to the property owner of the storage facility.
         (c)   Store/stay quarters shall only be used by the storage facility
owner, members of the owner's immediate family, or a registered lessee of the
storage/stay quarters.
         (d)   The store/stay quarters shall be occupied for less than 120 days
per calendar year.
         (e)   Shall not exceed 25% of the storage unit's gross floor area,
with a maximum quarter size of 800 square feet.
         (f)   Store/stay quarters shall not at any time be used as a vacation
rental, or any other type of rental.
         (g)   Store/stay quarters shall meet fire code, residential building
code and any other applicable codes or regulations.
         (h)   Owner shall sign an acknowledgement that the use is located in a
non-residential zoning district, in which there may be noise and traffic
commonly associated with service type commercial uses.
         (i)   Any additional parking needs shall be provided off-street.
         (j)   There shall be no outdoor yard, patio, deck, or living space.
         (k)   The exterior of all storage buildings and individual units shall
be clearly marked with a unique identifier that can be utilized by occupants
and emergency responders to efficiently locate each unit.
      (4)   Employee/contractor quarters.
         (a)   Employee/contractor quarters shall only be permitted as an
accessory use in Service Commercial (SC) and Industrial Park (IP) Districts
subject to the approval of a conditional use permit.
         (b)   Employee/contractor quarters shall be provided by the employer
only and operated in direct connection with the work of the principal use,
which must be active at the time of CUP application and approval. Employee/
contractor quarters shall also not be converted to any other use without prior
approval of an amendment to the CUP.
         (c)   Employee/contractor quarters shall not, at any time, be used as
a vacation rental, or any other type of rental.
         (d)   Employee/contractor quarters shall meet fire code, residential
building code and any other applicable codes or regulations.
         (e)   Each employee/contractor quarters shall be subject to the
development standards of the base zoning district (e.g. setbacks, height, lot
coverage, etc.).
         (f)   The minimum floor area used for sleeping purposes shall be 50
square feet for each occupant.
         (g)   At least one parking space per unit or one space per three beds,
whichever is more, shall be provided.
         (h)   Employee/contractor quarters shall be occupied for less than six
months per calendar year.
         (i)   If the principal use is destroyed, removed or ceases to exist,
the utilization of the employee/contractor quarters shall no longer be allowed.
      (5)   Cargo containers.
         (a)   Please note: this section does not prevent the use of cargo
containers for construction. Refer to the building code for allowed building
materials.
         (b)   Cargo containers are permitted as an accessory use in AR-5, RE1,
RE2, R1-20 Community Commercial (C-2), Regional Commercial (C-3), Service
Commercial (SC), Industrial Park (IP) and Airport Property (AP) Zoning
Districts subject to the following conditions:
            1.   A building permit shall be obtained at the Community
Development Department prior to installing a cargo container as a permanent
accessory use. Temporary placement of cargo containers, solely used for the
transport of goods, in conformance with permitted uses of the subject property
shall not require a building permit.
            2.   Cargo containers shall be located on the side or rear of the
principal building and must meet all development standards including setbacks,
lot coverage and height regulations for the zoning district in which it lies
and must also meet fire code requirements for placards as is necessary.
            3.   Cargo containers may not occupy any required off-street
parking spaces with the exception of temporary use during construction
activities authorized by a town building permit.
            4.   Cargo containers may not be stacked, except when used for
cargo purposes in the IP District.
            5.   Cargo containers shall not be connected to any utilities.
            6.   Licensed building contractors may use cargo containers in any
zoning district for temporary storage of equipment and/or material at a
construction site that has a valid building permit.
            7.   Cargo containers shall be painted in an earth tone color,
shall not be used for advertisement, and shall be screened from public view
with landscaping or an opaque screen wall/fence, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
            8.   Containers that are designed to be used for storage and appear
to be cargo containers, yet do not meet the specifications for commercial
shipping, packing or transportation of freight, shall comply with the
requirements of this section.
      (6)   Domesticated animals.
         (a)   Permitted in any zone. The keeping, in connection with each
permitted dwelling, of not more than three pets, such as dogs, cats, and
similar household pets, exclusive of animals under the age of six months, and
exclusive of birds, fish and other pets which at all times are kept within a
fully enclosed building or accessory building and which do not create odor or
sound which is detectable on an adjoining lot.
         (b)   The keeping of large livestock is allowed in the AR-5, RE-2A and
RE-1A zoning districts. Large livestock shall be limited to four large animals
per acre. Any shelter, stables, stalls, corrals, or pens for the animals shall
adhere to the same development standards as required for the principal use in
the zoning district in which the animals are located.
         (c)   Chicken hens and pullet are allowed in all residential zoning
districts subject to any applicable health, sanitation, and nuisance laws.
Roosters shall only be allowed in the AR-5, RE-2A, RE-1A and R1-20 zoning
districts. Chickens shall be kept within enclosed coops, pens, or cages that
comply with all applicable accessory provisions of §
152.046. All lots under 10,000 square feet shall be limited to no more than
five chickens per lot. Water used to clean coops, pens, or cages must not be
allowed to flow onto adjacent properties.
         (d)   Places where animals are kept shall be maintained so that flies,
insects, or vermin, rodents, odors, ponded water, the accumulation of manure,
garbage, refuse or other noxious material does not disturb the peace, comfort,
or health of any person.
         (e)   No person shall keep or maintain any poisonous reptile, or
dangerous, carnivorous, wild exotic animal without having approval from the
Arizona Game and Fish Department and meeting all county and town animal control
regulations. The animals or reptiles shall be safely penned or caged and kept
in accordance with all requirements of state, county and town regulations.
      (7)   Home occupations. A home occupation shall be considered a permitted
accessory use in all residential zoning districts provided that they do not
change the character of the surrounding residential area by generating more
traffic, noise, odors, visual impacts, or storage of materials than would
normally be expected in a residential zoning district, and if it complies with
the following regulations:
         (a)   All home occupations shall be clearly incidental and subordinate
to the use of the property and dwelling unit for dwelling purposes. A valid
town business registration shall be maintained for the home occupation use.
         (b)   Each dwelling unit shall be limited to one permitted home
occupation. Any additional home occupations shall require a conditional use
permit.
         (c)   All home occupations shall be conducted entirely from within the
principal residence or enclosed accessory buildings (i.e. detached garage)
except for home occupations that require the use of accessory structures
allowed within the subject zoning district (i.e. the use of swimming pools for
swimming lessons, play structures for day care, or horse corrals for horseback
riding lessons) as long as they do not create a noxious environment for
neighboring properties.
         (d)   Areas devoted to the home occupation use shall maintain a
residential character and appearance.
         (e)   There shall be no employees of the home occupation other than
persons residing in the dwelling unit where the home occupation is being
operated.
         (f)   There shall be no external evidence of the home occupation such
as greater volumes of traffic, noise, dust, odors, fumes, vibration, electrical
interference or fluctuation or other nuisances discernible beyond the property
lines than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood.
         (g)   A home occupation shall not be conducted in a way that is
perceptible in external effects (such as but not limited to noise, odors,
traffic) from beyond the property line between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. This time limit shall also apply to any loading or unloading of vehicles
on the property or on a street that causes noise to adjoining residents.
         (h)   There shall be no use of show windows, business display or
advertising visible from the exterior of the building, except as is
specifically permitted in §
152.058, that indicates the premises are being used in part for any purpose
other than a dwelling.
         (i)   The home occupation shall not result in excess generation of
solid waste or use of utilities and public facilities in amounts greater than
normally provided for residential use.
         (j)   Any parking incidental to the home occupation shall be provided
only in the residential driveway, subject to compliance with the off-street
parking requirements of §
152.056.
         (k)   The home occupation shall not involve the parking or storage of
more than two vehicles having a gross vehicle weight over 10,000 pounds on the
lot or on adjacent streets at any period of time. However, in the AR -5, RE-2A
and RE-1A zoning districts, the parking and storage of up to two vehicles,
directly related to the home occupation, with a gross vehicle weight of more
than 10,000 pounds shall be allowed within a fully screened side or rear yard.
         (l)   Storage of goods and materials necessary for the home occupation
shall be fully enclosed within a building or structure.
         (m)   The following are examples of uses which would be acceptable as
home occupations provided they comply with the above regulations:
            1.   Home offices with little or no client visits to the home;
            2.   Catering for off-site consumption;
            3.   Personal services such as a beauty shop, barbershop, and
seamstress;
            4.   Artists, sculptors, jewelry makers, and composers not selling
their artistic product to the general public on the premises;
            5.   Fine arts lessons (music, art, crafts, dance), tutoring and
swimming lessons;
            6.   Tax preparation;
            7.   Computer programing and software development; and
            8.   Day care (maximum of four persons).
         (n)   A home occupation shall not include, but shall not be limited
to, the following uses:
            1.   Medical offices, clinics, and laboratories, except for
psychologists, speech therapists, acupuncturists, and other professionals with
one-on-one counseling, therapy, or treatment that do not exceed six clients
within 24 hours;
            2.   Motor vehicle sales, repair, painting, storage, restoration or
conversion, engine repair or similar uses conducted outside and/or on vehicles
not registered to a person currently residing at the home;
            3.   Veterinarian office or animal care kennels or boarding
facilities. Except in the AR-5, RE-2A and RE-1A zoning districts such uses may
be permitted by conditional use permit;
            4.   Welding or machine shop;
            5.   Restaurants; or
            6.   Body piercing and/or tattoo studio.
         (o)   Complaints by citizens or local residents may be cause for
termination of the home occupation.
            1.   All complaints or violation of the above conditions shall be
registered with and reviewed by the Zoning Administrator.
            2.   The burden of proof shall be upon the home occupation to prove
that the standards of this section are being met, especially regarding possible
nuisances and traffic.
            3.   If appropriate measures cannot be undertaken to mitigate the
complaint or violations, the Zoning Administrator may determine that a
particular type or intensity of use is unsuitable to be a home occupation and
require termination of the use. Appeals of the Zoning Administrator's decision
can be made to the Board of Adjustment.
      (8)   Outdoor display and sales.
         (a)   Outdoor display and/or sale of merchandise may be allowed as an
accessory use for all commercial, mixed-use and industrial uses, provided that
the display meets the following guidelines and regulations:
            1.   Outdoor display and/or sale area shall be clearly defined on a
site plan and approved by the Zoning Administrator and may be subject to
appropriate conditions by the Administrator to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this division.
            2.   Exceptions. A permanent outdoor retail display area which is
an integral part of a business, including but not limited to, garden centers
and auto, boat, and RV dealership display lots shall obtain site plan approval
with all applicable development/improvements.
         (b)   Shall be a fixed location that does not disrupt the normal
function of the site or its circulation, and does not encroach upon required
driveways, landscaped areas, parking lots, sidewalks, loading zones, or fire
lanes. Displays shall not obstruct any entrance to a building or traffic safety
sight areas or otherwise create hazards for pedestrian or vehicle traffic.
         (c)   Display/sale of goods shall not be in any public right-of-way.
         (d)   Shall directly relate to a business occupying a permanent
structure on the same site, and shall display only goods of the primary
business on the same site, unless associated with a non-profit organization.
         (e)   Shall be limited to the hours of operation of the business and
portable and removed from public view at the close of each business day, unless
otherwise permitted through the site plan or development review process.
         (f)   No merchandise shall be affixed to the exterior of a building or
displayed so as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of the store
front windows for display purposes.
         (g)   Shall be managed so that display structures and goods are
maintained at all times in a clean and neat condition, and in good repair.
         (h)   All signage shall adhere to §
152.058.
      (9)   Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage associated with an on-site primary
use is permitted subject to the following conditions; however, the provisions
of this division shall not apply to outdoor storage associated with industrial
or agricultural uses:
         (a)   Storage areas must be fully screened from view by an opaque
fence or concrete/masonry block wall that is no less than six feet, but no more
than eight feet in height. A landscaped earthen berm may be used instead of or
in combination with a required fence or wall;
         (b)   The storage area screen fence/wall shall incorporate exterior
colors and/or finishes to match the primary building;
         (c)   Stored materials shall not exceed the height of the lowest
screen fence/wall, except as provided elsewhere in this chapter;
         (d)   Storage area gates must be opaque;
         (e)   Storage areas shall be paved with concrete, asphalt, pavers, or
gravel;
         (f)   Storage areas shall not be located within a required off-street
parking or loading area; and
         (g)   No storage of any items may occur within the front setback area
or within the street side yard building setback.
      (10)   Outdoor musical entertainment. Outdoor musical entertainment is
permitted in non-residential zones subject to the following:
         (a)   A business or property desirous of providing outdoor musical
entertainment shall be required to obtain a conditional use permit. The permit
shall be personal to the permittee and applicable only to the specific
business/property identified and shall not be transferable. A new conditional
use permit shall be obtained if the business/property is sold, leased, or
conveyed by the permittee; or if the permittee moves to a new location.
         (b)   Outdoor musical entertainment conditional use permits shall be
subject to an annual review, based on the initial approval date, to ensure the
use is conducted in accordance with all of the terms, conditions and
restrictions of this chapter, the approved CUP or any other applicable laws. If
the use is found to be in compliance, an administrative renewal shall be issued
by the Community Development Department. Any use found to be in violation of
the terms, conditions, or restrictions of this chapter, the CUP or any other
applicable laws shall be subject to revocation and scheduled for a formal
public hearing in accordance with §§
152.085 through
152.096. Following the formal public hearing process, the Town Council may
elect to renew, renew with additional stipulations, or revoke the CUP.
         (c)   Amplified outdoor musical entertainment, live or recorded, shall
not be permitted within 600 feet of a single-family residentially zoned
property.
         (d)   Outdoor musical entertainment will not be permitted within
public rights-of-way.
         (e)   Outdoor musical entertainment will be limited to the hours of 8:
00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
         (f)   No retail or wholesale over-the-counter sale of goods or
products are permitted to be sold in conjunction with the entertainment, other
than the products or service being provided by the permitted business, unless
accompanied by an Arizona Transaction Privilege Tax License.
         (g)   The performer will not use in their show any flammable items,
fireworks, electronic light displays, or laser-operated device.
         (h)   Outdoor musical entertainment shall be restricted to music or
singing which is not excessive or disturbing to the community as prescribed by
§
130.26.
         (i)   If the sound is of sufficient volume and duration that it would
cause discomfort or annoyance to a reasonable person of normal sensitivities,
it shall be prohibited.
      (11)   Outdoor vehicle parking and storage. The intent of outdoor vehicle
parking and storage standards is to protect the health, safety, and welfare and
ensure neighborliness and aesthetic quality for the residents and business
owners within the town's zoning jurisdiction. The following standards apply:
         (a)   Non-Residential Districts. The on-site outdoor storage of any
personal vehicles, commercial vehicles, a boat and trailer, recreation vehicle,
motor home, truck tractor, semi-trailer, trailer or equipment of a similar
nature when it is not associated with the business of the property shall be
prohibited in the front setback area. Storage of such personal vehicles is
permissible in an interior side yard or rear yard when screened by a solid six
foot tall, or higher, fence, wall or landscape barrier.
         (b)   Residential Districts.
            1.   No person shall store any vehicle not owned or leased by that
person or a member of that person's family, or household, on any property in a
Residential District.
            2.   In all Residential Districts, it shall be prohibited for any
person to park or store any personal vehicle having a gross vehicle weight
rating (GVWR) exceeding 14,000 pounds, except:
               a.   Temporary parking is permitted for the purpose of delivery
or the loading and unloading of household or permitted home occupation goods;
               b.   There shall be no GVWR limit for any personal vehicle
parked in the side, street side, or rear yard setback area when screened by a
solid six foot tall fence, wall, and/or landscape barrier;
               c.   The parking and storage of recreational vehicles shall be
subject to §
152.046(F)(14); and
               d.   Parking in residential districts shall also be subject to §
152.056(J).
            3.   In all Residential Districts, parking or storage of a
commercial vehicle shall be limited to one commercial vehicle with a maximum
GVWR of 14,000 pounds in the front, side, street side, or rear yard setback
area.
      (12)   Vehicle service. No person shall dismantle, repair, restore or
otherwise perform any work on any vehicle, machine, motor, or similar device
not owned or leased by that person or a member of that person's family, or
household, on any property in a Residential District. In addition, any work
performed beyond basic maintenance (tune-ups, service of fluids, replacement of
minor parts) shall be:
         (a)   Incidental to a permitted use and completely within a garage or
carport, or
         (b)   Completely within a paved concrete, asphalt, pavers, or gravel
area wholly enclosed from the view of surrounding properties and rights-of-way
by a solid structural barrier (either a wall or fence of ornamental block,
brick, wood, or combination of those materials) of six feet in height.
      (13)   Inoperable or unregistered vehicles. Any personal vehicles,
commercial vehicles and/or personal recreational vehicles, motor homes, utility
trailers, camp trailers, boats and similar equipment which is inoperable and/or
unregistered shall be parked or stored consistent with the following standards:
         (a)   Parking of operable vehicles, trailers, and vessels with
registration expired three months or less is permissible under a carport, in a
garage, or in an interior paved concrete, asphalt, pavers, or gravel side yard
or rear yard area when screened by a solid six foot tall fence, wall or
landscape barrier. No parking of inoperable or unregistered vehicles shall be
allowed in the required front yard setback or street side yard setback.
         (b)   Inoperable vehicles, trailers, and vessels and/or those
vehicles, trailers, and vessels with registration expired for a period greater
than three months shall be stored in a garage or an interior paved concrete,
asphalt, pavers, or gravel side yard or rear yard area when screened by a solid
six foot tall fence, wall or landscape barrier. No parking of inoperable or
unregistered vehicles shall be allowed in the required front yard setback or
street side yard setback.
      (14)   Recreational vehicle parking and storage. The parking and/or
storage of recreational vehicles, campers, travel trailers, motor homes, boats
and personal recreational vehicles and trailers is permitted on any residential
lot, subject to the following:
         (a)   Such equipment shall adhere to the provisions of §
152.046(F)(11) and §
152.056(J).
         (b)   Parking or storing in a required front yard or street side yard
setback area shall be prohibited unless all of the following conditions exist:
            1.   The vehicle does not exceed a gross vehicle weight rating
(GVWR) of 14,000 pounds;
            2.   The vehicle is parked on the designated driveway that provides
direct access to the garage from the street or on an improved area having an
asphalt, concrete, rock, gravel or other similar surface which is intended for
the parking of vehicles;
            3.   The vehicle does not extend over a sidewalk or street;
            4.   The vehicle is fully operable and legally registered; and
            5.   No more than two such vehicles or trailers are parked or
stored in the combined front or street side yard setback areas.
         (c)   There shall be no GVWR limit for any such equipment parked or
stored in the side, street side, or rear yard setback area when screened by a
solid six foot tall fence, wall, and/or landscape barrier as approved by the
Zoning Administrator. Such equipment shall be parked or stored so as to
maintain a minimum three-foot clearance on at least one side yard for emergency
access.
         (d)   Temporary parking of recreational vehicles/trailers or
recreational vehicles that exceed a gross vehicle weight of 14,000 pounds in a
required front or side yard setback, driveway is permitted for loading/
unloading or repairs for no more than 72 hours within seven consecutive days.
The Zoning Administrator may authorize a longer period of time if an emergency
exists, up to a maximum of five days.
         (e)   Such equipment shall be prohibited for human occupancy as a
permanent residence. Temporary occupancy is allowed for periods of no more than
72 hours within seven consecutive days. Any temporary occupancy that exceeds
this allowed period shall be required to obtain a temporary occupancy permit
from the Community Development Department and shall be limited to four weeks
per 12 month period. See §
152.047 for additional provisions and exceptions.
         (f)   Such equipment shall not be used for storage of goods,
materials, or equipment other than those items considered to be a part of the
recreational vehicle or essential for its use as a recreational vehicle.
      (15)   Alternative energy systems.
         (a)   Alternative energy systems, other than utility-scale (major)
electrical generating facilities, may be administratively approved as an
accessory use within any zoning district, subject to approval of a building
permit and meeting any applicable federal, state, county or town regulations.
         (b)   Alternative energy systems may be located on a parcel in a
manner consistent with any development standard (i.e. setback, height, lot
coverage) or accessory structure regulation (i.e. location standards) in the
respective zoning district in which the parcel is located.
         (c)   As part of the building permit review process, the Building
Official may require that design plans and an engineering report (e.g.
mechanical/electrical/structural), prepared and certified by an Arizona
licensed professional engineer, be included as a part of the building permit
submittal.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.047 TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Purpose. This section allows for the establishment of temporary uses
and/or activities that might not meet the normal development or use standards
of the applicable zoning district, but may be considered acceptable because of
their temporary nature. These activities are regulated to ensure that basic
health, safety, and community welfare standards are met, while also ensuring
compatibility is maintained between the proposed activity and surrounding
areas.
   (B)   Temporary use approval. All allowed temporary uses shall obtain a
temporary use permit, (unless otherwise stated in division (C) of this section
or exempt as identified in division (D) of this section), pursuant to §
152.092, of this chapter and provided that the temporary use complies with the
standards and/or conditions specified in division (C) below.
   (C)   Allowed temporary uses and structures.
      (1)   All temporary uses and structures, unless otherwise specified,
shall comply with the dimensional and development standards of the zoning
districts in which they are located. In the case of any conflict, the more
restrictive standards, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, shall apply.
      (2)   A construction trailer/yard may be permitted in any zoning district
during the construction of a permanent building when a valid building permit is
in effect, provided the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The uses are only associated with the developer/owner and
subdivision or project in which they are located.
         (b)   Off-street parking shall be provided for the office and
construction staff.
         (c)   Such structures and uses shall be located on the site no more
than 30 days prior to the start of construction and removed no more than 30
days after completion of the project or expiration of the approved TUP,
whichever occurs first. Unless satisfactory evidence is provided by the
property owner/contractor justifying the need for the extension of these time
limitations.
         (d)   The construction trailer/yard complex shall be permitted for no
longer than one year from the date of such approval, and may be renewed for
like periods thereafter upon submittal of satisfactory evidence from the
property owner indicating that the need for the use continues to exist on the
property.
      (3)   A temporary sales office, leasing office or model home may be
permitted, provided the following conditions are met:
         (a)   Such offices shall be located on the property being offered for
sale or lease. The temporary structures use shall be limited to the sale or
lease of on-site subdivided lots, dwelling units, or other types of on-site
real property.
         (b)   Off-street parking shall be provided for the sales office or
model home.
         (c)   All structures must meet all building code and permit
requirements for the appropriate category of construction.
         (d)   Any temporary use permit (TUP) approved for such office shall be
limited to a period of time not to exceed two years from the date of issue and
said permit may be renewed for like periods thereafter if the real property
being offered for sale or leased on the site has not been sold or leased.
         (e)   Upon sale of the development, cessation of the need for the use
(90% buildout) or termination of TUP, whichever comes first, all modifications
to structures and uses shall be removed.
      (4)   Carnivals, circuses, concerts, revivals, rodeos and similar
activities may be permitted, provided the following conditions are met:
         (a)   A temporary use permit (private property) shall be obtained or a
special event permit when the event is on town property.
         (b)   Staff shall ensure that health and fire safety is considered and
shall solicit the comments of the County Health Department and Fire Chief/
Marshal as necessary.
         (c)   Staff shall ensure that land area is adequate for the proposed
use's parking; and shall ensure that traffic safety is considered.
         (d)   Staff shall require measures to adequately protect surrounding
property.
         (e)   Permanent structures shall not be allowed.
         (f)   A special events permit or a temporary use permit shall pertain
to the allowable activity permitted during the time limit of the permit. A
change in ownership or sponsor applicant for the same activity during the time
limit of the permit shall not constitute grounds for extending the time granted
for the activity in the original permit.
      (5)   Outdoor vendor may be permitted, provided the following conditions
are met:
         (a)   The provisions of this division shall not apply to any event
located on town owned property or authorized by any other permit issued by the
town, such as a farmer's market, temporary; an authorized festival; very short
duration, primarily non-profit uses such as lemonade and Girl Scout cookie
stands; a school facility event, or recreational event if the vendor is in
partnership with the organization conducting the event and is located on the
site of the event.
         (b)   Outdoor vendors shall only be permitted to operate on town
specified property or on private property in commercial and mixed-use zoning
districts or the SC zoning district.
         (c)   Outdoor vending businesses are considered to be temporary in
nature and are not to be placed in a permanent way on a property.
         (d)   Outdoor vending will only be permitted on properties that have
been established with principal uses.
         (e)   All signs shall be affixed to the vending cart, stand or stall.
Stand-alone signs on any one side of the cart, stand or stall, shall be
approved as part of the TUP process. This type of sign will not require the
issuance of a separate sign permit.
         (f)   Vending carts, stands or stalls shall not block a driveway,
sidewalk or other point of emergency vehicular access, including emergency
access points.
         (g)   Vending carts, stands or stalls shall be located outside any
public sidewalk or nine feet from any street edge unless otherwise permitted.
If located near a street intersection, the vending cart, stand or stall must
maintain a visibility triangle per town code.
         (h)   Vending carts, stands or stalls located in parking areas shall
not reduce the number of parking spaces required for the principal use.
Additional off-street parking spaces must be provided for all employees of the
outdoor vending operation unless employees arrive in the vending cart.
         (i)   Vending carts, stands or stalls shall provide provisions for
proper collection and disposal of all solid waste generated by their operation.
         (j)   Vending carts, stands or stalls must be constructed of durable
and high-quality materials. Vending carts, stands or stalls must be maintained
in good condition and repair. Vending carts, stands or stalls that are in
disrepair shall be replaced or removed at the request of the Zoning
Administrator.
         (k)   The outdoor vending TUP will be conducted with proper licensing,
certification and registration required under the State of Arizona, Mohave
County and the town, if required.
         (l)   Every applicant, before being granted a permit for outdoor
vending shall submit the following:
            1.   Information providing support that the vending operation is in
conformance with the regulations outlined in this section.
            2.   Business registration for vending business and state tax
license number.
            3.   If permit will be on town property, proof of liability
insurance for $1,000,000 with the town listed as additionally insured.
         (m)   Approval, renewal, and revocation.
            1.   Outdoor vendor temporary use permits shall be subject/
stipulated to a specified maximum time period of operation.
            2.   Any use found to be in violation of the terms, conditions, or
restrictions of this chapter, the TUP or any other applicable laws shall be
subject to revocation.
      (6)   Seasonal and holiday sales, such as Christmas tree or pumpkin sales
on any open lot or parking lot in commercial or industrial zones are limited to
one sale per calendar quarter, lasting no longer than 45 consecutive days of
site occupation and operation.
      (7)   Outdoor arts and crafts shows and exhibits subject to not more than
15 days of operation or exhibition in any 90 day period.
      (8)   Outdoor parking lot sale events sponsored by businesses shall be
located on paved areas on the same lot as the structure containing the business
holding the event and are limited to one sale per calendar quarter, lasting no
longer than one week in duration. Rummage and other outdoor sales sponsored by
local non-profit organizations are limited to one sale in each six month
period.
      (9)   Farmer's market, temporary subject to not more than two days of
operation per seven day period.
      (10)   Stands for the sale of produce products are subject to not more
than 36 days a calendar year. Said stands shall not be located within any
public right-of-way and shall be kept free of litter and debris. The time
provisions of this section do not apply to the sale of produce raised on the
premises.
      (11)   A temporary second dwelling unit on a single legal parcel, for
guests, relatives, and/or caretakers in a recreational vehicle, for a period of
no more than four weeks per calendar year. A temporary occupancy permit must be
issued by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may authorize a
longer period of time if an emergency exists, up to a maximum of four
additional weeks. There shall be no extensions allowed and no re-application
permitted within 12 months of the expiration of such permits. Such temporary
second dwelling units shall not be used as rentals.
      (12)   Other temporary uses or structures may be approved using the
process established in §
152.047.
   (D)   Exempt temporary uses. The following temporary uses and events are
exempt from the requirement for a temporary use permit, but may require other
town approval to ensure public health, safety, and welfare.
      (1)   Garage sales, yard sales, and the sale of similar home-type
products, shall be limited to a maximum of three weekends every quarter in a
calendar year per residential location.
      (2)   Events which occur in meeting halls, theaters, or other permanent
indoor or outdoor public assembly facilities subject to all applicable
regulations of this code.
      (3)   Promotional activities related to the primary product lines of a
retail business, and similar activities (e.g. book readings and signings at
book stores, opening receptions at art galleries).
      (4)   Emergency public health and safety activities.
      (5)   Temporary nonprofit or fundraising car washes are permitted in non-
residential districts.
      (6)   Town sponsored events.
      (7)   Events held on town owned property shall obtain a special event
permit.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
§ 152.055 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   (1)   This subchapter includes standards that regulate the physical
layout and design of all development within the town to ensure the protection
of the health, welfare, safety, and quality of life. These provisions address
the physical relationship between development and adjacent properties, public
streets, neighborhoods, and the natural environment, in order to implement the
general plan vision for a more attractive, efficient, and livable community.
      (2)   The provisions of this chapter are complementary and supplementary
to and not in lieu of other provisions of this code. In the event of a conflict
between a provision of this chapter and any more restrictive provision of this
code applicable to a particular development, the more restrictive provision
shall apply.
      (3)   Every activity, operation or land use shall comply with the
following performance standards regardless of the zoning district in which they
are located. The Zoning Administrator may be responsible for insuring
compliance with these performance standards and shall invoke the provisions for
enforcement of compliance with these performance standards wherever there is
reasonable evidence that performance standards are being violated by such use.
   (B)   Glare and heat. Any activity producing intense glare or heat shall be
performed within a completely enclosed building in such a manner as not to
create a nuisance or hazard along property lines.
   (C)   Lighting. No light that flashes, revolves or otherwise resembles a
traffic control signal shall be allowed in any area where such light could
create a hazard for passing vehicular traffic. All outdoor lighting shall be
installed, maintained and utilized in conformance with §
152.059.
   (D)   Fire and explosion hazards. All disposals of waste materials by
outdoors incineration on the premises are expressly prohibited. All storage of
and other activities involving flammable and explosive materials shall be
provided adequate safety devices against hazards of fire and explosion,
together with adequate fire-fighting and fire suppression equipment and devices
standard in industry. All storage of flammable or explosive materials shall
further comply with locational requirements set forth by the Fire District or
as established by this chapter or other town ordinances.
   (E)   Vibration. Every use shall be so operated that the ground vibration
inherently and recurrently generated is not discernible without instruments at
any point beyond the site property line.
   (F)   Air pollution. No owner or occupant of land, whether improved or
unimproved, shall cause or permit unreasonable quantities of smoke, noxious
fumes, gas, soot or cinders to emanate beyond the boundaries of that land
except with a Fire Department burning permit. Use of a home barbeque, fire pit
or similar shall not be considered unreasonable.
   (G)   Liquids and solid waste. No materials, compounds or chemicals that can
contaminate any water supply, interfere with bacterial process in sewerage
treatment or otherwise cause emission of elements which are offensive or
hazardous to the public health, safety, welfare or comfort shall be discharged
at any point into any public sewer, private sewage disposal system, waterway or
into the ground, except in accordance with the standards approved by the
Arizona State Department of Health and Environmental Services or such
governmental agency as may have jurisdiction over such activities.
   (H)   Odors. No emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter shall be
permitted in such quantities as to be offensive in such a manner as to create a
nuisance or hazard beyond the site property line.
   (I)   Noise. All uses shall comply with the standards in §
130.26.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.056 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   (A)   Purpose. This section establishes minimum standards for parking and
loading. These standards are intended to promote the general welfare and public
safety by ensuring that an adequate amount of permanent, safe, accessible, and
attractive parking is provided in the town. The parking standards are intended
to provide for adequate ingress and egress by motor vehicles, recreational
vehicles, boats and buses.
   (B)   Applicability. Every use and structure, including a change or
expansion of a use or structure shall provide accessory parking and loading
areas as set forth below. Except when specifically exempted, the requirements
of this section shall also apply to all parking lots that are the principal use
on a site.
      (1)   New buildings and land uses. Off-street parking and loading shall
be provided as required by this section at the time any new building or
structure is erected or any new land use is established.
      (2)   Expansion of existing nonresidential buildings. When the floor area
of an existing structure is increased, additional off-street parking and
loading shall be provided as required by this section for the additional floor
area only, provided that the existing parking was legally established and has
not been reduced. If the number of existing parking and loading spaces is
greater than the requirements for such use, the number of spaces in excess of
the prescribed minimum may be counted toward meeting the parking and loading
requirements for the addition or enlargement.
      (3)   Addition of use to existing nonresidential buildings. When a new
use locates on a parcel with an existing use, all off-street parking shall be
provided to meet the total number of spaces required for the existing use and
the new use, unless the uses meet the requirements of §
152.056(E)(4) or alternative guidelines that are expressly allowed by other
provisions of this code.
      (4)   Change in use of existing nonresidential buildings. When a change
in use requires more off-street parking than the previous use, additional
parking and loading spaces shall be provided equivalent to the difference
between the number of spaces required by this section for the immediately
previous use and the total number of spaces required by the new use. A change
in occupancy is not considered a change in use unless the new occupant is in a
different use classification than the former occupant.
      (5)   Alterations that increase the number of dwelling units. The
creation of additional dwelling units through the alteration of an existing
building or construction of an additional structure or structures requires
added off-street parking, as required by this section, to serve the new
dwelling units. This requirement does not apply when sufficient off-street
parking exists to provide the number of spaces required for the existing and
new dwelling units.
      (6)   When required. Off-street parking and loading facilities required
by this section shall be constructed or installed prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy for the uses that they serve.
   (C)   General parking and loading regulations.
      (1)   Parking and loading spaces to be permanent. Parking and loading
spaces shall be permanently available, marked and maintained in good repair/
condition for parking or loading purposes for the use they are intended to
serve during the life of the use.
      (2)   Reduction in parking area. The owner or occupant of any building or
use subject to off-street parking requirements under this section shall not
discontinue or reduce any existing required parking without first having
established other parking spaces which meet all requirements of this section to
replace those being lost or except after proof that, by reason of reduction in
floor area, seating area or other factors, the proposed reduced area for off-
street parking or loading will conform to the requirements of this section.
      (3)   Restriction of parking area use.  Required off-street parking,
circulation, and access areas shall be used exclusively for the temporary
parking and maneuvering of motorized, operative vehicles. In all non-
residential zones, parking areas shall not be used for the sale, lease,
display, repair, or storage of vehicles, trailers, boats, campers, mobile
homes, merchandise, or equipment, or for any other use not authorized by the
provisions of this code. In all residential districts parking shall be
restricted per §
152.056(J).
      (4)   Located on same site. Parking and loading facilities shall be
located on the same site with the use the facilities serve or on a contiguous,
identically zoned lot that is incorporated into the development site. Off-site
parking facilities may be permitted subject to the requirements of §
152.056(E)(5).
      (5)   Located off-street. All parking and loading facilities required by
this section shall be provided off-street and shall not be located within any
public right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, or parkway, unless expressly allowed by
other provisions of this code.
      (6)   Surplus parking. The provisions of this section shall also apply to
parking and loading facilities provided in excess to those required, unless
otherwise expressly stated in this code.
      (7)   Surfacing and maintenance. All off-street parking shall be paved
with asphalt or concrete, and be graded and drained per the town engineering
standards and as approved by the Town Engineer and shall be maintained in good
condition free of weeds, dust, trash and debris. In cases of certifiable short
term or temporary use, parking lot surfaces may be constructed to a lesser
standard if approved during the development review process.
   (D)   Number of parking spaces required. Except as otherwise expressly
stated, off-street motor vehicle parking spaces must be provided in accordance
with Table 4.2-1: Parking Spaces Required.
Table 4.2-1: Parking Spaces Required
Use Category Specific Use Type Minimum Vehicle Spaces Required
Table 4.2-1: Parking Spaces Required
Use         Specific Use Type                                                       Minimum Vehicle Spaces Required
Category
            Single-Family Detached and Attached; Modular; Duplex; Manufactured Home Two spaces per dwelling unit
                                                                                    Studio and one bedroom unit - 1.5 space per unit
            Multi-Family; Residential component of Mixed Use District               Two bedroom units - 1.5 spaces per unit
                                                                                    Three or more bedroom units - 2 spaces per unit
            Live/Work                                                               Two spaces per dwelling unit
Residential Manufactured Home Park                                                  Two spaces per dwelling unit + 1 space for every 8 dwelling units/
Use                                                                                 lots for guests
Categories  Recreational Vehicle Park                                               One space per RV space + 1 space for every 8 RV spaces for guests
            Assisted Living Center                                                  0.5 space per residential room/unit +1 space for every 4 rooms/units
                                                                                    for guests and employees
            Assisted Living Home; Child Care Home; Group Care Home; Resident Care   Same as single-family
            Home
            Boarding/Shelter Care                                                   One space per 3 beds + 1 space per employee
            Nursing Home                                                            One space per 4 beds (based on maximum capacity)
            Arboretum or Botanical Garden                                           See §
                                                                                    152.056(D)(3)
            Assembly Hall/Auditorium; Community Center; Country Club Library;       One space per 4 fixed seats or 1 space per 300 SF GFA where fix
            Fraternal or Social Club; Social Service Facility                       seating is not provided
            Bus Terminal                                                            Six spaces per 1,000 SF of waiting area
            Campground                                                              One space per camp site
            Cemetery                                                                Minimum 5% of the gross area shall be made available for parking
            Child Care Center                                                       One space per 400 SF GFA
            College or University                                                   See §
                                                                                    152.056(D)(3)
            Crematorium or Funeral Parlor                                           One space per 4 fixed seats or 1 space per 300 SF GFA where fix
                                                                                    seating is not provided
Public and  Community Playfields and Parks                                          See §
Semi-Public                                                                         152.056(D)(3)
Use         Government Office and Civic Building                                    One space per 300 SF GFA
Categories  Hospital                                                                One space per 2 inpatient beds + 1 per employee on a normal shift
            Medical Clinic                                                          One space per 350 SF GFA
            Museum                                                                  One space per 300 SF of display area
            Public Safety Facility                                                  One space per employee + 1 space per fleet vehicle + 1 space per 350
                                                                                    SF of usable office/meeting space
            Religious Assembly                                                      One space per 4 fixed seats or 1 space per 300 SF GFA where fix
                                                                                    seating is not provided
            School, Public or Private, K- 8                                         One space per classroom + 1 space for each 200 SF of indoor assembly
                                                                                    area
            School, Public or Private, 9- 12                                        One space per 200 SF of classroom and office area
            Solar Generation Facility                                               One space per employee
            Telecommunication Facility (Including Tower and Supporting Facilities)  None
            Utility Facility and Service Yard                                       One space per employee + 1 space per fleet vehicle if present at site
Agriculture Agriculture, General                                                    None
Use         Market Garden                                                           One per 5,000 SF of lot area
Categories  Ranching, Commercial                                                    See §
                                                                                    152.056(D)(3)
            Adult Entertainment Business                                            One space per 200 SF GFA
            Animal Services (Kennel, Veterinary)                                    One space per 400 SF GFA
            Commercial Entertainment:
               Indoor:                                                           One space per 4 fixed seats or 1 space per 300 SF GFA, whichever is
                                                                                    greater
               Movie Theater:                                                    One space per 3 seats
               Outdoor:                                                          See §
                                                                                    152.056(D)(3)
            Commercial Recreation:
               General Recreation, Indoor:                                       One space per 200 SF GFA
               General Recreation, Outdoor:                                      Five spaces per acre of facility + 1 space per 4 persons of total
                                                                                    maximum capacity of facility
               Fitness and Sports Center:                                        One space per 200 SF GFA
               Tour Services:                                                    See §
                                                                                    152.056(D)(3)
               Bowling Alley:                                                    Three spaces per lane + required spaces for ancillary uses
               Billiards:                                                        Three spaces per table + required spaces for ancillary uses
               Golf Course:                                                      Five spaces per hole + required spaces for ancillary uses
               Golf Driving Range:                                               Two spaces per tee + required spaces for ancillary uses
            Personal Services                                                       One space per 300 SF GFA
            Financial Institution                                                   One space per 250 SF GFA
            Food and Beverage Services:
               Bar, Lounge, or Tavern:                                           One space per 75 SF patron space + 1 space per 200 SF of outdoor
                                                                                    seating area
               Microbrewery, Distillery, and/or Tasting Room:                    One space per 150 SF patron space
               Nightclub:                                                        One space per 75 SF patron space + 1 space per 200 SF of outdoor area
                                                                                    One space per 120 SF GFA + 1 space per 400 SF of outdoor seating area
               Restaurant, Full Service:                                         + (1 RV/boat/bus space per 14 required spaces (1 minimum) shall be
                                                                                    provided, but may count towards total required spaces. See also §
                                                                                    152.056(F)(3))
                                                                                    One space per 75 SF GFA + 1 space per 400 SF of outdoor seating area
Commercial     Restaurant, Limited Service:                                      + (1 RV/boat/bus space per 14 required spaces (1 minimum) shall be
Use                                                                                 provided, but may count towards total required spaces. See also §
Categories                                                                          152.056(F)(3))
               Medical Marijuana Dispensary, Operation or Cultivation            See §
                                                                                    152.056(D)(3)
            Office:
               Business or Professional; Research Laboratory:                    One space per 300 SF GFA
               Medical and Dental:                                               One space per 250 SF GFA
               Personal Services:                                                One space per 300 SF GFA
            Retail Sales:
               Alcoholic beverages; Convenience Store; Retail, General; Business One space per 300 SF GFA
            Services:
               Retail, Large:                                                    One space per 300 SF GFA
               Nursery, Commercial; Feed Store:                                  One space per 400 SF of sales and display area
               Outdoor Vending:                                                  One space per employee + principal use
               Farmers Market; Flea Market:                                      One space per 500 SF of designated vendor area
               Self-Storage, Indoor                                              One space per 50 units or 1 space per 5,000 SF of storage area,
                                                                                    whichever is greater
            Instructional Services or Trade Schools                                 One space per 200 SF GFA
            Vehicle Services:
               Vehicle/Boat, Sales and Leasing; Rentals:                         One space per 400 SF of sales and service buildings + 1 space per
                                                                                    10,000 SF of outdoor display area
                                                                                    Three spaces per service bay + 1 space per 350 SF of additional
               Vehicle/Boat, Repair:                                             retail sales and service area (service bay shall not be counted as a
                                                                                    parking space)
               Car Wash, Full Service:                                           One space per 200 SF of sales, office and lounge area
               Car Wash, Self- Serve:                                            0.5 spaces per bay + stacking (§ 152.056(K)(7))
               Service Station:                                                  Space at pump + 1 space per fueling position
               Service Station with Convenience Store:                           Space at pump + 1 space per fueling position + 1 space per 300 SF GFA
            Visitor Services:
                                                                                    One space per guest room + 1 space per 4 persons of total maximum
                                                                                    capacity of banquet room (if present) + 2 spaces per 3 employees + (1
               Hotel or Motel:                                                   RV/boat/bus space per 6 guest rooms (1 minimum) shall be provided,
                                                                                    but may count towards total required spaces. See also §
                                                                                    152.056(F)(3))
            Building Materials; Wholesale                                           One space per 500 SF of sales related area + 1 space per 350 SF of
                                                                                    office area
            Distribution Warehouse/Yard                                             One space per 2,000 SF of warehouse and/or 5,000 SF of yard related
                                                                                    area + 1 space per 350 SF of office area
            Manufacturing/Assembly:                                                  
               Light:                                                            One space per 500 SF of warehouse area + 1 space per 350 SF of office
Industrial                                                                          area
Use            Heavy:                                                            One space per 1,000 SF of warehouse area + 1 space per 350 SF of
Categories                                                                          office area
            Resource Extraction                                                     See §
                                                                                    152.056(D)(3)
            Outside Storage (Boat/RV)                                               Minimum 4 spaces + 1 space per employee
            Truck Stop                                                              See §
                                                                                    152.056(D)(3)
            Waste, Salvage and Recycling Facility                                   See §
                                                                                    152.056(D)(3)
 
      (1)   Multiple uses. Unless otherwise specified, lots containing more
than one use shall provide parking and loading in an amount equal to the total
of the requirements for all activities.
      (2)   Non-specified parking requirements. It is recognized that
specifying a single parking requirement for some uses listed in Table 4.2-1 is
not reasonably feasible due to the far-reaching variation in use
characteristics that can exist within that specific use type. For those uses
listed in Table 4.2-1 that do not have a specific parking requirement
identified, the Zoning Administrator shall determine a parking requirement
based upon the requirements for the most similar comparable use, the particular
characteristics of the proposed use, and any other relevant data regarding
parking demand. In order to make this determination, the Zoning Administrator
may require the applicant to submit a parking demand study or other
information, at the applicant's cost. The parking demand study may include, but
is not limited to, estimates of parking demand based on recommendations of the
Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), or other acceptable sources as
approved by the Zoning Administrator, and should include other reliable data
collected from uses or combinations of uses that are the same as or comparable
with the proposed use.
      (3)   Unspecified uses. Where buildings are constructed without uses
specified (i.e. shell buildings), the use with the highest parking requirement
among all uses specified for the zoning district where the site is located
shall be used to calculate off-street parking requirements.
      (4)   Uses not listed. Parking for land uses not specifically listed in
Table 4.2-1 shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator based upon the
requirements for the most similar comparable use, the particular
characteristics of the proposed use, and any other relevant data regarding
parking demand. In order to make this determination, the Zoning Administrator
may require the applicant to submit a parking demand study or other
information, at the applicant's cost. The parking demand study may include, but
is not limited to, estimates of parking demand based on recommendations of the
Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), or other acceptable sources as
approved by the Zoning Administrator, and should include other reliable data
collected from uses or combinations of uses that are the same as, or comparable
with, the proposed use.
      (5)   Uses in the CBD Zoning District. The parking requirements for uses
in the CBD zoning district may be amended in the following manner:
         (a)   Parking requirements shall be half of those listed in Table 4.2-
1, with the exception of service stations, grocery and supermarkets, laundries,
and motels and hotels, each of which shall meet all requirements listed in
Table 4.2-1.
         (b)   A parking demand study may be prepared and submitted, at the
applicant's cost, to request a modification to parking requirements within the
CBD Zoning District. The parking demand study may include, but is not limited
to, estimates of parking demand based on recommendations of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE), or other acceptable sources as approved by the
Zoning Administrator, and should include other reliable data collected from
uses or combinations of uses that are the same as or comparable with the
proposed use. The study should also take into account peak operating hours and
both on-street and off-street parking conditions to accurately demonstrate
parking demand and supply.
         (c)   For any change of use within the CBD Zoning District that may
require an increase to available off-street parking that cannot be accommodated
on-site, §
152.056(E), the Zoning Administrator may accept a traffic management plan,
prepared by the applicant at their expense, which contains information on the
strategies, designated parking areas, peak operating hours, and information
indicating the applicant's ability to provide and enforce these elements over
time. The Zoning Administrator may impose conditions that are needed to ensure
the long-term compliance to the plan, including but not limited to a reserve
parking area, phasing, or contributions to other alternative means of
transportation or parking accommodations.
      (6)   Basis of calculation. When calculating the number of parking spaces
required results in a fractional number, any fraction one -half or greater
shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.
      (7)   Occupancy or capacity-based standards. For the purpose of computing
parking requirements based on employees, students, residents or occupants,
calculations must be based on the largest number of persons working on any
single shift, the maximum enrollment or the maximum fire-rated capacity,
whichever results in the greater number of spaces, unless otherwise explicitly
specified within Table 4.2-1.
   (E)   Alternative parking provisions. Where conditions preclude the
provision of the number of off-street parking spaces required by Table 4.2-1,
the following alternative parking provisions may be available, subject to town
approval:
      (1)   On-street parking. On-street parking spaces in the right-of-way
along the property line, between the lot lines of the site, may be counted to
satisfy the minimum off-street parking requirements for non-residential uses.
One on-street parking space may be substituted for each required off-street
space. These provisions only apply to street frontages where on-street parking
is allowed and provided. The parking space credit shall be determined at the
time of site plan approval.
      (2)   Tandem parking. Shall mean a space where one vehicle parks behind
another, so that one vehicle must be moved before the other can be accessed.
Accessible parking spaces shall not be used for tandem parking spaces. Tandem
parking shall be limited to a maximum of two cars in depth and no less than
nine feet wide and 40 feet long. Tandem parking stalls are only allowed for:
         (a)   Residential uses. Tandem parking spaces shall be allowed for
single-family, duplex and townhome residential with spaces and access paved in
accordance with the town engineering standards.
         (b)   Multi-family residential uses. Tandem parking spaces shall be
allowed for condominium and multifamily residential uses, subject to the
following conditions:
            1.   The tandem spaces shall be reserved for and assigned to
dwelling units which are required to have two or more parking spaces; and
            2.   Tandem spaces shall not be used for guest parking.
         (c)   Non-residential uses. Tandem parking spaces shall not be allowed
for new non-residential construction.
      (3)   Shared parking.  The Zoning Administrator may approve shared
parking arrangements for developments or uses with different operating hours or
different peak business periods if the shared parking complies with all of the
following standards:
         (a)   Eligible developments or uses.  Shared parking arrangements
shall only be allowed for non-residential uses with different hours of
operation or different peak business periods.
         (b)   Location.
            1.   Shared parking facilities shall be located on the subject
property of the specified principal uses proposing to use shared facilities.
            2.   All shared parking facilities shall be located within 600 feet
from the subject site to the primary entrance of each principal use. The
distance of the off-street parking area to the principal uses shall be measured
along the shortest legal and acceptable pedestrian route. Acceptable pedestrian
routes are defined within §
152.056(K)(7).
         (c)   Parking study required. Those proposing to use shared parking as
a means of satisfying off-street parking requirements shall submit a shared
parking study to staff that clearly demonstrates the feasibility of shared
parking. At a minimum, the study must address the size and type of the proposed
development, the composition of tenants, the anticipated rate of parking
turnover and the anticipated peak parking and traffic loads for all uses that
will be sharing off-street parking spaces.
         (d)   Design and improvement standards. All newly-constructed shared
parking facilities shall conform to the same standards of access,
configuration, landscaping, lighting, layout, location, and size as are
required by this section for off-street parking spaces.
         (e)   Covenant required. A town-approved covenant shall be recorded
with the county that includes a description of the shared parking arrangement,
a requirement that all current and future tenants are notified of and shall
adhere to the same hours of operation and conditions of the shared parking
approval. Recordation of the agreement must take place before issuance of a
building permit or business registration/renewal for any use to be served by
the off-site parking area. The Zoning Administrator may grant permission to
dissolve a shared parking agreement only if all required off-street parking
spaces will be provided, in accordance with §
152.056(D) and (E).
      (4)   Off-site parking. The Zoning Administrator may approve the location
of required off-site parking spaces on a separate lot from the lot on which the
principal use is located if the off-site parking complies with all of the
following standards:
         (a)   Ineligible uses. Unless expressly permitted, off-site parking
may not be allowed for residential uses or other convenience-oriented uses.
         (b)   Location.
            1.   Off-site parking may be allowed only in the CBD district, or
outside the CBD upon issuance of a permit for a special event.
            2.   All off-site parking spaces shall be located within 600 feet
from the subject site to the primary entrance of the principal use, unless a
remote shuttle bus or valet parking service is provided. The distance of the
off-site parking area to the principal use shall be measured along the shortest
legal and acceptable pedestrian route. Acceptable pedestrian routes are defined
within §
152.056(K)(7).
            3.   Required parking spaces for persons with disabilities may not
be located off-site.
         (c)   Design and improvement standards. All newly-constructed off-site
parking spaces shall conform to the same standards of access, configuration,
landscaping, lighting, layout, location, and size as are required by this
section for off-street parking spaces.
         (d)   Terms of off-site parking.
            1.   A town-approved covenant shall be recorded with the county
that includes a description of the off-site parking and a requirement that the
owner of the separated lot maintain the required parking for the life of the
use to which it is covenanted.
            2.   The owner or operator of a business that uses approved off-
site space to satisfy the parking requirements of this chapter shall
immediately notify the Zoning Administrator of any change of ownership or use
of the property for which the spaces are required, and of any termination or
default of the agreement between the parties.
            3.   Should an agreement for required off-site parking expire or
otherwise terminate, the Zoning Administrator shall determine a reasonable time
in which one of the following shall occur:
               a.   Substitute parking is provided that is acceptable to the
town; or
               b.   The size or capacity of the use is reduced in proportion to
the parking spaces lost.
            4.   If the above conditions are not met in the timeframe
identified, the use for which the off-site parking was provided shall be
considered nonconforming and any and all approvals, including conditional use
permits shall be subject to revocation.
      (5)   Electric vehicle charging stations. Each charging station counts
toward the minimum number of required parking spaces.
   (F)   Parking space dimensions.
      (1)   Vehicular parking space dimensions. All vehicular parking areas
shall comply with the minimum dimension requirements as set forth in Table 4.2-
2 and as illustrated in Figure 4.2-A.
Table 4.2-2: Vehicle Parking Dimensions
A             B             C             D            E            F
Parking Angle Parking Space Parking Space Aisle Width  Aisle Width  Curb Length
              Width1        Length2       (1-Way)      (2-Way)
Table 4.2-2: Vehicle Parking Dimensions
A             B             C             D            E            F
Parking Angle Parking Space Parking Space Aisle Width  Aisle Width  Curb Length
              Width1        Length2       (1-Way)      (2-Way)
90            10 feet       20 feet       23 feet      24 feet      10 feet
60            10 feet       21 feet       18 feet      24 feet      11 feet 7
                                                                    inches
45            10 feet       19 feet 10    13 feet      24 feet      14 feet 2
                            inches                                  inches
30            10 feet       17 feet 4     12 feet      20 feet      20 feet
                            inches
Parallel      10 feet       N/A           12 feet      20 feet      22 feet 3 
1   The width of a parking space shall be increased by 2 feet when adjacent to
fences, walls, or planters.
2   The length of a parking space can be reduced subject to meeting the
requirements of §
152.056(K)(5). The length of the parking space and use of wheel stops shall be
implemented in a manner that assures vehicle overhang will avoid contact with
abutting objects such as landscaping, irrigation, or walls and vehicle
intrusion on walkways.
3   A single parallel parking space shall have a curb length of 26 feet.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1901.png]
 
      (2)   Motorcycle parking. All developments shall be allowed to designate
a portion of their required ten feet by 20 feet parking spaces for motorcycle
parking.
      (3)   Recreational vehicle and bus parking space dimensions. All
recreational vehicle, boat, personal watercraft or bus parking areas shall be a
minimum of 12 feet in width and 35 feet in length. If 12 feet in width and 40
feet in length stalls are provided, they may be counted as two required
standard stalls.
   (G)   Accessible parking. Off-street handicapped accessible parking spaces
shall be provided in accordance with Table 4.2-3 for all uses that provide off-
street parking. All disabled accessible parking spaces shall count toward
fulfilling the off-street parking requirements of this section.
      (1)   Number of spaces required for residential. Handicapped-accessible
parking for residential uses shall be provided at the rate of one space per
each dwelling unit that is designated for occupancy by the handicapped.
      (2)   Number of spaces required for non-residential. Handicapped-
accessible parking for non-residential uses shall be in accordance with the
rate shown in the table below:
Table 4.2-3: Accessible Parking Requirements
Total Number of Parking Spaces Provided Minimum Number of Required Accessible
in Parking Facility                     Parking Spaces
Table 4.2-3: Accessible Parking Requirements
Total Number of Parking Spaces Provided Minimum Number of Required Accessible
in Parking Facility                     Parking Spaces
1 to 25                                 1
26 to 50                                2
51 to 75                                3
76 to 100                               4
101 to 150                              5
151 to 200                              6
201 to 300                              7
301 to 400                              8
401 to 500                              9
501 to 1,000                            2 % of total
1,001 and over                          20, plus 1 for each 100, or fraction
                                        thereof, over 1,000
 
         (a)   Where more than one parking facility is provided on a site, the
number of accessible spaces provided on the site shall be calculated separately
according to the number of spaces required for each parking facility.
         (b)   For every six or fraction of six parking spaces required by
Table 4.2-3, at least one shall be a van parking space.
      (3)   Dimensions of accessible parking space. Vehicle accessible spaces
shall be at least eight-feet wide and have at least a five-foot wide access
aisle abutting the designated parking space. Van accessible spaces shall be at
least eight-feet wide and have at least an eight-foot wide access aisle
abutting the designated parking space.
      (4)   Location of accessible parking spaces. Accessible parking spaces
shall be located on the shortest accessible and unobstructed route from the
parking space to an accessible building or facility entrance. In parking
facilities where the accessible route must cross vehicular traffic lanes, the
route shall be designated and marked as a crosswalk. Where possible, it is also
preferable that the accessible route not pass behind parked vehicles.
   (H)   Loading area requirements.
      (1)   Passenger loading areas. A passenger loading space is the area a
vehicle occupies while loading or unloading passengers. Passenger loading areas
shall be provided in accordance with the following table of minimum
requirements. The required passenger loading spaces shall not be part of the
spaces used to satisfy the off-street parking requirements.
Table 4.2-4: Passenger Loading Area Requirements
Use Type Loading Spaces Required
Table 4.2-4: Passenger Loading Area Requirements
Use Type                    Loading Spaces Required
Cultural or Public Facility 2
Day Care Center, Commercial 3
Hospital                    2
Medical Offices             1 per 5,000 sq. ft.
Hotel or Motel              3
Religious Assembly          1 per 50 required parking spaces
Multi-Family Residential    1 per 50 units
Tour Services               1 per active tour vehicle (based on typical
                            operations)
Other                       Determined by Zoning Administrator
 
         (a)   Location. Passenger loading areas shall be provided adjacent to
the main entrance of the use or structure they are intended to serve, unless
another entrance serves as the main point of access from the parking area to
the structure or use.
         (b)   Maneuvering. Passenger loading areas shall consist of a vehicle
turnout area so as to not interfere with the circulation of vehicles,
pedestrians or bicycles within the parking area.
         (c)   Dimensions. A passenger loading space shall be a minimum of 12
feet in width and 25 feet in length, unless off-street loading will involve the
use of recreation vehicles or other vehicles in excess of 25 feet in length, in
which case loading spaces shall be at least 12 feet in width and 65 feet in
length. A minimum vertical clearance of 14 feet shall be maintained.
      (2)   Material loading areas. Whenever the operation of any use requires
that goods, merchandise, or equipment be delivered to or shipped from that use,
such as grocery stores, furniture or appliance stores, plant nurseries, retail
uses, hospitals, educational uses, and manufacturing and processing centers,
off-street material loading and unloading areas shall be provided in accordance
with the following table of minimum requirements. The required material loading
spaces shall not be part of the spaces used to satisfy the off-street parking
requirements.
Table 4.2-5: Material Loading Area Requirements
Gross Floor Area (sq. ft.)1 Loading Spaces Required
Table 4.2-5: Material Loading Area Requirements
Gross Floor Area (sq. ft.)1 Loading Spaces Required
0 - 15,000                  1
15,001 - 40,000             2
40,001 - 90,000             3
90,001 - 150,000            4
Over 150,000                5
1   Outdoor storage, sales or display areas are included as part of the
calculation of gross floor area if these areas contain materials that are
received or distributed via trucks.
 
         (a)   Location. Material loading areas shall be on the same lot or
parcel of land as the use or structure they are intended to serve and shall be
located as near as possible to the building door openings providing loading
access.
         (b)   Dimensions. Required loading space dimensions depend upon the
size of delivery vehicles serving the site. Minimum sizes are as follows:
            1.   Ten feet wide, 30 feet long, 14 feet overhead clearance:
Spaces serving single-unit trucks and similar delivery vehicles.
            2.   Twelve feet wide, 65 feet long, 15 feet overhead clearance:
Spaces serving larger freight vehicles.
         (c)   Maneuvering. Minimum required maneuvering areas depend upon the
size of delivery vehicles serving the site. Minimum maneuvering sizes are as
follows:
            1.   Thirty feet: Spaces serving single-unit trucks and similar
delivery vehicles.
            2.   Fifty feet: Spaces serving larger freight vehicles.
            3.   Maneuvering areas for loading spaces must not conflict with
parking spaces or with the maneuvering areas for parking spaces. All
maneuvering shall be contained on-site and shall not interfere with any public
right-of-way.
            4.   The provisions of this division (H)(2)(c) shall not apply to
uses located in the CBD zoning district.
         (d)   Setbacks and screening. Loading areas may not be located in a
required setback. See §
152.057(C)(6) for specific guidelines regarding screening of loading areas.
      (3)   Exceptions. Exceptions may be granted when a traffic or parking
study demonstrates the need for lower loading requirements.
   (I)   Bicycle parking.
      (1)   Bicycle parking requirement. Bicycle parking is required for multi-
family residential and non-residential development. The number of bicycle
parking spaces provided shall be at least equal to 5% of the number of vehicle
parking spaces required under this section.
      (2)   Bicycle location requirement.  Bicycle parking facilities shall be
located on the same lot as the use for which it is intended to serve, have
convenient access to the main entrance of the principal building or structure,
and maximize visibility from the main entrance and/or other high activity
areas.
      (3)   Bicycle space dimensions. Bicycle spaces shall measure two feet in
width by six feet in length or demonstrate feasible alternative.
      (4)   Bicycle parking design. Bicycle parking racks shall support each
bicycle in a method that does not use a wheel as the primary means of support
and connection to the rack. Bicycle parking racks shall also be securely
anchored to a hard surface.
   (J)   Special parking requirements for residential uses.
      (1)   Type of required residential parking spaces. Required spaces for
all non-multi-family residential uses may be either side-by-side or tandem as
specified in §
152.056(E)(3), side-by-side parking areas shall at a minimum measure 18 feet
wide by 20 feet deep with no obstructions. Tandem spaces shall at a minimum
measure nine feet wide by 40 feet deep with no obstructions.
      (2)   Residential driveway design.
         (a)   All residential lots except in the AR and RE zoning districts
shall provide a paved driveway between a local public street or private drive
and all required parking spaces. If access to a public street is provided via
an alley, the alley and drive shall be fully paved.
         (b)   Residential driveways shall not be less than 20 feet in length,
as measured from the back of sidewalk, or right-of-way line if no sidewalk is
provided, to the front face of a dwelling unit (i.e. garage or carport).
         (c)   Residential driveways which provide access from a garage to an
alley may be less than 20 feet in length, provided that the total width of the
alley and the total length of the driveway combine to provide a minimum length
of 23 feet for the maneuvering area.
      (3)   Location of residential parking spaces.
         (a)   Parking spaces for residential uses, as specified in Table 4.2-
1, may be allowed in the front yard setback area or street side yard setback
for corner lots, but not both.
         (b)   The portion of a residential driveway or maneuvering area
located within the front setback (or street side yard setback for corner lots)
of lots zoned AR, RE, R-1, R-2, MHS, and MHP may be used for parking of
vehicles for occupants and guests, subject to the following requirements:
            1.   Parking of vehicles shall be done only on areas paved with
concrete, asphalt, pavers, or gravel areas. Lots located in the AR and RE
Districts shall be exempt from this requirement.
            2.   The combined extent of residential driveway, maneuvering, and
parking areas shall not occupy more than 50% of the required front or street
side yard setback area or three stalls (nine feet by 18 feet) for lot widths
above 50 feet, whichever is greater.
            3.   The required front or street side yard setback area that is
allowed to be used for residential driveway, maneuvering, and parking areas can
be covered if the cover meets the following criteria:
               a.   Is open on three sides;
               b.   Is architecturally compatible with the dwelling unit; and
               c.   Does not extend into rights-of-way or easements.
         (c)   For all lots zoned AR, RE, R-1, R-2, MHS, and MHP parking of
vehicles within any interior side or rear yard is permissible, provided the
area is paved with concrete, asphalt, pavers, or gravel and is not located
closer than three feet to an abutting side property line, unless a shared
driveway is utilized.
   (K)   Parking area design and layout standards. In addition to meeting the
applicable off-street parking requirements of this section, the following
parking area design and layout regulations shall be complied with for all uses
allowed in each zoning district; excluding individual residential lots in the
AR, RE, R-1, and R-2 districts, unless expressly modified in the following
provisions.
      (1)   Access to parking areas and parking spaces.
         (a)   All parking areas shall provide access to a public street by
means of a paved driveway that extends on-site to a point not less than 20 feet
from the property line.
         (b)   If an off-street parking area utilizes a publicly dedicated
alley for access to a public street, the alley shall be paved the full length
of the alley. The use of an alley for access to a multi-family, commercial or
industrial site opposite any R-1 zoning district is prohibited.
      (2)   General parking design and maintenance.
         (a)   All parking areas shall be designed, constructed, and drained in
accordance with all applicable town ordinances, standards, and regulations.
         (b)   Vehicles are prohibited from parking in the sight triangle. The
sight triangle is located at the intersection of two streets or the
intersection of a street and a driveway. The sight triangle is present on all
corner lots and is measured by extending the property lines until they
intersect. Each of the two legs of the sight triangle shall measure 30 feet in
length along the property line and/or driveway and shall be connected by the
third side of the triangle. No curb cuts, driveways, maneuvering areas, and
minimal landscaping shall be permitted within the described triangular area.
         (c)   All parking spaces shall be permanently marked. Circulation
aisles, approach lanes, and turning areas shall be clearly marked with
directional arrows and lines to ensure safe traffic movement.
         (d)   All required off-street parking areas shall be maintained in a
debris-free, pothole-free, and excessive crack-free condition; as determined by
the Zoning Administrator.
      (3)   Parking circulation design.
         (a)   Drive aisles and maneuvering areas shall be designed to
facilitate the safe movement of vehicles without posing a danger to pedestrians
or impeding the function of the parking area.
         (b)   Parking areas that accommodate 20 or more vehicles must maintain
continuous circulation patterns, with no dead-ends, and safe access to public
streets.
         (c)   Ninety degree parking areas that accommodate less than ten
vehicles and terminate in a dead-end shall provide a five foot maneuvering area
for the width of the aisle to assist in turning movements.
         (d)   All off-street parking areas shall be designed so as to provide
ingress and egress from a public street by the forward motion of the vehicle.
Required off-street parking spaces shall be accessible without backing into or
otherwise re-entering a public right-of-way.
         (e)   All off-street parking areas must have the necessary dimensions
for the on-site maneuvering of refuse and fire trucks. If off-site maneuvering
is necessary, a permanent, recorded cross-access easement must be filed with
the Community Development Department prior to issuance of a building permit.
      (4)   Shared access. Parking areas shall provide reasonable connectivity
to adjacent parking areas, when requested by the town to promote convenience,
safety and efficient circulation. A cross access agreement guaranteeing the
continued availability of the shared access between the properties and running
with the land shall be recorded by the owners of the abutting properties.
      (5)   Curbing and wheel stops.
         (a)   Continuous curbing at least six inches high and six inches wide
shall be provided around the perimeter of all parking and drive aisle areas.
Curbing located adjacent to stormwater facilities may contain curb cuts to
allow for necessary drainage.
         (b)   To avoid conflicts or safety hazards, concrete wheel stops at
least four inches high and six inches wide shall be located at least two feet
from any adjacent wall, pole, fence, property line, walkway, sidewalk,
landscape area or any other obstruction over four inches in height where
parking is located, unless other provisions within this section are met. The
two-foot overhang area shall be measured from the front end of the space to the
rear of the wheel stop.
         (c)   The curbs adjacent to walkways or sidewalks may be used as wheel
stops, allowing the car to extend into or overhang the sidewalk, only if a
sidewalk with a width of six feet is provided. Where such overhang is used, the
length of the parking space may be reduced by two feet. Under no circumstances
shall vehicles be allowed to extend into or overhang abutting right-of-way and/
or private property.
         (d)   The curbs around landscape areas and/or planters may be used as
wheel stops, allowing the car to overhang the landscape area, only if the
landscape area is a minimum of two feet wide for single row parking or a
minimum of seven feet wide for opposing parking rows. Where such overhang is
used, the length of the parking space may be reduced by two feet. Any plants or
landscape materials within the two-foot overhang may not extend more than two
inches above the six inch curb. All sprinklers should be placed outside of the
bumper overhang or aligned with the parking space stripe so they are out of
range of car bumpers. Use of such bumper overhangs reduces impervious surfaces
and is encouraged. Under no circumstances shall vehicles be allowed to extend
into or overhang abutting right-of-way and/or private property.
      (6)   Stacking spaces.
         (a)   Required stacking spaces. In addition to meeting the off-street
parking requirements of this section, all drive-through facilities shall
provide vehicle stacking spaces in accordance with the following table:
Table 4.2-6: Vehicle Stacking Requirements
Use Type Stacking Space Requirement
Table 4.2-6: Vehicle Stacking Requirements
Use Type                              Stacking Space Requirement
Automated Teller Machine              Two per machine
Bank Teller                           Three per teller or window (CBD - 2 per
                                      teller or window)
                                      Three per bay at entrance (CBD - 2 per
Car Wash                              bay entrance)
                                      One per bay at exit
Retail Business (dry cleaning, liquor Two per window
store, etc.)
Pharmacy                              Two per window
Restaurant, drive through             Three behind menu board (CBD - 2 behind
                                      menu board)
                                     Three behind window (CBD - 2 behind first
                                      window)
                                      Zoning Administrator shall determine a
                                      stacking requirement based upon the
                                      requirements for the most similar
Other                                 comparable use, the particular
                                      characteristics of the proposed use, and
                                      any other relevant data regarding
                                      stacking demand
 
         (b)   Design and layout of stacking spaces.
            1.   Stacking spaces shall be a minimum of nine feet by 20 feet in
size.
            2.   Stacking spaces shall not interfere with on- or off-site
traffic movements or movements into or out of off-street parking spaces.
            3.   Stacking spaces must be separated from other internal
driveways by striping or raised medians if deemed necessary by the Zoning
Administrator.
         (c)   Exceptions. Exceptions may be granted when a traffic or parking
study demonstrates the need for lower stacking requirements.
      (7)   Pedestrian safe access.
         (a)   Parking lots in excess of 100 spaces shall provide direct and
continuous pedestrian networks within and adjacent to parking areas to connect
building entrances, parking spaces, public sidewalks, transit stops and other
pedestrian destinations.
         (b)   A safe and direct pedestrian pathway must be provided from the
street or sidewalk through the parking area to the primary building entrance.
These pathways must be ADA compliant, and either be completely separated from
vehicular traffic or clearly designated, such as through a raised surface or
distinctive paving.
         (c)   Pedestrian pathways within parking areas that cross driveways
must be clearly marked, such as through a raised surface or distinctive paving.
         (d)   Whenever possible, parking rows should be aligned perpendicular
to the main building, as this provides for a safer and more direct pedestrian
route.
   (L)   Parking area landscaping. The perimeter and interior of parking lots
shall be landscaped pursuant to the requirements in §
152.057(B).
   (M)   Parking area lighting. Off-street parking and loading areas shall
adhere to the lighting requirements in §
152.059.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.057 LANDSCAPE, WALLS, AND SCREENING.
   (A)   Purpose. The landscape, walls, and screening section provides uniform
standards for the installation of landscaping, walls and buffer areas as well
as guidelines for the protection, maintenance and management of these resources
to promote and encourage sustainability, effectuate privacy, facilitate logical
development and enhance property value. This section includes guidance on where
landscaping is required; the types and use of vegetation allowed, the provision
of screening and buffering mechanisms (where necessary) to encourage the
creation of an attractive appearance along public streets while screening
unattractive uses. Landscaping materials, including ground cover, shrubs and
trees, promote the control of erosion and the reduction of glare and dust, as
well as visually softening buildings, parking lots and walls. Walls and
screening devices allow for the separation of incompatible uses and for the
buffering of intensive activities.
   (B)   Landscape. This section is intended to contribute to the aesthetic
character of the town through the provision of landscaping and retention of
existing vegetation.
      (1)   Applicability.  These requirements apply to residential and non-
residential uses except those located in the IP district and single family home
lots. These regulations shall also apply to the required on- and off-site
improvements of a subdivision.
      (2)   Selection of plant materials. Xeriscape landscaping incorporates
water-conserving design through proper plant selection, installation, and
maintenance practices. The species and variety of plants selected to meet the
landscape requirements of this section, shall correspond closely with the
following xeriscape principles:
 
Table 4.3-1: Xeriscape Principles
                                      Careful consideration of a site's size
                                      and shape, soil type, topography, and
                                      building configuration is essential in
                                      developing a good landscape plan. The
                                      function of the space (i.e., its use),
Good Landscape Planning and Design    the amount of available sun, location of
                                      views, regional and microclimate
                                      conditions, and a preliminary assessment
                                      of landscape watering zones should also
                                      be taken into account in early planning
                                      of a xeriscape landscape.
                                      Primarily drought tolerant and low water
                                      use plants shall be used. These plants
                                      can serve nearly every function. Some
Use of Drought Tolerant and Low-Water provide shade and texture, while others
Use Plants                            are appropriate for borders, accent
                                      areas, seasonal color, and year-round
                                      greenery. Native wildflowers and grasses
                                      are typically suitable for revegetating
                                      disturbed areas.
                                      Lawns require a lot of water to stay
                                      green and healthy. Lawns shall only be
                                      located in areas where they provide
                                      functional benefits. Lawn areas planted
Appropriate Lawn Areas                close to a building may provide a cooling
                                      effect. Lawns should not be planted in
                                      odd shaped areas that cannot be watered
                                      efficiently. Lawn areas can often be
                                      planted with modern, low-water-use,
                                      drought-tolerant grasses.
                                      Install irrigation systems so that they
                                      provide an adequate amount of water at
                                      the proper time to the root zone of
                                      plants. Each plant and vegetative type
                                      has its own water needs, and the planting
                                      arrangement and irrigation system should
Efficient Irrigation                  be designed to reflect those needs.
                                      Moisture sensors should be installed on
                                      irrigation controls to measure real time
                                      soil moisture. Each water use zone should
                                      be on a different valve. Additionally,
                                      stormwater runoff should be routed into
                                      each area to offset irrigation needs.
                                      Organic matter should be added to
                                      existing soils to increase water-holding
Soil Improvement                      capacity and provide beneficial nutrients
                                      to plants. In low water-use zones,
                                      loosening the soil may be all that is
                                      needed.
                                      Xeriscape landscapes require low
                                      maintenance, but not no maintenance. To
Appropriate Maintenance               be effective, a xeriscape landscape must
                                      be monitored with a program of pruning,
                                      weed control, pest control, and
                                      irrigation system adjustments.
 
      (3)   Site area landscaping.
         (a)   Any part of a non-residential and multi-family development not
used for buildings, parking, driveways, sidewalks, or natural undisturbed open
space shall be landscaped with vegetation and landscape topping material.
         (b)   Required site area landscape planting criteria. The total
quantity of required landscape materials shall be computed for all site
landscape areas as follows (unless otherwise noted within this chapter):
            1.   Trees. A minimum of one tree shall be required per 500 square
feet of landscape area. All deciduous trees shall not be less than 1½ inches
caliper; all coniferous trees shall not be less than five feet planted height.
            2.   Shrubs. One shrub shall also be required per 100 square feet
of landscape area. All shrubs shall be a minimum of five gallons in size.
            3.   Groundcover. Hardy perennials and accent plants shall be a
minimum of one gallon in size. One plant shall be provided per 200 square feet
of landscape area.
            4.   Landscape topping materials. All landscaped areas shall be
finished with a natural topping material which may include, but not limited to,
crushed aggregate (two inches minimum depth). Type, size and color of landscape
topping material for projects shall be approved through the landscape plan
review process.
         (c)   The front yard of residential development in the R-1 and R-
2 zoning districts shall be landscaped with vegetation and/or landscape topping
material.
      (4)   Streetscape landscaping.
         (a)   The entire area of a public street right-of-way between a street
side property line and back of street curb (excluding approved driveways and
walkways or right-of-way not under the control of the town) shall also be
landscaped.
         (b)   Required streetscape landscape planting criteria. The total
quantity of required landscape materials shall be computed for all streetscape
landscape areas as follows (unless otherwise noted within this chapter):
            1.   Trees. A minimum of one tree shall be required for every 50
feet of lineal frontage. All deciduous trees shall not be less than 1½ inches
caliper; all coniferous trees shall not be less than five feet planted height.
            2.   Shrubs. Three shrub shall also be required for every 50 feet
of lineal frontage. All shrubs shall be a minimum of five gallons in size.
            3.   Groundcover. Hardy perennials and accent plants shall be a
minimum of one gallon in size. One plant shall be required for every 50 feet of
lineal frontage.
            4.   Landscape topping materials. All landscaped areas shall be
finished with a natural topping material which may include, but not limited to,
crushed aggregate (two inches minimum depth). Type, size and color of landscape
topping material for projects shall be approved through the landscape plan
review process.
         (c)   Placement of required streetscape landscaping.
            1.   Vegetation may be clustered and located within the public
street right-of-way or partially within the adjacent ten feet of the site.
            2.   Vegetation shall not be placed in drainage ways.
            3.   Trees may not be planted where they will interfere with any
overhead or underground utility lines in their initial planted or mature height
or width.
            4.   Trees are not to be planted in any sight triangle. Shrubs to
be planted in any sight triangle shall be of varieties that do not exceed
mature heights of more than 24 inches measured from finished grade.
            5.   Trees and/or shrubs shall not be planted closer than three
feet to any fire hydrant or utility pole.
            6.   Trees shall not be planted closer than five feet to the face
of any curb unless part of a landscaping plan that has been approved by the
Zoning Administrator.
      (5)   Parking area landscape requirements. All parking areas shall be
landscaped in compliance with the following requirements:
         (a)   Landscape areas with raised concrete curbing shall define all
parking lot edges, entrances, drives, aisles and the ends of all parking
aisles.
         (b)   Parking lot landscape islands shall be installed at the end of
each parking aisle and at a ratio of one landscape island for every 12 parking
spaces. In no instance shall more than 12 contiguous parking spaces be
installed in a row without the placement of a landscaped island.
         (c)   The design and landscape requirements of all parking islands/
planters shall be consistent with the following:
            1.   Each landscape island in the parking lot shall extend the
entire depth of the double or single loaded stall design and contain a minimum
of 75 square feet of area, not including curbs, and shall measure a minimum of
six feet in width at the mid-point.
            2.   Each landscape island shall include a minimum of one tree and
landscape topping material per §
152.057(B)(3)(b)4.
      (6)   Landscape maintenance.
         (a)   All landscape improvements installed in accordance with the
requirements and provisions of this chapter for new or expanded developments
and uses within on-site landscape areas as well as in the right-of-way, shall
be maintained, in perpetuity, by the property owner or owner's association
(should the property be subdivided) or the lessee of the site.
         (b)   All landscape areas shall be provided with a permanent, fixed
automatic irrigation system.
         (c)   Any plant material that does not survive shall be replaced
within 30 days.
      (7)   Landscape plan regulations.
         (a)   A "preliminary landscape plan" and a "final landscape plan"
shall be prepared by a landscape architect or design professional submitted,
and approved for all applicable development projects in accordance with the
procedures and requirements set forth in this section.
         (b)   All changes in the landscaping of a site/development area after
final landscape plan approval and landscape installation shall be approved by
the Community Development Department prior to issuing a certificate of
occupancy by the town.
         (c)   Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the Community
Development Department shall review and approve the required plans (i.e.
lighting, drainage, mechanical) which affect the placement and type of
landscaping and walls within the site.
         (d)   Landscape plan preparation and approval.
            1.   Preliminary landscape plan. A dimensioned preliminary
landscape plan shall be prepared and submitted along with the required
development/site plan for review by the Zoning Administrator. The preliminary
landscape plan may be shown on the development/site plan drawings. The
components of the preliminary landscape plan shall include, (at minimum) a
scaled plan indicating the general locations of all existing and proposed
trees, shrub massings, and groundcovers. Actual botanical names are not
required to be specified at this time. Property lines, north arrow, existing
and proposed structures, streets, sidewalks, trails, major natural features,
walls and fences, slopes, berms, basins, drainage structures, trash enclosures,
sewer laterals, utility transformers, site furniture, concrete curbing,
decorative paving, and other site elements that relate to or affect the overall
landscape along with any notes describing the proposed method of irrigation.
The preliminary landscape plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Community
Development Department as part of the development/site plan review, and may be
approved with stipulated changes or additions. A building permit may be issued
prior to final landscape plan approval; however, certificate of occupancy will
not be issued until final landscape plan is approved.
            2.   Final landscape plan. A dimensioned final landscape plan,
irrigation plan and lighting plan shall be submitted along with all other
required site improvement and building plans at the time of application for a
building permit. The lighting plan shall be prepared by a technically competent
lighting professional. The final landscape plan shall contain the final
calculations, data, and specific details and information of all proposed
landscaped areas, landscape materials, screening walls, irrigation system, and
other items that were required and identified in conceptual form on the
preliminary landscape plan. The final landscape plan shall contain a specific
schedule of all trees and shrubs identified by common and botanical name, and
shall clearly indicate the quantity and size of each tree and shrub to be
installed. The final landscape plan shall be in conformance with the approved
preliminary plan and any stipulated changes or additions, and shall be approved
by the Community Development Department prior to the issuance of a building
permit.
            3.   Upon approval, both sets of the landscape plan will be dated
and stamped "Approved" and one original, signed plan will be transmitted to the
applicant and one will be retained on file with the Community Development
Department.
   (C)   Fences, walls and screening. Standards set forth in this section
protect the visual quality of the public realm by establishing screening
requirements for various land use and development conditions.
      (1)   Applicability. Unless otherwise stated within this chapter, fences
and/or walls shall be installed and maintained in compliance with this section.
      (2)   General fence and wall regulations.
         (a)   All general perimeter and on-site fences and walls shall adhere
to the town adopted building codes and be constructed of long-lasting
materials, such as vinyl, wood, masonry, stone, decorative metal, and be
architecturally integrated with the building design. Within the RE, Commercial,
Industrial and Airport Zoning Districts, chain link fences may be allowed with
the approval of the Community Development Department.
         (b)   Fences or walls are not required to be set back from the
property line except as otherwise specified in this chapter.
         (c)   Walls more than six feet in height or retaining walls extending
more than four feet in height, measured from the bottom of the footing, require
a building permit and supporting structural calculations prepared by a licensed
structural engineer. Retaining concrete block walls shall adhere to the town
adopted building codes.
         (d)   Barbed wire fences shall be prohibited in R1-12 and R1-8 zoning
districts may be permitted in other districts and for temporary construction
sites. Temporary barbed wire fencing located on construction sites shall be
removed from the site at the time of final inspection, or a certificate of
occupancy will not be issued.
      (3)   General wall and fence height standards.
         (a)   Fences or walls located between the front yard building setback
line and the front property line of a lot may not exceed four feet in height.
         (b)   In areas behind a required front yard building setback and
within the required rear and side yards, including walls for single-family
dwellings, the maximum height of walls shall be six feet, as measured from the
finish grade, except where a taller wall is necessary for screening purposes.
Where two lots abut one another, but have differing finish grades, the wall
height shall be limited to six feet on the high side and eight feet on the low
side. Modifications of these requirements shall require written request and
approval of the Community Development Department.
         (c)   Walls exceeding six feet in height, measured from the inside
finished grade, shall require the submittal of structural calculations prepared
by a licensed structural engineer, unless specified otherwise in this chapter.
Non-retaining concrete block walls shall adhere to the town adopted building
codes.
         (d)   Corners. No walls, buildings or other obstruction to visibility
in excess of two feet in height (measured from the top of the street curb at
each end of the site triangle) shall be placed on any corner lot within a
triangular area formed by the curb lines and a line connecting them at points
30 feet from the intersection of lines, extended from the back of curbing.
There shall be an exception for any existing trees to remain within the area of
triangle, but shall be pruned to a height of seven feet measured from finished
grade to permit unobstructed visibility for vehicle drivers.
      (4)   Refuse area screens. All trash, rubbish or garbage, including
recyclable materials in common storage areas, except within the IP District,
shall be completely enclosed via a solid six foot wall or fence and view
obstructing gate and located on a concrete surface. Refuse collection areas
shall be readily accessible to collection vehicles, without substantially
encumbering adjacent parking and vehicular access. For multi-family dwellings,
the enclosure shall be softened with landscaping on any side visible from a
public or private street. If the refuse collection area can be seen from the
exterior of a manufactured housing park, the enclosure shall be softened with
landscaping on its most visible sides. For all other uses, if the refuse
collection area can be seen from the front of the property, the enclosure shall
be softened with landscaping on its most visible side.
      (5)   Mechanical equipment screens. All mechanical equipment, either
ground-mounted or located on a rooftop, shall be screened from the view of a
person standing on the property line on the far side of an adjacent public
street. Individual screening of rooftop mechanical equipment is discouraged.
Rooftop units should either be grouped together and screened or screened with a
parapet wall the entire length of the building. Such a parapet wall shall be
designed to be integral to the overall architecture of the building.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.058 SIGNAGE.
   (A)   Purpose. These regulations balance the need to protect the public
safety and welfare, the need for a well maintained and attractive community,
and the need for adequate identification, communication and advertising. The
regulations for signs have the following specific objectives:
      (1)   To ensure that signs are designed, constructed, installed and
maintained according to minimum standards to safeguard life, health, property,
and public welfare;
      (2)   To allow and promote positive conditions for sign communication;
      (3)   To reflect and support the desired ambience and development
patterns of the various zones, overlay zones, and plan districts and promote an
attractive environment;
      (4)   To allow for adequate and effective signs whose dimensional
characteristics further the interests of public safety and the needs of the
motorist, where signs are viewed from a street or roadway; and
      (5)   To ensure that the constitutionally guaranteed right of free
expression is protected.
   (B)   Applicability. The requirements of this code apply to all signs, sign
structures, awnings, and other types of sign devices located within the town,
except as specified in §
152.059(C), below.
   (C)   Exemptions. The following are exempt from the regulations of this
code, but may be subject to other codes enacted by the town where applicable:
      (1)   Signs which are not visible from a public roadway; however, these
signs must comply with any building and construction provisions enacted by the
town;
      (2)   Signs inside a building;
      (3)   Signs carved into a building or raised in integral relief on a
building;
      (4)   Signs required by federal, state, or town law/authority;
      (5)   Noncommercial flags;
      (6)   Painted and/or applied wall accents and decorations;
      (7)   Illuminated building accents and decorations;
      (8)   Public art. Murals defined as works of graphic art hand-painted or
applied to building walls, which contain no advertising, commercial messages,
or logos; and/or that are not displayed in conjunction with a commercial
enterprise which may obtain commercial gain from the display;
      (9)   Name and address. Up to two signs indicating address, number and/or
name of occupants of the premises that do not exceed two square feet in area
and located in an area not otherwise prohibited by this chapter;
      (10)   Decals. Decals and/or logos affixed to windows or door glass
panels, such as those indicating membership in a business group or identifying
credit cards accepted at the establishment;
      (11)   Directional or informational signs of a noncommercial public or
quasi-public nature, and community signs;
      (12)   Sign repainting without changing wording, composition or colors;
or minor nonstructural repairs;
      (13)   On-premise signs that are relevant to the function of the property
that are not visible beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel upon which they
are located, or from any public right-of-way;
      (14)   Public signs. Signs erected by government agencies or utilities,
including traffic, utility, safety, railroad crossing and identification signs
for public facilities and any signs erected by the town; and
      (15)   Security and warning signs. On-premise signs regulating the use of
the premises, such as "no trespassing," "no hunting" and "no soliciting" signs
that do not exceed one sign two square feet in area in residential areas and
one sign five square feet in area in commercial and industrial zones. These
limitations shall not apply to the posting of conventional "no trespassing"
signs in accordance with state law.
   (D)   Prohibitions. The following signs are prohibited:
      (1)   Signs containing strobe lights;
      (2)   Abandoned sign structures, as defined by this code;
      (3)   Signs placed on or painted on a motor vehicle or trailer parked
with the primary purpose of providing signage not otherwise allowed by the
code; prohibited is any sign displayed on a parked trailer or truck or other
vehicle where the primary purpose of the vehicle is to advertise a product,
service, business, or other activity. This regulation shall permit the use of
business logos, identification or advertising on vehicles primarily and
actively used for business purposes and/or personal transportation;
      (4)   No sign advertising a business or use shall be installed on any lot
other than that on which the business is located unless allowed by §
152.059(H) or (I), or unless approved by the town as part of a wayfinding
program;
      (5)   Signs in which a property owner accepts a fee for posting or
maintaining a sign allowed under §
152.059(H) or (I);
      (6)   Signs that imitate or resemble official traffic lights, signs or
signals or signs that interfere with the effectiveness of any official traffic
light, sign or signal;
      (7)   Mechanically moving signs. An environmentally activated sign or
other display with actual mechanical motion powered by natural, manual,
mechanical, electrical or other means, including but not limited to pennant
strings, streamers, spinners, propellers, and search lights;
      (8)   Flashing signs. For the purposes of this code, a sign that has a
change rate or dwell time of four seconds or longer does not fit within the
prohibition noted herein;
      (9)   Posters and handbills. Any signs affixed to any structures, trees
or other natural vegetation, rocks or poles;
      (10)   Simulated traffic signs and obstructions. Any sign which may be
confused with, or obstruct the view of, any authorized traffic sign or signal,
obstruct the sight-distance triangle at any road intersection or extend into
the public right-of-way;
      (11)   Signs adversely affecting safety. Signs which prevent free ingress
or egress from any door, window, fire exit, or that prevent free access from
one part of a roof to any other part;
      (12)   Sign emissions. No sign which emits smoke, visible vapors,
particles, sound or odor shall be permitted. Open flames used to attract public
attention to a place of business or to an advertising sign shall not be
permitted;
      (13)   Mirrors. No mirror device shall be used as part of a sign; or
      (14)   Situations where the code is silent. Where the code is silent, or
where the rules of this code do not provide a basis for concluding that a sign
is allowed, said sign is therefore prohibited.
   (E)   Conflicting regulations.
      (1)   Where there is a conflict between specific sign regulations and the
general sign regulations of this code, the specific sign regulations supersede
the base sign regulations.
      (2)   Where there is a conflict between a land use regulation and a
structural regulation, or other conflicts not otherwise addressed by this
section, the most restrictive applies.
   (F)   General provisions. The general provisions for all signs are listed
below:
      (1)   Design.
         (a)   All signs hereafter constructed or maintained shall conform to
the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of the town code, promoting
the health and welfare of the general public.
         (b)   No sign, other than an official traffic sign or similar sign,
shall be constructed within the boundary of any street or public right-of-way
unless specifically authorized herein, authorized by other town ordinances or
regulations; or permitted by special town authorization.
         (c)   No temporary or permanent sign or sign structure shall be
erected or placed in a manner that would obscure vehicular visibility on or at
the intersection of roadways; or at any location where its position, shape or
color may interfere with or obstruct the view of, or be confused with, any
authorized traffic sign, signal or device.
         (d)   All signs shall be designed and constructed to resist all
weather conditions and seismic hazard conditions of northern Arizona.
         (e)   The placement of new signs shall integrate with the established
locational pattern of like sign types.
         (f)   When a site is developed as a complex or center containing more
than three tenants, a comprehensive sign plan shall be provided for the
property consistent with §
152.058(K)(2).
      (2)   Materials.
         (a)   All sign materials and components shall be of the quality and
grade to resist specified wind and seismic hazard conditions of northwestern
Arizona.
         (b)   Combustible materials, other than approved plastics, shall not
be used in the construction of any electronic signs.
         (c)   Sign materials to be used on the building façade shall be
compatible with the design of the face of the façade.
      (3)   Sign anchors.
         (a)   All signs shall be securely anchored to resist the identified
wind and seismic hazards existing in northwestern Arizona.
         (b)   All signs attached to masonry, concrete, plywood or steel shall
be safely and securely fastened utilizing metal anchors, bolts or approved
expansion screws of sufficient size to safely support the loads generated by
the sign.
         (c)   Only signs attached to wood framing may be attached with screws
or nails. The screws or nails shall be of sufficient size to safely support the
weight of the sign and resist the wind and seismic hazards existing in
northwestern Arizona.
         (d)   Signs shall not be attached to any wall that is not securely
braced or supported. Signs shall not be attached to any parapet wall if the
parapet is not designed and constructed to accommodate the loads associated
with the signage identified to be attached.
      (4)   Sign illumination. Signs may be illuminated as provided by this
chapter and specified by approved sign criteria, if applicable, in accordance
with the following regulations:
         (a)   Sign lighting shall be of low intensity with effective
provisions made to minimize spillover of light beyond the actual sign face.
Examples of permissible illumination methods would include, but not be limited
to, the use of appropriate cut-off style light fixtures, the use of down-light
fixtures adjusted so as to avoid light spillover and interference with the
vision of motorists, and the use of muted internal illumination. Prohibited
forms of light spillover include, but are not limited to, spillover into
adjoining properties, roadways and airspace. Lighting must not interfere with
the vision of oncoming motorists.
         (b)   All illuminated signs shall adhere to the provisions provided in
§
152.059 unless specifically modified herein.
      (5)   Maintenance.
         (a)   The property owner or tenant on which the sign is located shall
be responsible to maintain all signage that has been approved or that has been
issued a permit. Periodic maintenance shall be undertaken by the owner or
tenant so that the signage continues to conform to the conditions imposed by
the sign permit.
         (b)   Any damaged sign base shall be repaired within 30 days after
receipt of written presentation/rectification of the issue by the Zoning
Administrator to the property owner.
         (c)   All metal pole covers and sign cabinets shall not show any
effect of rust and rust stains.
         (d)   Any internally illuminated sign cabinets or sign panels which
have been damaged shall not be illuminated until repaired.
         (e)   If the sign is suspect to collapse, or determined to be unsafe
by the town's Inspector/Code Enforcement, or if any sign shall be unlawfully
installed, erected or maintained in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, the owner thereof, or the person or firm using the sign, shall, upon
written notice by the Town's Inspector/Code Enforcement, or immediately in the
case of imminent danger, and in any case within not more than ten days after
notice shall make such sign conform to the provisions of this chapter; or
remove the sign. If, within ten days, full compliance with the notice has not
occurred, the town's Inspector/Code Enforcement may remove, or cause such sign
to be removed, at the sole expense of the owner and/or user of the sign.
         (f)   The changeable letter panels of a permitted changeable copy sign
shall be subject to the same maintenance requirements as imposed by the sign
permit.
      (6)   Sign height measurements. Sign height measurements are determined
as follows for each sign type:
         (a)   Freestanding signs.  The overall height of a freestanding sign
or sign structure is measured from the lowest point of the ground directly
below the sign to the highest point of the freestanding sign or sign structure.
         (b)   Exception. Where a freestanding sign or sign structure is
mounted along a roadway that has a higher grade level as compared to the grade
level directly below the freestanding sign or sign structure, then the
freestanding sign or structure's height will be measured from the top of curb
or the crown of the adjacent roadway (where no curb exists) to the highest
point of the freestanding sign or sign structure.
         (c)   Wall signs or fascia mounted signs.  The height of the sign
shall be measured from the top of the sign structure to the top of curb or the
crown of the adjacent road where no curb exists.
      (7)   Sign area standards. The "sign area" of each permitted sign shall
be measured as follows:
         (a)   Background mounted signs. Sign copy mounted or painted on a
background panel or area distinctively painted, textured or constructed as a
background for the sign copy shall be measured as that area within the outside
dimensions of the background panel or surface. The base of a freestanding
monument sign shall not be calculated as sign area unless said base contains
signage.
         (b)   Individual mounted signs. The area of a sign copy mounted or
painted, as individual letters or graphics, against a wall or the fascia of a
building or other structure that has not been painted, textured or otherwise
altered to provide a distinctive background for the sign copy, shall be
measured as the area enclosed by the smallest standard geometric shape or
combination of geometric shapes capable of encompassing the perimeter of the
background area of the sign.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1903.png]
 
         (c)   Two-part signage. In instances in which a sign consists of
individual elements such as letters, symbols, or other graphic objects or
representations that are painted, attached to, or otherwise affixed to a
surface such as a wall, window, canopy, awning, architectural projection, or to
any surface not specifically designed to serve as a sign background, the sign
area shall be based on the sum of the individual areas of the smallest
geometric shape or combination of geometric shapes capable of encompassing the
perimeters of the individual elements comprising the sign.
   Figure 4.4-B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1905.png]
 
         (d)   Sign frames or cabinets. The area of sign faces enclosed in
frames or cabinets is determined based on the outer dimensions of the frame or
cabinet.
   Figure 4.4-C
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1907.png]
 
         (e)    One sign with one or more sign faces:
            1.    One face.  Area of the single face only.
            2.    Two faces.  If the interior angle between the two faces is 45
degrees or less, the sign area will be the total of one face only; if the angle
between the two sign faces is greater than 45 degrees, the sign area will be
the sum of the areas of the two faces.
            3.   Three or more faces.  The sign area will be calculated as the
sum of the areas of each of the faces.
   Figure 4.4-D
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1909.png]
 
            4.   Irregular shaped signs. To be measured based on the
appropriate mathematical formula to obtain the sign area for a circle, an oval
or irregularly shaped sign.
            5.    Spherical, free-form, sculptural or other non-planar signs.
The signage area will be the sum of the areas using only the four vertical
sides of the smallest cube that will encompass a sign.
   Figure 4.4-E
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1911.png]
 
   (G)   Total aggregate sign area standards. The total aggregate sign area
shall be the sum of all the sign areas of each allowable sign placed on a
parcel with the following restrictions:
      (a)   For all non-residential uses, the total aggregate sign area
allowable to any business having an external business entrance shall not exceed
the greater of 50 square feet or 1½ square feet per lineal foot of building
frontage per business, but in no case more than 300 square feet per business.
      (b)   All non-residential uses having only an external building wall
facing a public street, shall be permitted exterior signage with a total
aggregate sign area not to exceed 50 square feet.
      (c)   Non-residential uses having only an internal business entrance and
no external wall facing a public street or public access driveway or public
alley shall be limited to business identification signage on a multi-tenant
building wall mounted sign as set forth in §
152.058(I)(1)(k).
      (d)   Businesses having building frontage greater than 200 feet in length
may increase their allowed sign area by 0.5 square feet per one lineal foot of
building frontage in excess of 200 feet. Such additional sign area shall be for
the exclusive use of said business and not transferable or reallocable to other
businesses on the parcel.
      (e)   Building frontage is determined by the measurement of the portion
of the business facing the street or public access driveway or public alley.
Multi-story building lineal footage is limited to the ground floor lineal
footage measurement except as modified by the divisions below.
   (H)   Standards by sign type. The criteria listed within this table
describes the permitted conditions applicable for each sign type. This table
also includes references to additional sign standards that may be applicable to
each sign type.
Table 4.4: Sign Requirements by Sign Type*
                    P = Permitted N = Not Permitted
     Sign   Part of Zoning Districts                      Additional Lighti
Sign Permit Aggrega Res.                                  Sign       ng Permi
Type Requir te Sign Res . Non- Com./ MU Bus ./ Air. Spec. Standards  tted
     ed     Area    Use   Res.          Ind.
                          Use
Table 4.4: Sign Requirements by Sign Type*
                             P = Permitted N = Not Permitted
              Sign   Part of Zoning Districts                 Additional Lighti
Sign Type     Permit Aggrega Res.             Bus             Sign       ng
              Requir te Sign Res . Non- Com./ ./   Air. Spec. Standards  Permi
              ed     Area    Use   Res. MU    Ind.                       tted
                                   Use
Permanent Signs
Attached or                                                   §
Wall Mounted  Yes    Yes     P     P    P     P    P    P     152.058(I) Yes
                                                              (1)
                                                              §
Awning/Canopy Yes    Yes     N     P    P     P    P    N     152.058(I) No
                                                              ( 2)
                                                              §
Directional   Yes    No      N     P    P     P    P    P     152.058(I) Yes
                                                              ( 3)
                                                              §
Directory     Yes    No      P     P    P     P    P    P     152.058(I) Yes
                                                              ( 4)
Electronic                                                    §
Message       Yes    Yes     N     P    P     P    P    N     152.058(I) Yes
Center                                                        ( 5)
Freestanding/                                                 §
Monument      Yes    Yes     P     P    P     P    P    P     152.058(I) Yes
                                                              ( 6)
                                                              §
Gas Filled    No     No      N     N    P     P    N    N     152.058(I) Yes
                                                              ( 7)
                                                              §
Projecting    Yes    Yes     N     P    P     P    P    N     152.058(I) No
                                                              ( 8)
                                                              §
Pylon         Yes    Yes     N     N    P     P    N    N     152.058(I) Yes
                                                              ( 9)
                                                              §
Window        Yes    Yes     N     P    P     P    P    N     152.058(I) No
                                                              ( 10)
Temporary Signs
                                                              §
A-Frame Sign  Yes    No      N     N    P     P    N    N     152.058(J) No
                                                              (1)
                                                              §
Banner Sign   Yes    No      P     P    P     P    P    P     152.058(J) No
                                                              (2)
                                                              §
Sign Walker   Yes    No      N     N    P     P    N    N     152.058(J) No
                                                              (3)
Weekend                                                       §
Directional   No     No      P     P    P     P    P    N     152.058(J) No
                                                              (4)
                                                              §
Yard Sign     Yes    No      P     P    P     P    P    N     152.058(J) No
                                                              (5)
*   All sign criteria listed in this table is subject to and may be further
modified by their respective additional sign standards provided in §
152.058(I) or as stated elsewhere within this chapter.
 
   (I)   Additional standards by permanent sign type. This section describes
the permitted conditions and applicable standards for each permanent sign type
listed within Table 4.4.
      (1)   Attached or wall-mounted signs. Attached or wall mounted signs are
permitted as identified in Table 4.4, subject to the conditions identified
below:
         (a)   Attached or wall-mounted signs shall be counted as a portion of
the total aggregate sign area.
         (b)   Attached or wall mounted signs shall be supported solely by the
façade or exterior building face.
         (c)   One attached sign per street frontage is permitted per business
in all non-residential zoning districts.
         (d)   Attached or wall mounted signs may project no more than 12
inches from the surface of the wall to which it is attached or for halo
illuminated signs must not exceed a one and ¾ (1.75) inch separation from the
wall.
         (e)   Attached or wall mounted signs shall not extend above the wall,
parapet, or fascia upon which it is placed.
         (f)   Attached or wall mounted signs are permitted on a roof surface
if the roof is within 25 degrees of vertical.
         (g)   Attached or wall mounted signs shall not exceed 25 feet in
height.
         (h)   Residential uses in the RE, R-1, R-2, MHS, and MHP zoning
districts shall be allowed one attached or wall mounted sign not to exceed two
square feet per parcel.
         (i)   Residential subdivisions and multi-family developments shall be
allowed one attached or wall mounted sign not to exceed 24 square feet per
subdivision entrance or six square feet per multi-family building.
         (j)   For all non-residential uses, attached or wall mounted signs
shall not exceed more than the total aggregate sign area allowed as determined
by §
152.058(G).
         (k)   Multi-tenant building wall mounted identification signs are
permitted in the commercial and industrial zoning districts subject to the
conditions identified below:
            1.   The use of a multi-tenant building wall mounted identification
sign shall take the place of single business wall mounted signs and shall be
counted as a portion of the total aggregate sign area.
               a.   The maximum number of multi-tenant signs for each building
shall be limited to one sign per street frontage.
               b.   The maximum area of the multi-tenant sign shall not exceed
the greater of 50 square feet or 1½ square feet per lineal foot of combined
building frontage for each business, but in no case more than 300 square feet
per multi-tenant sign.
      (2)   Awning/canopy sign. Awning/canopy signs are permitted as identified
in Table 4.4, subject to the conditions identified below:
         (a)   Awning/canopy signs shall be counted as a portion of the total
aggregate sign area.
         (b)   Sign copy, including logos, shall not exceed 1½ square feet per
lineal foot of building frontage.
         (c)   Such a sign shall only be displayed on ground floor awnings.
         (d)   If encroaching over an abutting town right-of-way line, a
revocable town encroachment permit or other Town Council-granted authorization
approved by the Town Engineer and the Town Attorney shall be required.
      (3)   Directional sign. Directional signs are permitted as identified in
Table 4.4, subject to the conditions identified below: Non-residential uses
shall be allowed a maximum of one directional sign permitted per drive or
parking entry with a maximum area of three square feet and a maximum height of
three feet.
      (4)   Directory sign. Directory signs to assist the public, law
enforcement and emergency personnel locate a particular address or individual
unit are permitted as identified in Table 4.4, subject to the conditions
identified below:
         (a)   Properties occupied by three or more buildings shall have an
internally illuminated directory that shows the street address, layout of the
complex, the location of the viewer and the unit designations within the
complex;
         (b)   Shall not exceed a maximum height of six feet or sign area of 24
square feet; and
         (c)   Shall not include any advertising signage.
      (5)   Electronic message center. Electronic message center (EMC) signs
with intermittent, scrolling or flashing illumination, are permitted as
identified in Table 4.4, subject to the conditions identified below:
         (a)   EMC signs shall be counted as a portion of the total aggregate
sign area;
         (b)   Signs must be entirely located on-site;
         (c)   There shall be no moving or flashing green or red features that
could be mistaken as traffic control devices;
         (d)   Digital message portion of the sign shall not exceed 50% of sign
area;
         (e)   Sign shall be installed at least 150 feet from a designated
crosswalk;
         (f)   Sign shall not be installed within 350 feet of a residential
structure;
         (g)   EMC signs shall be separated from other EMC signs by a minimum
of 1,000 feet;
         (h)   All continuous loop image progression occurring on the face or
copy of the sign must have a minimum interval time of eight seconds;
         (i)   Illumination of EMC signs during daylight operations shall not
exceed 3.85-watt wedge base lamps, and shall not exceed 1.925-watt base wedge
lamps during nighttime operation;
         (j)   All EMC signs shall have automatic dimming controls, either by
photocell (hardwired) or via software settings, to reduce the illumination
intensity of the sign as ambient lighting conditions change; and
         (k)   EMC signs shall not be illuminated more than 30 minutes before
the operation is open to the public or more than 30 minutes after the time at
which the operation is closed to the public or 10:00 p.m., whichever is later.
      (6)   Freestanding/monument signs. Freestanding/monument signs are
permitted as identified in Table 4.4, subject to the conditions identified
below:
         (a)   For single use buildings, freestanding/monument signs shall be
counted as a portion of the total aggregate sign area. For single or multi-
building developments with multiple tenants, freestanding/monument signs shall
not be counted as a portion of the total aggregate sign area.
         (b)   Single use buildings, complexes, or centers on a single lot are
allowed one freestanding/monument sign per street frontage, or one
freestanding/monument sign for every 200 feet of street frontage, whichever is
greater. The second sign must be at least 100 from the first.
         (c)   Single use buildings, complexes, or centers on a single lot,
less than five acres in net site area, the maximum height of the sign,
including any supporting structures shall be eight feet, maximum area shall be
40 square feet.
         (d)   Single use buildings, complexes, or centers on a single lot,
five acres in net site area or greater, the maximum height of the sign,
including any supporting structures shall be ten feet, maximum area shall be 60
square feet.
         (e)   A portion of the sign may have changeable copy, which shall not
exceed 25% of sign area.
         (f)   Shall have monument-type bases of masonry construction or other
architectural grade material.
         (g)   Freestanding or monument signs located in the CBD district shall
either be located on low planter walls or incorporated with distinctive
elements of the building's architectural style and scale.
         (h)   Address numerals shall be included on all freestanding sign
structures. The numerals shall be at least six inches in height.
         (i)   No portion of the sign shall be located within three feet of the
front property line or six feet of a side or rear property line.
         (j)   Freestanding/monument signs for residential uses in residential
districts shall be limited to residential subdivisions or multi-family
developments only, subject to the conditions identified below:
            1.   The maximum height shall be six feet and the maximum area
shall be 24 square feet.
            2.   A maximum of one sign shall be located at each non-local
street access to the identified subdivision or multi-family development.
            3.   The text area of the sign may be back-lit such that the source
of illumination is not visible; provided, however, that back-lit, non-opaque
panels are not permitted.
            4.   The text area of the sign may be illuminated by fully shielded
ground mounted directional lighting.
      (7)   Gas filled signs. Gas filled signs (neon, argon, krypton, etc.) are
permitted as identified in Table 4.4, subject to the conditions identified
below:
         (a)   Gas filled signs are limited to interior window display only
(may not be used on the exterior of a building).
         (b)   The total area of gas filled signage for any one business shall
be six square feet.
         (c)   No more than two gas filled signs shall be allowed for any one
business.
      (8)   Projecting signs. Projecting signs are permitted as identified in
Table 4.4, subject to the conditions identified below:
         (a)   Such signs shall be included in the total aggregate sign area;
         (b)   One projecting sign is permitted for each business front and
shall be adjacent to the business it identifies;
         (c)   Such signs shall only be permitted if they are affixed to a
building and shall not project into the public right-of-way unless within the
CBD District;
         (d)   The maximum area for each projecting sign for any one business
shall be four square feet, except in the IP District where the maximum
projecting sign area shall be 14 square feet;
         (e)   The maximum distance between the wall and the outer edge of the
sign shall be four feet, or if a paved public sidewalk is below, 50% of the
width of the sidewalk, whichever is less; and
         (f)   Such signs shall be located so that the base edge of the sign is
not less than seven feet from the sidewalk or ground. Such signs shall require
both a town sign permit and, if encroaching over an abutting town right-of-way
line, a revocable town encroachment permit or other Town Council-granted
authorization is approved by the Town Engineer and the Town Attorney.
      (9)   Pylon signs. Pylon signs are permitted as identified in Table 4.4,
subject to the conditions identified below:
         (a)   Pylon signs shall be counted as a portion of the total aggregate
sign area;
         (b)   One freestanding sign shall be allowed per property, additional
signs are allowed on a property with street frontage that exceeds 200 feet. If
multiple signs are placed on a single street frontage, there shall be a minimum
of 100 feet between each sign;
         (c)   For single use buildings, the maximum height of the sign,
including any supporting structures shall be 14 feet and the maximum area shall
be 50 square feet. For single use buildings with frontage on State Route 389,
the maximum height of the sign shall be 18 feet;
         (d)   All complexes and centers on a single lot less than five acres
in net site area, the maximum height of the sign, including any supporting
structures shall be 14 feet and the maximum area shall be 75 square feet. For
said complexes and centers with frontage on State Route 389, the maximum height
of the sign shall be 18 feet;
         (e)   All complexes and centers on a single lot, five acres in net
site area or greater, the maximum height of the sign, including any supporting
structures shall be 14 feet and the maximum area shall be 200 square feet. For
said complexes with frontage on State Route 389, the maximum height of the sign
shall be 18 feet;
         (f)   A portion of the sign may have changeable copy, which shall not
exceed 50% of sign area for single use buildings and 25% of sign area for
complex and centers on a single lot;
         (g)   A minimum setback of ten feet from all property lines shall be
required, except that a minimum setback of 12 feet from adjoining residential
properties shall be required;
         (h)   Sign supports shall consist of at least 30% of the total sign
width; each single support shall consist of at least 15% of the total sign
width; and
         (i)   Signs shall be composed of a decorative base, support, and sign
face.
      (10)   Window signs. Window signs are permitted as identified in Table
4.4, subject to the conditions identified below:
         (a)   Window signs that are permanent shall be included in the total
aggregate sign area;
         (b)   Permanent window signage shall be limited to 25% of the total
window area in which it is placed;
         (c)   Permanent window signs shall be prepared by a professional sign
company; and
         (d)   Temporary window decorations/painting.
            1.   Window decorations/painting signs are permitted in all zoning
districts and shall not require a sign permit or be considered part of the
total aggregate sign area.
            2.   Holiday decorations may be displayed on a temporary basis for
civic, patriotic or religious holidays.
            3.   The coverage of window decoration/painting and signage must
not exceed 75% of the total window area.
            4.   Window decoration shall not contain any form of advertising
copy, including but not limited to, name of business, logo or sale language.
   (J)   Additional standards by temporary sign type. Signs that meet the
standards of this section are exempt from the standards for permanent signs and
are not counted in the total aggregate sign area allowed on any particular
property or site.
      (1)   A-frame signs. A-frame signs are permitted as identified in Table
4.4, subject to the conditions identified below:
         (a)   Uses permitted to display A-frame signs may display a maximum of
one such sign per street, public access driveway, or public alley frontage.
Such signs shall be located as follows:
            1.   On the same property as the use; or
            2.   Within the right-of-way of the nearest adjacent public street
to the use.
         (b)   The location of A-frame signs shall be restricted as follows:
            1.   Such signs shall not be located on the paved portion of any
public street, any sidewalk, or any median;
            2.   Such signs shall not be located within a designated parking or
loading area;
            3.   Signs shall not be located in a manner that poses a traffic
vision hazard;
            4.   A-frame signs must be placed at least one foot behind the curb
or public sidewalk. If no curb or public sidewalk is present, signs shall be
located at least five feet from the edge of the paved portion of the public
right-of-way; and
            5.   Businesses within the CBD District may use A-frame signs on
public or private sidewalks, provided the portable sign does not obstruct the
pedestrian walkways and shall only be placed within the first three feet of the
sidewalk located immediately adjacent to the curb, leaving a minimum sidewalk
clearance of five feet.
         (c)   No sign may be greater than 12 square feet per side with a
maximum height of four feet.
         (d)   Signs shall be weighted down and constructed of wrought iron;
sheet metal; inch thick plastic; or of wood that is at least inch thick. No
other materials are acceptable.
         (e)   Signs must be manufactured by a licensed and bonded sign
company.
         (f)   Signs shall be clean and in good working order.
         (g)   Attachments to signs are limited to balloons flown no higher
than six feet from the ground. If attachments are used, the A-frame sign must
be set back from the curb and/or sidewalk a minimum of three feet.
         (h)   Landscaping cannot be modified or damaged to accommodate an A-
frame sign.
         (i)   Signs shall only be displayed during business hours.
      (2)   Banner signs. Banner signs are permitted as identified in Table
4.4, subject to the conditions identified below:
         (a)   In residential districts, temporary banners are not permitted on
sites with individual dwelling units. Banners for holidays and special family
events are excepted;
         (b)   On multi-family or non-residential uses in residential districts
and in the commercial and industrial zoning districts one banner no larger than
32 square feet in size is permitted per development or business;
         (c)   Banner signs shall be securely affixed to the wall or fence of a
permanent structure or building, where feasible. No banner shall exceed the
height of the prevailing roofline, or exceed the building height allowed by
this chapter, whichever is less;
         (d)   Banner signs shall not be located in a manner that poses a
traffic vision hazard and shall not be placed within the public right-of-way;
and
         (e)   Shall be displayed for a maximum of nine days per occurrence, up
to a total of six permits per calendar year.
      (3)   Sign walkers. Sign walkers are permitted as identified in Table
4.4, subject to the conditions identified below:
         (a)   If located within the right-of-way, a sign walker shall be
positioned behind the curb or, if no curb is present, ten feet behind the edge
of pavement;
         (b)   Sign walkers shall not erect or place tents, temporary
structures, umbrellas, chairs or stools within the public right-of-way or
adjacent property;
         (c)   Sign walkers shall not be positioned so as to obstruct vehicle
sight lines;
         (d)   Sign walkers shall not obstruct the free movement of pedestrians
on sidewalks;
         (e)   Sign walkers are not allowed in the medians of public streets;
and
         (f)   The sign worn, held or balanced by a sign walker shall be a
maximum of five square feet in size and may be double sided.
      (4)   Weekend directional signs. Weekend directional signs are permitted
as identified in Table 4.4, subject to the conditions identified below:
         (a)   Must be placed at least one foot behind the curb. If no curb is
present, signs shall be located at least one foot from the edge of the paved
portion of the public right-of-way. Weekend directional signs shall not be
placed on sidewalks or within the center medians that divide portions of paved
or unpaved roadways;
         (b)   The maximum size shall not exceed four square feet;
         (c)   The maximum height shall not exceed three feet;
         (d)   Signs shall be constructed of heavy duty, weather- resistant
material, such as laminated paper, plastic foam core, or similar material.
Placement stakes shall be wood or heavy gauge wire; and
         (e)   Weekend directional signs shall not be attached to any utility
pole or box, light pole, street sign, tree or any structure within the public
right-of-way.
      (5)   Yard signs. Yard signs are permitted as identified in Table 4.4,
subject to the conditions identified below:
         (a)   For non-multi-family residential uses in residential districts,
yard signs shall be limited to one sign per property with a maximum size not to
exceed six square feet and maximum height of six feet;
         (b)   For multi-family residential uses in residential districts, yard
signs shall be limited to one sign per property with a maximum size not to
exceed eight square feet and maximum height of six feet;
         (c)   Temporary yard signs with a sign area six square feet or less
shall not require a sign permit, provided the sign complies with the
requirements of this section;
         (d)   On non-residential uses in the residential district and in the
commercial, industrial, and airport zoning districts yard signs shall be
limited to one sign per property with a maximum size not to exceed 32 square
feet and a maximum height of eight feet;
         (e)   Shall not be located within any right-of-way whether dedicated
or owned in fee simple or as an easement;
         (f)   Shall only be located on property that is owned or leased by the
person whose sign it is and must not be placed on any utility pole,
streetlight, similar object, or on public property;
         (g)   Shall not be illuminated; and
         (h)   Shall be displayed for a maximum of six months per occurrence,
with up to one extension subject to approval per calendar year.
      (6)   Political signs. For regulations related to political signs please
refer to A.R.S. § 16-1019.
   (K)   Permits required and process. A permit is required to erect, re-erect,
construct, alter or move certain sign types within the town. A separate permit
shall be required for each sign or group of signs on a single supporting
structure. In addition to a sign permit, an electrical permit shall be obtained
for all electric signs. All electric signs shall be subject to the provisions
of the adopted electrical code of the town in effect at the time of submittal
of the plans. All components of the electric sign shall bear the label of an
approved agency.
      (1)   Master sign program.  To provide a mechanism by which the sign
regulations established in this Section can be modified to ensure that signs
for a uniquely planned or designed development or area are most appropriate for
that particular development or area, a master sign program may be requested per
the guidelines identified below.
         (a)   A master sign program may be:
            1.   Requested by the developer, owner or master lessor of a
development or parcel that is a minimum of ten gross acres; or
            2.   Initiated by the town for a particular area in furtherance of
a specific plan, revitalization program, overlay zone, or other area wide
planning tool.
         (b)   A master sign program may include provisions that are more and/
or less restrictive than the regulations established in this section as related
to issues of size, location, color, construction materials and design of the
sign but without consideration as to the message to be displayed on the sign
based on the particular unique features of the development.
         (c)   Each master sign program applicant shall show to the
Administrator's satisfaction why the modifications requested are warranted and
how the total sign proposal for the development meets, on balance, the general
purpose and intent of this section.
         (d)   A master sign program application shall be approved,
conditionally approved, or disapproved through the sign permit - master sign
program review process.
         (e)   A new master sign program approval shall be obtained for
substantial revisions to the original approval, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
      (2)   Comprehensive sign plan. To ensure large multi-building, -tenant
developments or complexes maintain a cohesive and aesthetically pleasing design
theme, comprehensive sign plans shall be required for developments containing
more than three structures or businesses.
         (a)   Comprehensive sign plans shall meet all sign criteria of the
town within the commercial and industrial zoning districts. The following
elements are required for submittal and approval:
            1.   Name, address and phone number of property owner or designee;
            2.   Written text clearly outlining the sign plan to include all
suites, offices or other leased/leasable space;
            3.   Name and address of property for which the comprehensive sign
plan is designated;
            4.   Design criteria allowed for signage (i.e. colors, installation
method, materials, type of signage, etc.). If it is the intention of the
property owner to allow nationally recognized registered logos, this must be
specified in the plan;
            5.   Site plan showing all lot dimensions, suites, offices or other
leased/leasable space and proposed/existing signage placement (drawn to scale);
            6.   Elevations showing proposed sign envelopes;
            7.   Lineal footage of building(s);
            8.   Allocation chart showing allowable and utilized sign square
footage for each suite, office or space number; and
            9.   Comprehensive sign plan amendments must be made in writing and
submitted, reviewed and approved by the Zoning Administrator.
            10.   A comprehensive sign plan denial, by the Zoning
Administrator, may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment.
         (b)   For tenants of a development that has an approved comprehensive
sign plan, sign permits will only be issued for signs that comply with the
previously approved comprehensive sign plan, or receive approval through the
master sign program.
      (3)   Sign permit criteria. Sign permits are subject to review and
approval by the Zoning Administrator, or designee, per §§
152.085 through
152.096. The following information shall be submitted to obtain a sign permit,
unless alternative arrangements are made as part of a master sign program or
comprehensive sign plan as specified herein:
         (a)   The applicant's name, name of business, business address, work
telephone number and email address. If different, the application shall also
include the name, address, work telephone number, email address and signed
authorization of the property owner;
         (b)   The name, address, contact information and ROC# of the Arizona
licensed sign contractor;
         (c)   The address of the site for the proposed signage;
         (d)   Two scaled drawings of the proposed signage that include at a
minimum:
            1.   All sign dimensions, including the height of the signage;
            2.   Sign finish, materials and colors;
            3.   A site plan showing the proposed location of signage;
            4.   Any building elevations showing proposed location of signage;
            5.   Electrical plans (if applicable), including the source of sign
illumination and applicable details of the fixture and screening; and
            6.   The landscape details (i.e. planting design, vegetation types,
irrigation service, wall components, etc.) for signs with a landscape
requirement; and
         (e)   The Zoning Administrator may require other pertinent information
where, in his/her opinion, such information is necessary to insure compliance
with the code.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.059 OUTDOOR LIGHTING.
   (A)   Purpose. These regulations are intended to establish standards that
ensure minimal light pollution, reduce glare, increase energy conservation,
while providing for night safety, utility, security and productivity.
   (B)   Applicability. These regulations shall apply to all outdoor lighting
including, but not limited to, search, spot or floodlights for: buildings and
structures, recreational areas, parking lot lighting, landscape lighting, and
other outdoor lighting.
   (C)   Nonresidential lighting. The following standards apply to the lighting
of all outdoor facilities except public or private athletic/arena recreation
facilities.
      (1)   The height of any light fixture or illumination source shall not
exceed 20 feet.
      (2)   All lighting sources shall be hooded or shielded so that they are
not visible from any adjacent or nearby lot or real property.
      (3)   Lights or illuminating units shall not direct light, either
directly or through a reflecting device, upon any adjacent or nearby real
property.
      (4)   Lighting fixtures shall be fully shielded and the rated correlated
color temperature (CCT) of light sources shall not exceed 3,000K (subject to a
manufacture specified color stability variation of no more than +/- 200k in
CCT) to prevent the formation of an urban light cloud.
      (5)   Recreational lighting exempted from the above standards shall meet
the following.
         (a)   All metal halide/quartz fixtures shall be filtered by glass,
acrylic or translucent enclosures; and
         (b)   No lighting of 2,250 lumens or greater shall be used after 11:00
p.m. without a temporary use permit.
   (D)   Security, landscaping or other lighting.
      (1)   All other outdoor lights shall be fully shielded and directed
downward.
      (2)   Fully shielded means outdoor light fixtures constructed so that no
light rays are emitted by the installed fixture at angles above the horizontal
plane.
   (E)   Residential lighting. All exterior lighting shall be limited to 1,600
lumens per fixture unless filtered, shielded or screened to minimize any light
impact onto adjoining property.
   (F)   Other pole-mounted lighting (parking, walkways and the like). All
lights mounted on poles eight feet or greater in height shall be directed down.
The light source shall be shielded so that it will not be visible from any
adjacent or nearby real property.
   (G)   Searchlights.  The operation of searchlights shall be allowed subject
to the following conditions:
      (1)   During the months of May through October, searchlights shall be
operated only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.;
      (2)   During the months of November through April, searchlights shall be
operated only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.; and
      (3)   Searchlights shall not be operated on residentially zone properties
except for grand openings or new developments.
   (H)   Non-conforming lighting.
      (1)   All existing outdoor lighting that was legally installed before May
13, 2020 and that does not conform with the provisions of this chapter shall be
considered non-conforming.
      (2)   In the event that the use of a non-conforming outdoor luminaire is
discontinued for six months or is damaged to the point of requiring repairs for
safe operation, the repaired or replacement luminaire shall comply with the
provisions of this section.
      (3)   All non-conforming luminaires and lighting installations shall be
brought into conformance upon performing any significant maintenance or upgrade
to the luminaire, or expansion of the lighting installation. Upon replacing a
failed lamp, the rated correlated color temperature (CCT) of the replacement
lamp shall not exceed 3000K if such a lamp is available.
      (4)   Whenever the use of any existing building, structure, or premises
is changed to a new use, all outdoor lighting shall be reviewed and brought
into compliance with this code before the new use commences.
   (I)   Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
streetlights installed in public rights of way or light fixtures on property
owned by the town, except that all such fixtures shall be fully shielded and
the rated correlated color temperature (CCT) of light sources shall not exceed
3000K.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 152.070 PURPOSE.
   This chapter defines the authority and responsibilities of town staff and
official bodies in the administration of this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.071 TOWN COUNCIL.
   The Town Council is the governing body of the town as established in Chapter
30 of this code.
   (A)   Powers and duties. The Town Council shall have the following powers
and duties relating to the administration and enforcement of this chapter:
      (1)   Act as the review and decision-making body on all specified
planning matters as outlined in this chapter or by state law; and
      (2)   Take such other action not expressly delegated exclusively to the
Zoning Administrator, the Planning Commission, or the Board of Adjustment as
the Town Council may deem desirable and necessary to implement the provisions
of this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.072 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be established as set forth
in §
153.004 of this code (A.R.S. § 9-461.02).
   (B)   Powers and duties. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the
following powers and duties:
      (1)   Initiate, conduct hearings, and make recommendations to the Town
Council on proposed amendments to the general plan map and text, pursuant to §
152.088;
      (2)   Initiate, conduct hearings, and make recommendations to the Town
Council on proposed amendments to the zoning map and to the text of this title,
pursuant to §§
152.089 and
152.090;
      (3)   Initiate, conduct hearings, and decide on proposed conditional use
permits, pursuant to §
152.091;
      (4)   Initiate, conduct hearings, and make recommendations to the Town
Council on proposed modifications to approved conditional use permits, pursuant
to §
152.086(J);
      (5)   Hear and decide site plan review decisions brought forth by Zoning
Administrator because of special circumstances of the application, pursuant to
§
152.095(B); and
      (6)   Exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as are
provided by law and directed by the Town Council.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.073 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   The Board of Adjustment is hereby created, which shall have the powers and
duties set forth in this code (A.R.S. § 9-462.06).
   (A)   Appointment and members.  The Board of Adjustment shall consist of
five electors of the town, appointed by the Council. In the absence of a Board
of Adjustment or by desire of the Council, it may act as the Board of
Adjustment. In such case, the Council shall meet as a Board of Adjustment and
not take action as a Board at regular Council meetings. The Council acting as a
Board shall adhere to the applicable rules listed in this section.
   (B)   Term of office and removal.
      (1)   All appointments shall serve staggered terms of three years.
Vacancies occurring other than through expiration of the term may be filled for
the unexpired portion of the term, or as deemed appropriate by Council.
      (2)   The term of all members shall extend until their successors are
qualified, provided that three successive unexcused or unexplained absences
from any regular or special meeting shall be grounds for termination at the
pleasure of the appointing authority without the necessity of a hearing or
notice. Such action shall be final.
      (3)   Members of the Board may, after a public hearing, be removed by the
Council for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office. The Council
shall file a written statement of the reasons for the removal.
      (4)   All members shall be paid a stipend per meeting as set by the
Council; Also, members may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in
connection with their duties upon authorization by the Board and approval of
the expenditures by the Council.
   (C)   Organization.
      (1)   The Board shall elect a Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson from its
members, who shall serve in this capacity for one year and until their
successors are elected and qualified.
      (2)   The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings and exercise all the
usual rights, duties and prerogatives of the head of any similar organization.
The Chairperson shall have the power to administer oaths and take evidence.
      (3)   In the absence of the Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson shall
perform the duties of the Chairperson.
      (4)   Chairperson vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term by a
new election. In the case of the Council acting as Board, the Mayor shall act
as Chairperson.
      (5)   The Council shall appoint a Secretary who shall keep minutes of the
Board's proceedings, showing the votes of each member and records of its
examinations and other official actions. The Secretary shall cause a file to be
kept of all meetings of the Board in the office of the Town Clerk and retained
as a public record.
   (D)   Meeting and hearing conduct. Meetings and hearings shall be conducted
in accordance with the following:
      (1)   Meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall
conduct their open meetings according to the applicable procedures provided by
law, including but not limited to the Arizona open meetings laws.
      (2)   Meetings and hearings shall be conducted at the call of the
Chairperson or the Zoning Administrator and at such other times as the
appointed body may determine. All meetings and hearings shall be conducted
pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter, town code or state law.
      (3)   The Board may conduct special meetings for good cause on call of
the chairperson, or Zoning Administrator, or by a majority of the members, or
as may be scheduled by a majority vote of the members at a previous meeting.
The manner of the call shall be recorded in the minutes of the special meeting,
and at least 24 hours' notice of the meeting shall be provided to each member
and the general public.
      (4)   The Board may ask town departments for assistance in the
performance of its duties, and it shall be the duty of each department to
render assistance to the Board as may be reasonably required.
      (5)   In the case of the Council acting as the Board, a majority of the
Council shall constitute a quorum. Otherwise, the presence of a majority of the
Board shall constitute a quorum. The Board shall act by motion or resolution.
The affirmative vote of a majority of all members shall be required for passage
of any matter before the Board. A member may abstain from voting only upon a
declaration of a conflict of interest, in which case the member shall not
participate in the deliberations of the matter in question.
   (E)   Powers and duties. The Board of Adjustment shall have the following
powers and duties:
      (1)   Hear and decide appeals in which it is alleged there is an error in
a decision made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement of the zoning
ordinance;
      (2)   Hear and decide appeals for variances from the terms of the zoning
ordinance only if, because of special circumstances applicable to the property,
including its size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, the strict
application of the zoning ordinance will deprive such property of privileges
enjoyed by other property of the same classification in the same zoning
district. Any variance granted is subject to such conditions as will assure
that the adjustment authorized shall not constitute a grant of special
privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the
vicinity and zone in which such property is located;(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-
2020)
      (3)   Reverse or affirm the order, requirement or decision of the Zoning
Administrator appealed from, and make such order, requirement, decision or
determination as necessary; and
      (4)   Shall exercise such other powers as may be granted by this chapter
and adopt all rules and procedures necessary for the conduct of its business.
   (F)   Restrictions.  The Board of Adjustment may not:
      (1)   Make any changes in the uses permitted in any zoning district, or
make any changes in the terms of the zoning ordinance provided the restriction
in this division shall not affect the authority to grant variances pursuant to
this section; and
      (2)   Grant a variance if the special circumstances applicable to the
property are self-imposed by the property owner.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.074 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   Pursuant to A.R.S § 9-462.05, the provisions of this code shall be
administered and enforced by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator
shall be a regular, full-time employee of the town and shall be appointed by
the Town Manager. In the event that no such person is appointed or if the
Zoning Administrator becomes unavailable, the Community Development Director
shall serve as the Zoning Administrator.
   (A)   Powers and duties.  The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized and
is hereby delegated the authority to commence an action to enforce the
provisions of this chapter, pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-462.05.A, § 9-462.05.B, and
shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   To establish rules, procedures and forms to provide for the
efficient and timely processing of applications or requests for action under
the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   To accomplish all administrative actions required by this chapter,
to include official notification, scheduling of hearings, preparation of
reports, receiving and processing appeals, acceptance and accounting of fees
and rejection or approval of permits and plans as provided in other provisions
of this chapter.
      (3)   To provide advice and recommendations to the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the Board of Adjustment and the Town Council with respect to
applications, requests for approval and permits as required by this chapter.
      (4)   To interpret the zoning ordinance to the public, town departments
and other branches of government, subject to the advice of the Town Attorney
and specific policies established by the Town Council.
      (5)   To undertake preliminary discussions with and provide non-legal
advice to applicants requesting zoning interpretive actions.
      (6)   To assure that any development or use proceed only in accordance to
the terms, conditions or requirements established by the town's Boards,
Planning and Zoning Commission or Town Council, as a term, condition or
requirement of development and/or permit approval.
      (7)   To direct such inspections, observations and analysis of any and
all construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or use of buildings,
structures or land within the town as is necessary to fulfill the purposes and
procedures set forth in this chapter. No building shall be occupied until such
time as the Zoning Administrator has signed-off on, and a certificate of
occupancy has been issued under this chapter.
      (8)   To enter or inspect any building, structure, premises, or real
property in the town upon which, or in connection with which, a development or
land use is located or proposed for the purpose of inspection to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Such inspections shall be
carried out in compliance with A.R.S. § 9-833.
      (9)   To take such action as is necessary for the enforcement of this
chapter with respect to any violations of this chapter.
      (10)   To interpret the location of any zoning district boundary shown on
the zoning map adopted as part of this chapter when such location is in
dispute.
      (11)   The Zoning Administrator may, due to the complexity of any matter,
unless otherwise noted herein, refer a permit application to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for a recommendation.
      (12)   The Zoning Administrator shall delegate administrative functions
as deemed necessary to execute the intent of this code to members of the
Community Development Department staff.
   (B)   Restrictions. The Zoning Administrator may not:
      (1)   Make any changes in the uses permitted in any zoning classification
or zoning district, or make any change in the terms of the zoning ordinance;
provided that the restriction in this division shall not affect the authority
to grant variances pursuant to A.R.S § 9-462.06.
      (2)   Refuse to sign-off on a building permit or occupancy permit when
the applicant has complied with all provisions of this and other applicable
ordinances or codes.
   (C)   Liability. The Zoning Administrator, or designee, charged with the
enforcement of this chapter, acting in good faith and without malice in the
discharge of the duties described in this chapter, shall not be personally
liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of an
act, or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of their duties. A
suit brought against the Zoning Administrator, or designee, because such act or
omission performed by the Zoning Administrator, or designee, in the enforcement
of any provision of such code or other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented
through the enforcement of this chapter or enforced by the enforcement agency
shall be defended by the town until final termination of such proceedings. Any
resulting judgment shall be assumed by the town.   
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
ZONING PROCEDURES
§ 152.085 PURPOSE.
   This chapter provides procedures and requirements for the preparation,
filing, and processing of development applications required by this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.086 COMMON PROCEDURES.
   The preparation and filing of applications for land use permits,
entitlements, amendments (e.g., general plan, zoning map, and zoning code), and
other matters pertaining to this chapter shall comply with the following common
procedures, unless an exception to the common procedure is expressly identified
in subsequent sections of this chapter. Subsequent sections include additional
provisions that are unique to each type of application, including staff and
review board assignments and approval criteria.
   (A)   Pre-application conference.
      (1)   (a)   A pre-application meeting to discuss the nature of the
proposed application, application submittal requirements, the procedure for
action, and the standards for evaluation of the application shall be required
for all proposed:
            1.   General plan amendments;
            2.   Zoning text amendments;
            3.   Zoning map amendments (rezone);
            4.   Planned area developments;
            5.   Subdivisions;
            6.   Conditional use permits;
            7.   Site plan review; and
            8.   Variances.
         (b)   An applicant for a project not requiring pre-application review
may request, in writing to the Zoning Administrator, such review.
      (2)   Pre-application filing. Before filing any applications described by
this section, the applicant shall submit a preliminary description of the
proposal, accompanied by a fee specified by the adopted fee schedule, for
review and comment by the Zoning Administrator and any other persons the Zoning
Administrator deems appropriate. This preliminary description shall include, at
minimum, a site plan and project narrative; both of sufficient scope and detail
so as to allow a basic review of location, land area, land use, land use
intensity, traffic generation and adjacent streets, stormwater drainage,
utility service, and previous case history.
      (3)   Pre-application conference.
         (a)   After receipt of a proper preliminary description of the
proposal, the Zoning Administrator shall schedule a pre-application conference.
At the conference, the applicant, the Zoning Administrator or designee, and any
other persons the Zoning Administrator deems appropriate to attend shall
discuss the proposed development.
         (b)   Based upon the information provided by the applicant and the
provisions of this code, the parties should discuss in general the proposed
development, the applicable submittal requirements and standards of this code,
and conditions that may be appropriate to meet the purposes and requirements of
this code.
      (4)   Pre-application waivers. The Zoning Administrator may waive the
requirement for a pre-application review based on a determination that no
purpose will be served by the review. In such cases, the Zoning Administrator
shall prepare a written statement setting forth the reasons for approving the
waiver.
      (5)   Pre-application completeness review meeting. Following the
mandatory pre-application conference, but prior to filing any application
described by this section, the applicant may request in writing a pre-
application completeness review meeting with Community Development staff.
Although not required, this meeting is recommended to allow staff the ability
to complete a cursory review of the planned submittal material and identify if
any required items are missing that may prevent an application from being
accepted. This meeting should be scheduled several working days prior to the
submittal deadline.
   (B)   Application submittal (administrative completeness review).
      (1)   Applications. Completed applications shall be submitted to the
Community Development Department on a form and in such a manner as established
by the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Application schedule. In accordance with A.R.S. § 9-835, the
Community Development Department shall publish an application schedule, which
prescribes the necessary deadline for submitting specified application types in
advance of being reviewed by the appropriate decision-making body pursuant to
this chapter or the A.R.S.
      (3)   Authority to file applications. Any of the following persons or
entities may submit an application:
         (a)   The owner of the property;
         (b)   An agent representing the owner, duly authorized to do so in
writing by the owner.
      (4)   Payment, waiver and refund of application fees.
         (a)   Schedule of fees. The town shall establish fees for all
application and permit types. The fee schedule shall be adopted by resolution
of the Council. Payment of the fee is required in order for an application to
be complete. No application or permit shall be processed without payment of the
applicable fee.
         (b)   Fee waiver or deferral. No fee shall be required when the
applicant is the town.
         (c)   Refund of fees.
            1.   Recognizing that filing fees are utilized to cover town costs
of public hearings, mailing, posting, transcripts, and staff time involved in
processing applications, no refunds shall be issued due to a disapproval of an
application.
            2.   In the case of an application withdrawal, the Zoning
Administrator may authorize a partial refund based upon the costs incurred to-
date and determination of the status of the application at the time of
withdrawal.
      (5)   Application completeness review. Each application filed with the
Community Development Department shall be initially processed as follows:
         (a)   Completeness review. The Zoning Administrator shall review an
application for completeness and accuracy before it is accepted as being
complete and officially filed. The Zoning Administrator will consider an
application complete when:
            1.   All necessary application forms, documentation, exhibits,
materials, maps, plans, reports and other information specified in the
application form, and any additional information required by the Zoning
Administrator have been provided and accepted as adequate.
            2.   All necessary fees have been paid and accepted.
         (b)   Notification of applicant. If the application is determined to
be complete, the application shall then be processed according to the
procedures set forth in this chapter. If an application is determined to be
incomplete, the Zoning Administrator shall provide written or electronic notice
to the applicant along with an explanation of the application's deficiencies.
No further processing of an incomplete application shall occur until the
deficiencies are corrected in a resubmittal.
         (c)   Expiration of application. If a pending application is not
deemed complete within six months after the first filing with the Community
Development Department, the application shall expire and be deemed withdrawn.
Thirty days prior to that date the planning staff shall notify the applicant in
writing that the application will become inactive. Any refunds of fees shall be
processed according to §
152.086(B)(4).
         (d)   Extension of application. The Zoning Administrator may grant one
six month extension upon written request of the applicant. After expiration of
the application, and extension, if granted, a new application, including
applicable fees, plans, exhibits and other materials will be required to
commence processing of a new project application on the same property.
      (6)   Additional information. After the application has been accepted as
complete, the Zoning Administrator and/or any decision-making body may require
the applicant to submit additional information in order to evaluate fully
whether an application complies with the requirements of this chapter, state,
or federal law.
      (7)   Concurrent applications. When a project requires approvals under
more than one section of the zoning code, the individual applications may be
processed concurrently at the option of the Zoning Administrator and with the
approval of the applicant; provided, however, rezoning applications may not be
approved simultaneously with major general plan amendments. Rezone applications
can only be approved sequentially after major GPA adoption; the rezone
application will be cancelled if the major GPA is not adopted. Minor GPAs may
be processed concurrently with other applications. The concurrent processing of
applications shall be in all cases at the applicant's risk.
      (8)   Referral of application. At the discretion of the Zoning
Administrator, or where otherwise required by this chapter, A.R.S., or federal
law, an application filed in compliance with this chapter may be referred to
any public agency that may be affected by or have an interest in the proposed
land use activity.
   (C)   Citizen review process.
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of the citizen review process is to provide a
means for the applicant, surrounding residential neighbors, and registered
neighborhood and homeowner's association representatives to review a
preliminary development proposal and solicit input and exchange information
about the proposed development. This citizen review process is intended to
result in an application that is responsive to neighborhood concerns and to
expedite and lessen the expense of the review process by avoiding needless
delays, appeals, remands or denials. The applicant is responsible for all costs
associated with the citizen review process.
      (2)   Applicability.  In accordance with A.R.S. § 9-462.03, all of the
following application types shall conduct a neighborhood meeting, unless as may
be otherwise specified in this section, the town code, or A.R.S.
         (a)   General plan amendments;
         (b)   Zoning text amendments;
         (c)   Zoning map amendments (rezoning);
         (d)   Conditional use permits (optional);
         (e)   Variances (optional); and
         (f)   Major modification to an approved plan or condition of approval
(when original approval requires neighborhood meeting).
      (3)   Meeting schedule. The applicant shall be responsible for scheduling
and facilitating the meeting. The applicant is required to hold one meeting,
prior to the first public hearing on an application for a specific project, but
may hold more if desired. The required meeting shall be held at least 15
calendar days before the first public hearing on the application. Attendance at
the meeting by Community Development Department staff is not required and will
be determined by the Zoning Administrator on a case-by-case basis.
      (4)   Meeting location. Neighborhood meetings shall be held at a location
near the subject property. The meeting shall be held on a weekday evening, or
weekends at any reasonable time and in a publicly accessible location.
      (5)   Notification requirements. Notice of the meeting, which shall state
a brief description of the application and include the date, time, and place of
the meeting, shall be provided by the applicant as follows:
         (a)   Mailing a notice not less than ten calendar days prior to the
date of the neighborhood meeting to:
            1.   All real property owners, as shown on the latest Mohave County
assessment records, within 300 feet of the outer boundary of the subject
property. This notification area may be expanded if the general plan or other
policy adopted by the Town Council requires notification within a larger area
or the Zoning Administrator determines the potential impact of the project
extends beyond the required notification boundary;
            2.   Residents, registered neighborhoods, and homeowners
associations that may be impacted as a result of the application, and other
neighborhood entities identified by the town;
            3.   Interested parties which have requested that they be placed on
a contact list for this application; and
            4.   Potentially interested parties that have been identified by
the town.
      (6)   Meeting summary. The applicant shall submit to the Community
Development Department seven calendar days before the first public hearing on
the matter a written summary of the meeting. The following information shall be
included in the meeting summary, at a minimum: date, time, and location of the
meeting; a copy of the mailing list and meeting sign-in sheet, a summary of how
the applicant has addressed or proposes to address the issues, concerns, and
objections identified during the meeting.
   (D)   Application review and report (substantive review). After determining
that a development application is complete, the Zoning Administrator shall
refer the application to the appropriate review agencies and town staff to
review the submitted materials, and provide written review comments to the
applicant if necessary. Upon receiving the applicant's final response to review
comments, the Zoning Administrator or designee shall prepare a staff report.
The staff report shall be made available for inspection and copying by the
applicant and the public prior to the scheduled public hearing on the
development application. The staff report shall indicate whether, in the
opinion of the staff, the development application complies with all applicable
standards of this chapter. Conditions for approval may be recommended to
eliminate any areas of noncompliance or mitigate any adverse effects of the
development proposal.
   (E)   Public notice requirements. Public notification required under this
chapter, shall be subject to the following requirements, unless as may be
otherwise specified in the town code or as set forth in A.R.S. Any changes to
Arizona Law notice requirements shall have control over this provision in the
manner of providing notice.
      (1)   Summary of notice requirements. The following Table 6.2-
1 summarizes the notice requirements of the procedures in this chapter.
Table 6.2-1: Summary of Notice Requirements
Application Type Section Type of Notification Required
                         Published Mailed Posted Neighborhood Meeting
Table 6.2-1: Summary of Notice Requirements
Application Type           Section Type of Notification Required
                                   Published Mailed Posted Neighborhood Meeting
Major General Plan         §         Per A.R.S. § 9-461.06
Amendment                  152.088
Minor General Plan         §      X         X      X      X
Amendment                  152.088
Amendment to Zoning Code   §         Per §
Text                       152.089 152.089(C)
Amendment to Zoning Map    §      X         X      X      X
                           152.090
Conditional Use Permit     §      X         X      X      (Optional)
                           152.091
Temporary Use Permit       §      None
                           152.092
Variance                   §                X      X      (Optional)
                           152.093
Sign Permit, Comprehensive §      None
Sign Plan                  152.094
Master Sign Program        §      X                X
                           152.094
Sign Plan Review           §      None
                           152.095
Site Plan Review - If      §
referred to Planning and   152.095 X                X
Zoning Commission
Annexation                 §      X                X
                           152.096
 
      (2)   Content of public notice. All required notifications as specified
in Table 6.2-1 shall include; the date, time, and place of the hearing; a
general explanation of the matter to be considered; a general description of
the area affected; and indicate where additional information on the matter may
be obtained. If the matter to be considered applies to territory in a high
noise or accident potential zone as defined in A.R.S. § 28-8461, the notice
shall include a general statement that the matter applies to property located
in the high noise or accident potential zone.
      (3)   Specific notice requirements. Notice as specified in Table 6.2-1,
shall be provided as follows:
         (a)   Published notice.  A public hearing display ad (per A.R.S. § 9-
462.04) shall be placed by the town, at least once in a local newspaper of
general circulation within the town. The advertisement shall be published at
least 15 calendar days prior to the public hearing.
         (b)   Mailed notice.  A notice of public hearing shall be sent by the
town, via U.S. first class mail, at least 15 calendar days prior to the public
hearing. The applicant shall be responsible for providing the town with mailing
labels containing the names and addresses of:
            1.   The applicant or representative and owners of the subject
property;
            2.   All real property owners, as shown on the latest Mohave County
assessment records, within 300 feet of the outer boundary of the subject
property. This notification area may be expanded if other policy adopted by the
Town Council requires notification within a larger area or the Zoning
Administrator determines the potential impact of the project extends beyond the
required notification boundary;
            3.   Residents, registered neighborhoods, and homeowners
associations that may be impacted as a result of the application, and other
neighborhood entities in the town as determined by the Zoning Administrator;
            4.   Interested parties which have requested that they be placed on
a contact list for this application;
            5.   Interested parties that have been identified by the town;
            6.   If the proposed project involves land that abuts other
municipalities or unincorporated areas of Mohave County or a combination
thereof, notice of the public hearing shall be sent to the planning agency of
the adjacent governmental unit.
             
         (c)   Posted notice.  A notice of public hearing shall be posted by
the town on the lot, parcel, or tract of land that is the subject of the
application. A minimum of one posting shall be placed in a manner that is
clearly visible from the most heavily traveled public right-of-way adjoining
the subject property and shall be placed at least 15 calendar days prior to the
public hearing. Such notice shall be composed of weatherproof materials and
shall be printed so that the following are visible from a distance of 100 feet:
the application type, the application request (i.e. for a zoning map amendment
display the present zoning district classification and the proposed zoning
district classification) and the date, time, and location of the hearing. The
town shall update the sign as needed and maintain the sign in good condition
throughout the required posting period. The posting shall be removed no later
than ten days after the public hearing and final action.
         (d)   Neighborhood meeting. A notice of neighborhood meeting shall be
provided as specified in §
152.086(C)(5).
         (e)   Multiple notices.  When multiple applications are under review
for the same project, the responsible noticing body as specified in this
section may simultaneously issue notice for multiple applications.
         (f)   Validity of notice. The validity of the public hearing
proceedings shall not be affected by the failure of any person to receive
notice or by the presence of minor defects in the notice. Minor defects in
notice shall be limited to errors in a legal description or typographical or
grammatical errors that do not impede communication of the notices' primary
intent to inform affected parties of the project and the time, date, and place
of a public hearing or meeting.
   (F)   Public hearing. A public hearing, if required under this chapter,
shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, unless
as may be otherwise specified by the town or as set forth in A.R.S.
   (G)   Written decision. The decision to approve or approve with conditions
or deny shall be communicated in writing to the applicant within 15 days from
the decision. All decisions shall include a statement of approval, approval
with conditions, or denial, whichever is appropriate.
   (H)   Limitation on reapplication. In the event that an application is
denied, an application that is substantially the same project or request will
not be considered for a period of one year from the date the initial
application was denied, except as follows;
      (1)   A substantial change in circumstances relevant to the issues and/or
facts considered during review of the application that might reasonably affect
the decision-making body's application of the relevant review standards to the
development proposed in the application;
      (2)   A new application is proposed to be submitted that is materially
different (e.g., proposes new uses, or a substantial decrease in proposed
densities and intensities) from the prior application; or
      (3)   The final decision on the application was based on a material
mistake of fact or the foregoing.
   (I)   Reconsideration or rehearing of decisions.
      (1)   Decisions of any appointed body under this chapter may be brought
up for reconsideration or rehearing only if:
         (a)   There was substantial procedural error in the original
proceeding;
         (b)   The Zoning Administrator or body acted without jurisdiction in
the original proceeding;
         (c)   The original decision was based upon fraud or misrepresentation;
         (d)   Reconsideration is appropriate to avoid delay or hardship that
may be caused by an appeal; or
         (e)   As requested by a member of the body whose vote was included in
the side that prevailed in the motion to be reconsidered.
      (2)   Any person seeking reconsideration or a rehearing must file a
request with the Zoning Administrator, together with materials supporting one
or more of the grounds stated in this section, within 15 days of the original
decision, or within the timeframe established under state law if applicable.
The appointed decision-making body, by majority vote, may decide to hold a
rehearing if the rehearing request meets requirements of divisions (I)(a)
through (e) of this section. A rehearing shall be conducted in the same manner
as the original proceedings before the Zoning Administrator or appointed body.
   (J)   Amendments to permits or other forms of approval. An approved
development or new land use shall be established only as specified by the
approved land use permit, and subject to any conditions of approval. An
applicant may request, in writing, to amend the approved permit, and shall
furnish appropriate supporting materials and an explanation of the reasons for
the request.
      (1)   Minor changes may be approved, modified, or denied by the Zoning
Administrator. Major changes shall be approved, modified or denied by the
original review authority.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether a proposed change
is major or minor. The determination that the change is major depends on
whether the proposal may result in:
         (a)   Significant impacts to the surrounding neighborhood;
         (b)   Significant environmental impacts;
         (c)   A change to the approved use or a significant change in
conformance to the original plan or intent; or
         (d)   A change to the basis upon which the review authority made the
findings for approval of the project.
      (3)   A major change request shall be processed in the same manner as the
original permit or entitlement.
   (K)   Appeals. This section sets forth the procedures for appeals except for
appeals filed pursuant to division (L) of this section. Any decision within the
authority of the decision-making body may be appealed, unless the zoning code
provides that the decision is final.
      (1)   Applicability. The appropriate decision-making body for each appeal
type is identified in §§
152.088 through
152.096. General appeals in which it is alleged there is an error in an order,
requirement or decision made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement of
this zoning ordinance shall be made to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to the
provisions of this division (K).
      (2)   Appeal process.
         (a)   Filing of appeal.
            1.   Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by persons
aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality
affected by a decision of the Zoning Administrator. An appeal shall be filed
with the Community Development Department on a form established by the
Director. Within five working days after the appeal is filed, the Zoning
Administrator shall transmit all records pertaining to the action appealed from
to the Board. The appeal shall set forth the decision or decisions being
appealed and the grounds upon which the appeal is based. The appeal shall be
accompanied by any applicable fees.
            2.   A person aggrieved by a decision of the legislative body or
Board of Adjustment or a taxpayer who owns or leases the adjacent property or a
property within 300 from the boundary of the immediately adjacent property, an
officer or a department of the municipality affected by a decision of the
legislative body or Board, may file a complaint for special action in the
superior court to review the legislative body or Board of Adjustment decision.
         (b)   Appeal period. All appeals shall be filed within 15 calendar
days of the decision, except for appeals from decisions of the Board of
Adjustment or Town Council. An appeal from any decision regarding a Town
Council or Board of Adjustment action (e.g., variances, text or map amendments)
shall be filed with the Superior Court within 30 days of the decision. If no
appeal is filed in writing within the relevant 15 or 30-day protest period, the
decision shall be considered final.
         (c)   Proceedings stayed by appeal. The timely filing of an appeal,
except for appeals related to the Zoning Administrator's interpretation or
enforcement of this chapter, shall stay all proceedings in the matter appealed.
            1.   Appeals made to the Board of Adjustment in regard to the
Zoning Administrator's interpretation or enforcement of this chapter shall stay
all proceedings in the matter appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator
certifies to the Board that, in the Zoning Administrator's opinion by the facts
stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or
property. Upon such certification, proceedings shall not be stayed, except by
restraining order granted by the Board or by a court of record on application
and notice to the Zoning Administrator.
            2.   Filing a complaint in Superior Court does not stay proceedings
on the decision sought to be reviewed, but the court may, on application, grant
a stay and on final hearing may affirm or reverse, in whole or in part, or
modify the decision reviewed.
         (d)   Public notice. Prior to consideration of any appeal for which
state law or the zoning code requires a public hearing, the town shall provide
public notification in compliance with §
152.089(E) or as required by state law, whichever requires the most notice.
         (e)   Standards. When reviewing any decision on appeal, the decision-
making body shall use the same standards for decision-making required for the
original decision.
         (f)   Hearing body action. Public hearings shall be conducted in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter, unless as may be otherwise
specified in this town code or as set forth in A.R.S. The decision-making body
for the appeal shall deny or grant the appeal or the decision-making body may
remand the matter to the original decision-making body for reconsideration, for
additional information or to cure a deficiency in the record or proceeding. The
decision-making body shall render its decision within 30 days of the date the
hearing is closed unless state law requires a shorter deadline.
   (L)   Appeals of dedications or exactions to hearing officer.
      (1)   Any requirement of a dedication or exaction as a condition of
granting approval for the use, improvement, or development of real property may
be appealed to a hearing officer appointed by the Town Council. This division
shall not apply to legislatively imposed dedications or exactions in which no
discretion by the Zoning Administrator or administrative officer to determine
the nature or extent of the dedication or exaction was exercised. In the event
of such an appeal, the Zoning Administrator shall prepare a takings impact
report. No fee shall be charged for filing an appeal under this section and
such appeal shall be conducted as required by A.R.S. § 9-500.12.
      (2)   Appeal of decision of zoning hearing officer. A property owner
aggrieved by a decision of the zoning hearing officer to modify or affirm a
dedication or exaction requirement or to affirm a zoning regulation may file
within 30 days after the decision a complaint in Superior Court, pursuant to
A.R.S § 9-500.12G.
   (M)   Effective date and exercising approval at risk.
      (1)   A final decision on an application for any discretionary approval
subject to appeal (e.g., a conditional use permit, variance, or site plan
approval) shall become effective after the expiration of the appeal period
following the date of action, unless an appeal is filed. No building permit or
business registration shall be issued until the day following the expiration of
the appeal period, unless, in accordance with division (M)(2) below, the
applicant signs a waiver explaining that they understand and accept the risk of
proceeding before the appeal period ends.
      (2)   An approved conditional use permit or variance or an interpretation
favorable to the applicant may be exercised at the applicant's sole risk, and a
building permit (if required) may be issued subsequent to approval by the town
Building Official. However, if an appeal of the decision is filed in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter that reverses in whole or in part or
modifies the decision and that causes any construction or use commenced as a
result of exercising the decision to be in conflict with the appellate body's
decision, then such building permit may be revoked in accordance with the
appellate body's decision and any such construction or use may constitute a
violation of this chapter and may be subject to removal or cessation by the
applicant, property owner, or his or her agent.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.087 REVIEW AUTHORITY.
   Table 6.3-1 identifies the town official or body responsible for reviewing
and making decisions on each type of application, land use permit and other
approvals required by this chapter, unless otherwise stated within each
applicable procedure section.
Table 6.3-1: Review Authority
                  Role of Review Authority
Procedure Section R = Review Rec = Recommendation D = Decision
                  Zoning        Board of   Planning and Zoning Town Council
                  Administrator Adjustment Commission
Table 6.3-1: Review Authority
                         Role of Review Authority
                         R = Review Rec = Recommendation D = Decision
Procedure        Section Zoning        Board of   Planning and
                         Administrator Adjustment Zoning          Town Council
                                                  Commission
General Plan     §      R                        Rec             D
Amendments       152.088
Amendment to     §      R                        Rec             D
Zoning Code Text 152.089
Amendment to     §      R                        Rec             D
Zoning Map       152.090
Conditional Use  §      R                        Rec             D
Permit           152.091
Temporary Use    §      D
Permit           152.092
Variance         §      R             D
                 152.093
Sign Permit,     §
Comprehensiv e   152.094 D
Sign Plan
Master Sign      §      R                        Rec             D
Program          152.094
                                                  D (If referred
Site Plan Review §      D                        to Planning and
                 152.095                          Zoning
                                                  Commission )
Annexation       §      R                        R               R/D
                 152.096
 
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.088 GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENT.
   (A)   Purpose and applicability. The purpose of this section is to provide
procedures by which changes may be made to the text or map of the general plan.
   (B)   Initiation of amendments. An amendment to the general plan text or map
may be initiated by:
      (1)   Town Council on its own motion;
      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Commission;
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator; or
      (4)   The owner of the subject property or authorized agent.
   (C)   Timing of amendments.
      (1)   Major amendments. All applications for major amendments to the
general plan shall be heard by the Town Council at a single hearing during the
calendar year in which they are filed. Applications for major amendments shall
be filed by the date provided on the application schedule in order to be
considered in that calendar year.
      (2)   Minor amendments. Applications for minor amendments may be filed
and heard at any time during the calendar year.
   (D)   General plan amendment application process.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1913.png]
 
      (1)    Pre-application conference. Prior to the submission of an
application for a general plan amendment, all applicants are required to
schedule a meeting with the Zoning Administrator, as set forth in §
152.086(A).
      (2)   Application submittal. A complete application for a general plan
amendment shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator as required by §
152.086(B).
      (3)   Citizen review process. All applications to amend the general plan
shall be subject to a citizen review process. The Zoning Administrator may
establish additional procedures for the citizen review process. The citizen
review process shall at a minimum conduct a neighborhood meeting in accordance
with the procedures set forth in §
152.086(C).
      (4)   Application review and report. Upon receipt of a complete general
plan amendment application, the Zoning Administrator shall review the proposed
amendment and prepare a staff report for transmittal to the Planning and Zoning
Commission in accordance with §
152.086(D).
      (5)   Notification. Public notification shall be provided in compliance
with §
152.086(E). In addition, at least 60 days before a new general plan or major
amendment of a general plan is noticed pursuant to this section, the Community
Development Department shall transmit the proposal to the Planning Commission
and the Town Council and shall submit a copy for review and further comment to:
         (a)   The Mohave County Planning Agency;
         (b)   Each municipality that is contiguous to the corporate limits of
the town;
         (c)   The regional planning agency;
         (d)   The state agency that is designated as the general planning
agency for the State of Arizona;
         (e)   Any ancillary military facility as defined under state law, if
an element of or amendment to the general plan is applicable to territory in
the vicinity of such a facility;
         (f)   The Attorney General, if an element of or major amendment to the
general plan is applicable to property in the high noise or accident potential
zone of any ancillary military facility, as defined under state law; and
         (g)   Any person that requests in writing to receive a review copy of
the proposal.
      (6)   Planning and Zoning Commission review and recommendation. The
Planning Commission shall conduct at least one public hearing for all general
plan amendments. The Planning Commission may recommend the approval, approval
with modifications or denial of the proposed amendment. If the Commission fails
to make a recommendation to the Town Council within 90 days after closing the
public hearing, the Planning Commission shall be deemed to have recommended
denial and the application shall be scheduled for public hearing and action by
the Town Council.
      (7)   Town Council review and action. The Town Council shall review the
application in a public hearing. The Town Council may approve, approve with
modifications or deny the application. Approval of any major amendment to the
general plan shall require an affirmative vote by at least 2/3 of the members
of the Council. Approval shall be by resolution.
      (8)   Written notification. The decision to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny shall be communicated in writing to the applicant in
compliance with §
152.086(G).
   (E)   Issues for consideration. In determining whether to approve, approve
with conditions, or deny proposed general plan amendments, issues for
consideration shall include but not be limited to:
      (1)   Whether the development pattern contained in the future land use
plan provides appropriate optional sites for the use proposed in the amendment;
      (2)   That the amendment constitutes an overall improvement to the
general plan and is not solely for the good or benefit of a particular
landowner or owners at a particular point in time;
      (3)   The degree to which the proposed amendment will impact the
community as a whole or a portion of the community by:
         (a)   Significantly altering acceptable existing land use patterns;
         (b)   Requiring larger and more extensive improvements to roads,
sewer, or water systems than are needed to support the prevailing land uses in
which, therefore, may negatively impact development of other lands. The
Commission and/or the Town Council may also consider the degree to which the
need for such improvements will be mitigated pursuant to binding commitments by
the applicant, a public agency, or other sources when the impacts of the uses
permitted pursuant to the general plan amendment will be felt;
         (c)   Adversely impacting existing uses due to increased traffic on
existing systems; or
         (d)   Affecting the livability of the surrounding area or the health
and safety of present or future residents;
      (4)   That the amendment is consistent with the overall intent of the
general plan;
      (5)   Whether there was an error or oversight in the original general
plan adoption that did not fully consider facts, projects or trends which could
reasonably exist in the future;
      (6)   Whether events subsequent to the general plan adoption have
superseded the original premises and findings made upon plan adoption;
      (7)   Whether events subsequent to the general plan adoption may have
changed the character and/or condition of the area so as to make the
application acceptable; and
      (8)   The extent to which the benefits of the plan amendment outweigh any
of the impacts identified in divisions (E)(1) through (8) hereto.
   (F)   Appeal. An appeal from any final decision regarding a Town Council
action shall be filed with the Superior Court within 30 days of the decision.
If no appeal is filed in writing within 30 days, the decision shall be
considered final.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.089 AMENDMENTS TO ZONING CODE TEXT.
   (A)   Purpose and applicability. The purpose of this section is to provide
procedures consistent with applicable state requirements by which changes may
be made to the text of the zoning code.
   (B)   Initiation of amendments. An amendment to the text of this code may be
initiated by:
      (1)   Town Council on its own motion;
      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Commission;
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator; or
      (4)   An application filed by an individual or group.
(C)   Text amendment application process.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1915.png]
 
      (1)   Pre-application conference. Prior to the submission of an
application for a text amendment, all individual or group applicants are
required to schedule a meeting with the Zoning Administrator, as set forth in §
152.086(A).
      (2)   Application submittal. A complete application for a text amendment
shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator as required by §
152.086(B). At minimum a zoning text amendment application shall include:
         (a)   A written narrative identifying the section of the code to be
amended, the proposed revised zoning text, how the proposed zoning text
conforms with the general plan and why the text amendment is necessary;
         (b)   The applicant shall submit any other information identified in
the pre-application meeting and all required information stated elsewhere in
this code for an amendment to the zoning text.
      (3)   Citizen review process.
         (a)   In place of a neighborhood meeting, a citizen review session
shall be held at a work session of the Planning and Zoning Commission scheduled
at least five days prior to the public hearing at the Planning Commission for
the consideration of any proposed text amendment. Landowners and other citizens
potentially affected by the proposed text amendment shall have an opportunity
to comment on the proposal.
         (b)   Notice of the citizen review session shall be given by the
applicant at least ten days prior to the Planning Commission work session. The
notice shall state the date, time, and place of the citizen review session and
shall include a general explanation of the proposed text amendment. The method
of notice to be used may vary according to the type of text amendment proposed.
Any method of notice approved by the Zoning Administrator for the proposed text
amendment shall be considered sufficient. The method of notice given may
include, but is not limited to, the following:
            1.   A notice of a citizen review session shall be sent, via U.S.
first class mail, to landowners, citizens potentially affected by the proposed
text amendments, and any person or group who has specifically requested notice
regarding the application;
            2.   Publication in a local newspaper of general circulation
distributed to residents living within the town;
            3.   Posting at a minimum of three public places within the town;
or
            4.   Posting on the official town website.
      (4)   Application review and report. Upon receipt of a complete text
amendment application, the Zoning Administrator shall review the proposed text
amendment for consistency with the goals and objectives of the general plan,
and prepare a staff report for transmittal to the Planning and Zoning
Commission in accordance with §
152.086(D).
      (5)   Notification.
         (a)   Amendments to the text of this chapter involving either a 10% or
more increase or decrease in the number of square feet or units that may be
developed, a 10% or more increase or reduction in the allowable building
height, an increase or reduction in the number of stories of buildings, a 10%
or more increase or decrease in setback or open space requirements, or a change
in permitted uses, shall be subject to notice requirements as set forth below
or if amended per A.R.S. § 9-462.04.
         (b)   The town shall provide, at least 15 calendar days prior to the
public hearing, notice to real property owners pursuant to at least one of the
following notification procedures:
            1.   Notice shall be sent by first class mail to each real property
owner, as shown on the last assessment, whose real property is directly
governed by the changes.
            2.   If the municipality issues utility bills or other mass
mailings that periodically include notices or other informational or
advertising materials, the municipality shall include notice of such changes
with such utility bills or other mailings.
            3.   The municipality shall publish such changes prior to the first
hearing on such changes in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality. The changes shall be published in a "display ad" covering not
less than one-eighth of a full page.
            4.   If notice is provided pursuant to divisions 1. or 3. above,
the municipality shall also send notice by first class mail to persons who
register their names and addresses with the town as being interested in
receiving such notice.
      (6)   Planning and Zoning Commission review and recommendation. The
Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the application in a public
hearing, and recommend approval, approval with modifications, or denial of the
subject application. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend the
approval, approval with modifications or denial of the proposed amendment. If
the Commission fails to make a recommendation to the Town Council within 90
days after closing the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
be deemed to have recommended denial and the application shall be scheduled for
public hearing and action by the Town Council.
      (7)   Town Council review and action. The Town Council shall review the
application in a public meeting; or a public hearing if any member of the
public provides written objection to the recommendation of the Planning and
Zoning Commission; and approve, approve with modifications, or deny the
application. Approval shall be by ordinance. If a public hearing is held,
public notification shall be provided in compliance with §
152.086(E).
      (8)   Written notification. The decision to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny shall be communicated in writing to the applicant in
compliance with §
152.086(G).
   (D)   Issues for consideration. In determining whether to approve, approve
with conditions, or deny proposed text amendments, issues for consideration
shall include but not be limited to:
      (1)   The proposed amendment will promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare;
      (2)   The proposed amendment is consistent with the general plan and the
stated purposes of this development code; and
      (3)   The proposed amendment is necessary or desirable because of
changing conditions, new planning concepts, or other social or economic
conditions.
   (E)   Appeal. An appeal from any final decision regarding a Town Council
action shall be filed with the Superior Court within 30 days of the decision.
If no appeal is filed in writing within 30 days, the decision shall be
considered final.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.090 AMENDMENTS TO ZONING MAP (REZONE).
   (A)   Purpose and applicability. The purpose of this section is to provide
procedures consistent with applicable state requirements by which changes may
be made to the official zoning map. This procedure shall apply to all proposals
to revise a zoning district classification or zoning district boundary line
shown on the official zoning map.
   (B)   Initiation of amendments. An amendment to the official zoning map may
be initiated by:
      (1)   Town Council on its own motion;
      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Commission;
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator; or
      (4)   The owner of the subject property or authorized agent.
   (C)   Rezone application process.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1917.png]
 
      (1)   Pre-application conference. Prior to the submission of an
application for a zoning map amendment, all applicants are required to schedule
a meeting with the Zoning Administrator, as set forth in §
152.086(A).
      (2)   Application submittal. A complete application for a zoning map
amendment shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator as required by §
152.086(B). At minimum a zoning map amendment application shall include:
         (a)   Proof of ownership;
         (b)   A written narrative identifying how the proposed zoning conforms
with the general plan, fits in with the surrounding neighborhood, and why it is
more appropriate for the property than the existing zoning;
         (c)   A site plan showing the footprint of all existing and proposed
buildings, parking configuration, location of all utilities and easements, and
other details demonstrating conformance with all regulations and development
standards applicable to the proposed zoning district;
         (d)   A map showing adjoining zoning districts within 300 feet;
         (e)   A list of all property owners within 300 feet; and
         (f)   The applicant shall submit any other information identified in
the pre-application meeting and all required information stated elsewhere in
this code for an amendment to the zoning map.
      (3)   Citizen review process. The applicant shall schedule and conduct a
neighborhood meeting in accordance with the procedures set forth in §
152.086(C).
      (4)   Application review and report. Upon receipt of a complete zoning
map amendment application, the Zoning Administrator shall review the proposed
zoning map amendment and prepare a staff report for transmittal to the Planning
and Zoning Commission in accordance with §
152.086(D).
      (5)   Notification. Public notification shall be provided in compliance
with §
152.086(E).
      (6)   Planning and Zoning Commission review and recommendation. The
Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the application in a public
hearing, and recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the
subject application.
      (7)   Protest procedures. If the owners of 20% or more either of the area
of the lots included in a proposed zoning change, or of those immediately
adjacent in the rear or any side thereof extending 150 feet therefrom, or of
those directly opposite thereto extending 150 feet from the street frontage of
the opposite lots, file a protest in writing against the proposed amendment, it
shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of ¾ of the members of
the Town Council. The protest shall be filed in writing with the Town Clerk at
least five days prior to the public hearing or any continued public hearing of
the Town Council to allow time to verify the signatures on the protest.
      (8)   Town Council review and action. The Town Council shall review the
application in a public meeting; or a public hearing if any member of the
public provides written objection to the recommendation of the Planning and
Zoning Commission; and approve, approve with modifications, or deny the
application. Approval shall be by ordinance. If a public hearing is held,
public notification shall be provided in compliance with §
152.086(E).
      (9)   Written notification. The decision to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny shall be communicated in writing to the applicant in
compliance with §
152.086(G).
   (D)   Issues for consideration. In determining whether to approve, approve
with conditions, or deny proposed official zoning map amendments, issues for
consideration shall include but not be limited to:
      (1)   Consistency (or lack thereof) with the general plan, and other
adopted plans;
      (2)   Compatibility with the present zoning and conforming uses of nearby
property and with the character of the neighborhood;
      (3)   Suitability of the subject property for uses permitted by the
proposed zoning district;
      (4)   Suitability of the subject property for uses permitted by the
existing district; and
      (5)   Availability of sewer and water facilities.
   (E)   Revocation or modification. If the Town Council approves an amendment
to the official zoning map with a condition that is required to be completed
within a specific time period and the condition is not satisfied within that
time period, the following actions may be taken:
      (1)   The Town Council or Planning and Zoning Commission may initiate an
amendment to remove the condition or extend the time period and direct the
Zoning Administrator to prepare an ordinance to do the same pursuant to the
procedures set forth in §
152.090(C)(5) through (8);
      (2)   The Town Council or Planning and Zoning Commission may initiate a
rescission of the zoning map amendment to revert the zoning to its prior zoning
classification for failure to comply with the conditions of the rezoning
ordinance, pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-462.01(e) and direct the Zoning Administrator
to notify the property owner by certified mail and prepare an ordinance to
revert the zoning pursuant to the procedures set forth in §
152.090(C)(5) through (8); or
      (3)   The property owner in writing may apply to amend or remove the
condition pursuant to the procedures set forth in §
152.090(C)(5) through (8).
   (F)   Appeals. An appeal from any final decision regarding a Town Council
action shall be filed with Superior Court within 30 days of the decision. If no
appeal is filed in writing within 30 days, the decision shall be considered
final.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.091 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Purpose and applicability. The purpose of this section is to permit
conditional uses in appropriate zoning districts. This may only occur in
specific locations and only when designed and developed in a manner which
assures maximum compatibility with adjoining uses. This section establishes
principles and procedures essential to proper guidance and control of these
uses. Conditional use may require the imposition of additional conditions in
order to accomplish the following:
      (1)   To protect the public health, safety, convenience, and general
welfare;
      (2)   To assure that the purposes of the zoning ordinance shall be
maintained with respect to the particular conditional use on the particular
requested site;
      (3)   To consider the location, use, building, traffic characteristics,
and environmental impact of the proposed use; and
      (4)   To consider existing and potential uses with the general area in
which the requested conditional use is proposed.
   (B)   Types of conditional uses. The Council may grant a conditional use
permit in accordance with the procedures stated in this section for the
following uses:
      (1)   Only those uses that are enumerated as conditional uses in a zoning
district, as set forth in §§
152.025 through
152.033; or
      (2)   Non-specified uses as determined by the Zoning Administrator, per
§§
152.026(C)(7),
152.027(C)(7), or
152.028(C)(7), upon a finding that said use is materially similar to other
conditional uses within the same zoning district, in accordance with the
procedures and standards set forth in this section.
   (C)   Conditional use permit application process.
      (1)   Pre-application conference. Prior to the submission of an
application for a conditional use permit, all applicants are required to
schedule a meeting with the Zoning Administrator, as set forth in §
152.086(A).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1919.png]
 
      (2)   Application submittal. A complete application for a conditional use
permit shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator as required by §
152.086(B). In addition, no conditional use shall be established until a site
plan has been approved in accordance with §
152.095. Applications for a conditional use and site plan review shall be
submitted and reviewed concurrently. At minimum, a conditional use permit
application shall include:
         (a)   Proof of ownership;
         (b)   A written narrative that responds to §
152.091(D);
         (c)   A site plan consistent with §
152.095(C);
         (d)   A map showing adjoining zoning districts within 300 feet;
         (e)   A list of all property owners within 300 feet; and
         (f)   The applicant shall submit any other information identified in
the pre-application meeting and all required information stated elsewhere in
this code for a conditional use permit.
      (3)   Citizen review process. The applicant shall not be required to
conduct a neighborhood meeting; However, for certain conditional use requests
staff shall have the option to require the applicant to schedule and conduct a
neighborhood meeting to avoid any unnecessary delays during the public hearing
process. If the applicant chooses to hold or is required to hold a neighborhood
meeting it shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in §
152.086(C).
      (4)   Application review and report. Upon receipt of a complete
conditional use permit application, the Zoning Administrator shall review the
proposed conditional use permit application and prepare a staff report for
transmittal to the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with §
152.086(D).
      (5)   Notification. Public notification shall be provided in compliance
with §
152.086(E).
      (6)   Planning and Zoning Commission review and recommendation. The
Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the application in a public
hearing, and recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the
application, subject to the review conditions set forth in §
152.091(C) and (D).
      (7)   Town Council review and action.
         (a)   The Town Council shall review the application in a public
meeting; or a public hearing if any member of the public provides written
objection to the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission; and
approve, approve with modifications, or deny the application. If a public
hearing is held, public notification shall be provided in compliance with §
152.086(E).
         (b)   Conditions of approval. In permitting a conditional use or the
alteration of an existing conditional use, the Council can impose, in addition
to those standards and requirements expressly specified by this chapter
additional conditions which it finds necessary to avoid detrimental
environmental impact and to otherwise protect the best interest of the
surrounding area or the community as a whole. These conditions can include, but
are not limited to the following:
            1.   Limiting the manner in which the use is conducted, including
restricting the time a certain activity can take place and restraints to
minimize such environmental effects as noise, vibration, air pollution, glare
and odor;
            2.   Establishing special yard, open space, lot area or dimensional
requirements;
            3.   Limiting the height, size or location of a building or other
structure or use;
            4.   Designating the size, number, location and nature of vehicle
access points. For example, but not limited to: secondary driveway access on
corner lots in residential subdivisions;
            5.   Designating the size, location, screening, drainage, surfacing
or other improvements of a parking area or loading area;
            6.   Limiting or otherwise designating the number, size, location,
height and lighting of signs;
            7.   Limiting the intensity of outdoor lighting and requiring light
shielding.
            8.   Requiring screening, landscaping or another facility to
protect adjacent or nearby property and designate standards for its
installation and maintenance;
            9.   Designating the size, height, location of screening and
materials of fencing, including anti-graffiti type materials; and
            10.   Limiting hours of operation, revocation dates and time limits
for commencing construction or use authorization.
      (8)   Written notification. An approved conditional use shall not be
established until a conditional use permit has been issued by the Community
Development Department. The permit shall cite the plans and documents on which
the Council based its approval, as well as the specific modifications and/or
conditions of the approval, if any.
   (D)   Required findings. The Council may approve a conditional use permit as
submitted or modified only upon making the following findings:
      (1)   The proposed use will not be detrimental to the health, safety, or
general welfare of persons living or working in the vicinity, to adjacent
property, to the neighborhood, or to the public in general;
      (2)   The proposed use conforms with the purposes, intent, and policies
of the general plan and its policies and any applicable area, neighborhood, or
other plan officially adopted by the Town Council;
      (3)   The proposed use conforms with the conditions, requirements, or
standards prescribed by the zoning code and any other applicable local, state,
or federal requirements;
      (4)   The proposed conditional use shall conform to the character of the
neighborhood, within the same zoning district, in which it is located. In
making such a determination, consideration shall be given to the location, type
and height of the buildings or structures and the type and extent of
landscaping and screening on the site;
      (5)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, fire protection, and
other necessary facilities shall be provided;
      (6)   Adequate measures shall be taken to provide ingress and egress so
designed as to minimize traffic hazards and to minimize traffic congestion on
the public roads;
      (7)   The proposed use shall not be noxious or offensive by reason of
vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke, or gas;
      (8)   The proposed use shall not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of
the property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted, nor
substantially diminishes or impair the property values within the neighborhood;
and
      (9)   The establishment of the proposed use shall not impede the orderly
development and improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted within
the zoning district.
   (E)   Expiration and time extensions.
      (1)   Expiration. In any case where a conditional use permit has not been
used within six months after the granting, it shall become null and void.
Conditional use permits shall run with the land unless the Council elects to
specify a period of abandonment after which the conditional use permit shall be
voided.
      (2)   Time extensions. The Council shall hold a public hearing to
consider the granting of a time extension as follows:
         (a)   Upon request by the applicant.
         (b)   When the request is filed in writing with the Community
Development Department not less than 30 days prior to the expiration date of
the original conditional use permit (CUP) approval.
         (c)   When accompanied by a time conditional use permit application
fee in accordance with the fee schedule of the town.
         (d)   Upon determination by the Council that there have been no
changes in the circumstances or in the vicinity of the property or use which
would render the previously approved conditional use permit (CUP)
inappropriate.
   (F)   Revocation or modification.
      (1)   Revocation. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant by
mail if in violation of the CUP. If no attempt to change the violation is made
within ten working days of notification, the Council shall be authorized to
hold a public hearing to consider the revocation or modification of a
conditional use permit (CUP) previously granted in accordance with the
provisions of the zoning ordinance. A written notice of the date, time, place
and purpose of the hearing shall be served on the owner of the property for
which the CUP was granted by registered mail, return receipt requested, not
less than 30 days prior to the date of such hearing.
      (2)   Findings. A conditional use permit (CUP) may be revoked or modified
if, from the facts presented at the public hearing or by investigation, the
Town Council makes an affirmative determination on any one of the following
findings:
         (a)   That the conditional use permit (CUP) was obtained by fraud.
         (b)   That the conditional use permit (CUP) granted is being exercised
contrary to the conditions of approval of such CUP or in violation of any
applicable law, license, ordinance, permit or regulation.
         (c)   That the use for which the conditional use permit (CUP) was
granted is being or has been exercised as to be detrimental to the public
health or safety.
         (d)   The use ceases for a period of 90 consecutive days, or because
of failure to comply with the conditions of the use permit.
   (G)   Appeal. Decisions of the Council may be appealed pursuant to the
procedures set forth in §
152.086(K).
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.092 TEMPORARY USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Purpose and applicability. The purpose of this section is to allow for
the establishment of interim or temporary uses when such activities are
desirable for the community, or are temporarily required in the process of
establishing a permitted use. Temporary uses allowed under this section shall
be consistent with the health, safety and general welfare of persons residing
and working in the community, shall be conducted so as not to cause any
detrimental effects on surrounding properties and the community, and shall not
violate any other ordinance or regulation of the town.
   (B)   Types of temporary uses. The Zoning Administrator may grant a
temporary use permit in accordance with the standards and/or conditions
specified in §
152.047.
   (C)   Temporary use permit application process.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1921.png]
 
      (1)   Application submittal. A complete application for a temporary use
permit shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator as required by §
152.086(B). At minimum, a temporary use permit application shall include:
         (a)   Aerial map of the site;
         (b)   Notarized property owner authorization (if applicable);
         (c)   A site plan showing the location and footprint of proposed uses
and structures, parking configuration and other details necessary to
demonstrate that the proposed use and site conforms with all other requirements
of the zoning district and all other town codes; and
         (d)    Contain sufficient information to demonstrate compliance with
temporary use conditions in accordance with §
152.047(C) and (D) and all required information stated elsewhere in this code
or any other town code.
         (e)   All applications for temporary use permits shall be filed at
least four weeks prior to the date the temporary use will commence, or at least
six weeks prior to the date the temporary use will commence if public safety
support is requested from the town. The Zoning Administrator may waive this
filing deadline requirement in an individual case for good cause shown.
      (2)   Application review and decision. Upon receipt of a complete
temporary use permit application, the Zoning Administrator shall review the
proposed temporary use permit application and distribute the application to
other reviewers as he or she deems necessary. Based on the results of those
reviews, the Zoning Administrator shall take final action on the application
and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application based on the
applicable approval criteria.
   (D)   Required findings. The Zoning Administrator may approve a temporary
use permit as submitted or modified only upon making the following findings:
      (1)   The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the use will not,
under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health,
safety, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood
of the proposed use.
      (2)   The use, as described and conditionally approved, will not be
detrimental or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood or to
the general welfare of the town.
      (3)   Approved measures for the removal of the use and site restoration
have been required to ensure that no changes to the site would limit the range
of possible future land uses otherwise allowed by this code.
   (E)   Appeal. Decisions of the Zoning Administrator may be appealed to the
Board of Adjustment pursuant to the procedures set forth in §
152.086(K).
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.093 VARIANCE.
   (A)   Purpose and applicability. Because of special circumstances applicable
to a property, including its size, shape, topography, location or surroundings,
there may be instances in which the strict application of the zoning ordinance
will deprive the property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the same
zoning district. To ensure a fair application of this chapter, a variance from
the standards imposed may be granted by the Board of Adjustment. In granting a
variance:
      (1)   Consideration may be given with respect to dimensional and
performance standards including, but not limited to site dimensions, yards,
height of structures, distances between structures, open space requirements,
signage dimensions, fences, and walls.
      (2)   Nothing shall be construed to empower the Board to change the terms
of this chapter, to authorize uses which violate any other town ordinance, to
affect changes in the zoning map, to add to the uses permitted or adjust the
permitted density in any zoning district, or to grant a conditional use permit.
      (3)   All sections of this code are considered binding unless relief is
granted through the variance process.
      (4)   All shall be personal to the appellant and shall be transferable
and run with the land only after completion and final inspection of any
authorized structure.
   (B)   Variance application process.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1923.png]
 
      (1)   Pre-application conference. Prior to the submission of an
application for a variance, all applicants are required to schedule a meeting
with the Zoning Administrator, as set forth in §
152.086(A).
      (2)   Application submittal. A complete application for a variance shall
be submitted to the Zoning Administrator as required by §
152.086(B). At minimum a variance application shall include:
         (a)   Proof of ownership;
         (b)   A written statement indicating the variance will meet the
requirements listed in §
152.093(C);
         (c)   A site plan showing the footprint and proposed use of all
buildings proposed, parking configuration and other details necessary to
demonstrate that the proposed use and site conforms with all other requirements
of the zoning district and variance requirements; and
         (d)   The applicant shall submit any other information identified in
the pre-application meeting and all required information stated elsewhere in
this code for a variance.
      (3)   Citizen review process.
         (a)   The applicant shall not be required to conduct a neighborhood
meeting, however for certain variance requests staff shall have the option to
require the applicant to schedule and conduct a neighborhood meeting to avoid
any unnecessary delays during the public hearing process.
         (b)   If the applicant chooses to hold or is required to hold a
neighborhood meeting it shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures
set forth in §
152.086(C).
      (4)   Application review and report. Upon receipt of a complete variance
application, the Zoning Administrator shall review the proposed variance for
compliance with criteria enumerated in §
152.093(C). The Zoning Administrator shall then prepare a staff report for
transmittal to the Board of adjustment.
      (5)   Notification. Public notification shall be provided in compliance
with §
152.086(E).
      (6)   Board of Adjustment review and action.
         (a)   The Board of Adjustment shall review the application in a public
hearing and may approve, approve with modifications and/or conditions, or deny
the variance.
         (b)   Conditions of approval. In approving a variance, the Board of
Adjustment may impose reasonable conditions necessary to:
            1.   Achieve the general purposes of the zoning code or the
specific purposes of the zoning district in which the site is located, or to
make it consistent with the general plan;
            2.   Protect the public health, safety, and general welfare; or
            3.   Insure operation and maintenance of the use in a manner
compatible with existing and potential uses on adjoining properties or in the
surrounding area.
      (7)   Written notification. The decision to approve or approve with
conditions or deny shall be communicated in writing to the applicant in
compliance with §
152.086(G).
   (C)   Required findings. The Board of Adjustment shall only approve a
variance after finding that all of the following conditions are met. Financial
hardship, personal preference of the owner, or the fact that property may be
utilized more profitably if the requested variance is granted shall not be
considered grounds for a variance.
      (1)   Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to
the land, structure, or building involved, and which are not applicable to
other lands, structures, or buildings in the same zoning district.
      (2)   A literal interpretation of this chapter would deprive the
appellant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning
district.
      (3)   The alleged hardship caused by literal interpretation of the
provisions of this chapter includes more than personal inconvenience and
financial hardship and is not the result of actions by the appellant.
      (4)   Granting the variance will not confer upon the appellant any
special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands, structures, or
buildings in the same zoning district.
      (5)   Granting the variance will not interfere with or substantially
injure the appropriate use of adjacent conforming properties in the same zoning
district.
      (6)   The reasons set forth in the appeal justify the granting of the
variance, and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible
the reasonable use of the land, building or structure.
      (7)   Granting the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose
and intent of this chapter and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or
otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.    
      (8)   No variance shall be granted from any written conditions attached
by another decision-maker to the approval of a rezoning, conditional use
permit, subdivision plat, or site plan.
      (9)   No variance shall be granted if the conditions or circumstances
affecting the applicant's property are of so general or recurrent a nature as
to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation for such
conditions or situations.
      (10)   No non-conforming use or violations of this chapter with respect
to neighboring lands, structures or buildings, in the same zoning district, and
no permitted use of lands, structures or buildings in other zoning districts,
shall be considered grounds for granting a variance.
      (11)   Every decision of the Board shall be based upon findings of fact,
and every finding of fact shall be supported in the record of its proceedings.
The conditions required by this chapter to exist on any matter upon which the
Board is authorized to pass under this chapter shall be construed as
limitations on the power of the Board to act. A mere finding or recitation of
the enumerated conditions, unaccompanied by findings of specific fact, shall
not be deemed findings of fact, and shall not be deemed in compliance with this
chapter.
   (D)   Expiration and time extensions.
      (1)   Expiration. In any case where a variance has not been used within
one year after the granting, it shall become null and void.
      (2)   Time extensions. The Board of Adjustment shall hold a public
hearing to consider the granting of a time extension of no more than one
additional year as follows:
         (a)   Upon request by the applicant;
         (b)   When the request is filed in writing with the Community
Development Department not less than 30 days prior to the expiration date of
the original variance approval;
         (c)   When accompanied by a time extension fee in accordance with the
fee schedule of the town; or
         (d)   Upon determination by the Board that there have been no changes
in the circumstances or in the vicinity of the property or use which would
render the previously approved variance inappropriate.
   (E)   Revocation.
      (1)   Revocation. The Board of Adjustment shall be authorized to hold a
public hearing to consider the revocation of a variance previously granted in
accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance. A written notice of the
date, time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be served on the owner of
the property for which the variance was granted by registered mail, return
receipt requested, not less than 30 days prior to the date of such hearing.
      (2)   Findings.  A variance may be revoked if, from the facts presented
at the public hearing or by investigation, the Board makes an affirmative
determination on any one of the following findings:
         (a)   That the variance was obtained by fraud; or
         (b)   That the variance granted is being exercised contrary to the
conditions of approval of such variance or in violation of any applicable law,
license, ordinance, permit or regulation.
   (F)   Appeals. An appeal from any final decision regarding a Board action
shall be filed with Superior Court within 30 days of the decision. If no appeal
is filed in writing within 30 days, the decision shall be considered final.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.094 SIGN PERMIT, COMPREHENSIVE SIGN PLAN AND MASTER SIGN PROGRAM.
   (A)   Purpose and applicability. The purpose of this section is to provide
procedures by which specific signage within the town can be regulated to
promote traffic safety, safeguard public health, facilitate police and fire
protection, prevent adverse community appearance and enhance identification
and/or direction within the town. Certain sign approvals are required to erect,
re-erect, construct, alter or move specific sign types within the town. Sign
applications shall also be required as part of a final site plan or final plat
submittal or as may be required by the Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   Sign permit and comprehensive sign plan application process.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1925.png]
 
      (1)   Application submittal. A complete application for a sign permit or
comprehensive sign plan (see §
152.058 (J)) shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator as set forth in §
152.086(B). All sign permit or comprehensive sign plan applications shall
provide information as specified in §
152.058(J)(2) and (3).
      (2)   Additional application requirements. The application for a sign
permit for the erection of a sign in which electrical wiring and connections
are to be used shall include electrical plans and specifications to be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator, who shall forward the plans and
specifications regarding all wiring and connections to the Building Official.
The Building Official shall examine the plans and specifications to determine
compliance with the electrical code of the town as a condition of granting the
sign permit.
      (3)   Application review and decision. Upon receipt of a complete sign
permit or comprehensive sign plan application, the Zoning Administrator shall
review the proposed application and distribute the application to other
reviewers as he or she deems necessary. Based on the results of those reviews,
the Zoning Administrator shall take final action on the application and
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application based on compliance
with the requirements of this code (See sign standards in §
152.058).
      (4)   Appeal. An appeal from any final decision of the Zoning
Administrator may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to the
procedures set forth in §
152.086(K).
   (C)   Master sign program application process.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1927.png]
 
      (1)   Application submittal. A complete application for a master sign
program (See §
152.059(J)) shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator as set forth in §
152.086(B). All master sign program applications shall provide information as
specified in §
152.059(J)(1).
      (2)   Application review and report. Upon receipt of a complete master
sign program application, the Zoning Administrator shall review the proposed
application and prepare a staff report for transmittal to the Planning and
Zoning Commission in accordance with §
152.086(D).
      (3)   Planning and Zoning Commission review and recommendation. The
Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the application in a public
hearing, and recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the
application, subject to the review conditions set forth in §§
152.107(C)(7) and
152.108.
      (4)   Town Council review and action. The Town Council shall review the
application in a public meeting and approve, approve with modifications, or
deny the application.
      (5)   Written notification. The decision to approve or approve with
conditions or deny shall be communicated in writing to the applicant in
compliance with §
152.086(G).
   (D)   Master sign program required findings. The Planning and Zoning
Commission may approve a master sign program as submitted or modified only upon
making the following findings:
      (1)   The proposed sign program only amends provisions in §
152.058 and does not violate any other provisions of this chapter or any other
town ordinance.
      (2)   The appearance, scale, materials, design and graphics, and
orientation of signs are in keeping with the character of the site and
buildings, and the surrounding neighborhood.
      (3)   Approval of the master sign program would not be detrimental to the
public interest, health, safety, convenience, or welfare, or materially
injurious to persons, property, or improvements in the vicinity in which the
project is located.
   (E)   Revocation. Failure to conform to the provisions of a sign permit,
including any conditions and/or stipulations attached thereto by the Zoning
Administrator, Commission and/or Council shall render such permit void.
   (F)   Appeal. Decisions of the Commission may be appealed to the Superior
Court pursuant to the procedures set forth in §
152.086(K).
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.095 SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   Purpose and applicability. This section provides procedures and
standards for the comprehensive review of proposed development projects to:
promote the safe, functional and aesthetic development of property, ensure
compliance with the development and design standards of this chapter; and
encourage quality development reflective of the goals, policies, and objectives
of the general plan. Site plan review shall be required for:
      (1)   All new construction, remodeling, or expansion of non-residential
or multi-family residential uses, with the following exceptions:
         (a)   Proposed modifications are strictly related to the interior of
the building.
         (b)   Modifications, additions, or enlargements to a building which do
not increase the gross floor area by more than 500 square feet or 10%,
whichever is less, and which do not require a variance from the provisions of
this chapter.
      (2)   An application for approval of a zoning map amendment or
conditional use. In this case, the site plan review shall occur concurrently
with the review of the rezone or conditional use application.
   (B)   Site plan process.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1929.png]
 
      (1)    Pre-application conference. Prior to the submission of an
application for site plan approval, all applicants are required to schedule a
meeting with the Zoning Administrator, as set forth in §
152.086(A).
      (2)   Application submittal. A complete application for site plan
approval shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator as required by §
152.086(B) and §
152.095(C).
      (3)   Application review and action. Following submittal of a complete
application, the Zoning Administrator shall refer the application to the
appropriate review agencies and town staff to review the submitted materials,
and provide written review comments to the applicant if necessary. Following
receipt of review comments, the applicant shall correct the site plan as needed
and resubmit the corrected application to the Community Development Department.
Based on the resubmitted application material, the Zoning Administrator shall
take final action on the application and approve, approve with conditions, or
deny the application based on the applicable approval criteria, unless the
Administrator determines that there are unusual circumstances or special
conditions related to an application, in which case the Administrator may defer
action and refer such application to the Planning and Zoning Commission for
final decision.
         (a)   Conditions of approval. In approving a site plan, the Zoning
Administrator may impose reasonable conditions necessary to:
            1.   Achieve the general purposes of the zoning code or the
specific purposes of the zoning district in which the site is located, or to
make it consistent with the general plan;
            2.   Protect the public health, safety, and general welfare; or
            3.   Insure operation and maintenance of the use in a manner
compatible with existing and potential uses on adjoining properties or in the
surrounding area.
      (4)   Review by Planning and Zoning Commission. If referred to the
Planning and Zoning Commission, the Commission shall review the application in
a public hearing, and recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial
of the subject application as set forth in §
152.086(E) and (F).
      (5)   Written notification. The decision to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny shall be communicated in writing to the applicant in
compliance with §
152.086(G).
   (C)   Required site plan information. All site plans shall be drawn to scale
and shall contain the following information, unless otherwise specifically
waived by the Zoning Administrator:
      (1)   A vicinity map which shall include the location of any public
streets in the vicinity of the site.
      (2)   The boundaries and dimensions shown graphically, along with a
written legal description of the property.
      (3)   The present and proposed topography, drainage systems and
structures, and retention basins of the site by contour lines at an interval of
not more than two feet.
      (4)   The location of existing and proposed structures, with height,
gross floor area, use and exterior material appropriately noted.
      (5)   The location of open space, yards, and setbacks and their
dimensions.
      (6)   The location and dimensions of existing and proposed points of
vehicular and pedestrian access.
      (7)   The location of off-street parking, driveway and loading areas,
with number of spaces, dimensions, circulation patterns, and type of paving
appropriately noted.
      (8)   The type of surfacing and base course proposed for all parking
areas, loading areas, and walkways.
      (9)   The location, height, and material for screening walls and fences.
      (10)   The size and location of all existing and proposed public and
private utilities and their easements.
      (11)   Existing and proposed public streets or rights-of-way, easements,
or other reservations of land on the site.
      (12)   The location and method of screening of outdoor trash storage
areas.
      (13)   The proposed type and location of all signage.
      (14)   The location and height of proposed lighting facilities.
      (15)   Elevation views of all proposed buildings or structures, with
building materials and proposed colors noted.
      (16)   When a site is to be developed in stages, the plan should indicate
the ultimate development of the site and proposed developmental phases.
      (17)   Any additional information which the Zoning Administrator may find
necessary to establish compliance with this and other ordinances.
   (D)   Issues for consideration. In determining whether to approve, approve
with conditions, or deny proposed site plans, issues for consideration shall
include but not be limited to:
      (1)   The general layout of the project, including orientation and
location of buildings, open space, vehicular and pedestrian access and
circulation, parking and loading facilities, building setbacks and heights, and
other improvements on the site, is consistent with the requirements of the
zoning district in which the site is located, and with all applicable
development standards and design guidelines.
      (2)   The architectural design of the structure(s) and their materials
and colors are compatible with the scale and character of surrounding
development and other improvements on the site and are consistent with the
requirements of the zoning district in which the site is located, and with all
applicable development standards and design guidelines.
      (3)   The landscaping, including the location, type, size, color,
texture, and coverage of plant materials, provisions for irrigation, and
protection of landscape elements has been designed to create visual relief,
complement structures, and provide an attractive environment and is consistent
with the requirements of the zoning district in which the site is located, and
with all applicable development standards and design guidelines.
      (4)   The design and layout of the proposed project will not interfere
with the use and enjoyment of neighboring existing or future development, will
not result in vehicular or pedestrian hazards, and will be in the best interest
of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
      (5)   The existing or proposed public facilities necessary to accommodate
the proposed project (e.g., fire protection devices, parkways, public
utilities, sewers, sidewalks, storm drains, street lights, traffic control
devices, and the width and pavement of adjoining streets and alleys) will be
available to serve the subject site.
      (6)   The proposed project is consistent with the general plan and any
applicable specific plan.
   (E)   Final inspection. A site plan approval is a binding development order
and all improvements reflected on approved site plans must be completed, and
all restrictions and conditions of site plan approval must be fulfilled, prior
to issuance of the final certificate of occupancy.
   (F)   Expiration of approval.
      (1)   A site plan approval becomes void if a building permit has not been
issued within one year from the date of approval. An extension of approval may
be granted if the applicant files for an extension prior to the approval
becoming void and the extension is granted by the Zoning Administrator. The
Zoning Administrator may grant a one-time three-month extension. Additional
extensions must be approved by the Commission.
      (2)   Applications for extensions of the time need to include
justifications for the extension. The Commission will give consideration to the
following:
         (a)   Progress of the project;
         (b)   Funds spent on the project;
         (c)   Good faith efforts;
         (d)   Weather-related delays and other Acts of God; and
         (e)   Delays related to archaeological or environmental issues.
   (G)   Revocation. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant of a
violation or termination of a site plan approval, by mail, if the applicant has
not commenced use of the building permit. The applicant shall be notified if
they are in violation of the conditions of the site plan. If no attempt is made
to change the circumstances of the violation within ten days of notification,
the site plan approval and all permits requiring site plan approval shall be
revoked.
   (H)   Appeal. An appeal from any final decision of the Zoning Administrator
may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to the procedures set forth
in §
152.086(K). Decisions of the Planning and Zoning Commission may be appealed to
the Town Council pursuant to the procedures set forth in §
152.086(K).
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.096 ANNEXATION.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide procedures
consistent with applicable state requirements for the annexation of real
property into the corporate limits of the town.
   (B)   Initiation of annexations.
      (1)   Town Council or Town Manager. The Town Council or Town Manager may
direct staff to review specific property to determine whether it may be legally
annexed and to contact property owners to determine whether they will sign an
annexation petition.
      (2)   Owner initiation. One or more property owners may submit an
application to annex property owned by them into the town.
   (C)   Annexation process. All annexation proceedings shall be conducted in
conformance with A.R.S. § 9-471 and any other applicable state law requirements
for the annexation of land into the town.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.105 PURPOSE.
   This section establishes procedures through which the town seeks to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this code and obtain corrections for
violations. The section also sets forth the remedies and penalties that apply
to violations of this code.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.106 ENFORCEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Building and code compliance. Prior to issuance of building permits,
the Building Official shall ascertain that plans presented with the building
permit application comply with those approved standards subject to the
requirements of the zoning code.
   (B)   Code compliance. The provisions of this code shall be administered and
enforced by the Zoning Administrator, or such other person as may be designated
by the Administrator, and is authorized to stop any work undertaken not in
compliance with any provision of the zoning code, approved permit, or condition
of approval.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.107 ENFORCEMENT GENERAL.
   (A)   No person shall develop or use any land, building, or structure within
the town in violation of this code, regulations authorized under this code, or
the terms and conditions of permits or other approvals or entitlements issued
under this code.
   (B)   No permit or approval may be issued under this code unless all
structures and uses of land and structures to be authorized by the permit or
approval conform to this code, regulations promulgated under this code, and the
terms and conditions of other applicable permits and approvals issued under
this code. Except as otherwise required by Arizona law, any permit issued or
administrative approval granted in conflict with this zoning chapter is void.
   (C)   Any person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, or
maintains any situation that is contrary to the requirements of this code may
be held responsible for the violation and suffer the penalties and be subject
to the remedies provided in this code.
   (D)   Each day any violation of any provision of this code, or the failure
to perform any act or duty required by this code, continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.108 TYPES OF VIOLATIONS AND OFFENSES.
   (A)   Any erection, construction, reconstruction, remodeling, alteration,
maintenance, expansion, movement, or use of any land, building, structure, or
sign that is inconsistent with this code or any regulation adopted pursuant to
this code.
   (B)   Any development, use, or other activity that is in any way
inconsistent with the terms or conditions of any permit or approval required to
engage in such activity and that was issued under or required by this code.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.109 VIOLATION REMEDIES.
   The Zoning Administrator shall have the following remedies and powers to
enforce this code:
   (A)   Deny or withhold entitlements. The town may deny or withhold all
permits, certificates or other forms of authorization on any land or structure
or improvements thereon upon which there is an uncorrected violation of a
provision of this chapter or of a condition or qualification of a permit,
certificate, approval, or other authorization previously granted by the town.
This enforcement provision shall apply regardless of whether the current owner
or applicant is responsible for the violation in question.
   (B)   Entitlement approved with conditions. Instead of withholding or
denying a permit or authorization (as described in division (A), above) the
town may grant such authorization subject to the condition that the violation
be corrected.
   (C)   Revoke entitlements.
      (1)   Any development permit or other form of authorization required
under this chapter may be revoked when the Zoning Administrator determines:
         (a)   That there is departure from the plans, specifications, or
conditions as required under terms of the permit;
         (b)   That the development permit was procured by false representation
or was issued by mistake; or
         (c)   That any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated.
      (2)   Written notice of such revocation shall be served upon the owner,
the owner's agent or contract, or upon any person employed on the building or
structure for which such permit was issued, or shall be posted in a prominent
location; and, thereafter, no such construction shall proceed.
   (D)   Stop work. With or without revoking permits, the Zoning Administrator
may stop work on any building or structure on any land on which there is an
uncorrected violation of a provision of this chapter or of a permit or other
form of authorization issued hereunder, in accordance with the town's power to
stop work under its building codes. A stop-work procedure is as follows:
      (1)   The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed both to the
permit holder and the person doing the work, and shall specify the provisions
of this code or other law allegedly in violation. After any such order has been
served, no work shall proceed on any building, structure, or tract of land
covered by such order, except to correct such violation or comply with the
order.
      (2)   Once conditions for resumption of the work have been met, the
Zoning Administrator shall rescind the stop-work order.
   (E)   Abatement. The town may commence an action to abate a violation of the
zoning code pursuant to A.R.S § 9-499.
   (F)   Other remedies. The town shall have such other remedies as are and as
may be from time to time provided by Arizona law for the violation of zoning or
related ordinance provisions.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.110 CRIMINAL AND CIVIL PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this code,
or any amendments to it, shall be guilty of a Class One Misdemeanor punishable
by a fine not exceeding $2,500, or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding
six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. Every
action or proceeding under this section shall be commenced and prosecuted in
accordance with the laws of the State of Arizona relating to misdemeanors and
the Arizona Rules of Criminal Procedure.
   (B)   Violation of any provision of this code, or any amendments to it, may
also subject the offender to issuance of a civil citation. The citation shall
direct the defendant to appear in Colorado City Magistrate Court or pay a fine
not to exceed $250 within 14 days after issuance of the citation. The civil
citation shall be substantially in the same form and format as the Arizona
Traffic Ticket and Complaint standard form.
      (1)   The citation shall be served by delivering a copy to the defendant
by any of the following means:
         (a)   By having the defendant sign the citation with the promise to
appear in court on or before the date specified on the face of the citation.
         (b)   If the defendant refuses to sign the citation, then the Zoning
Administrator shall hand-deliver a copy of the citation to the defendant and
note on the defendant's copy of the citation date and time of hand-delivery to
the defendant.
         (c)   By mailing a copy of the citation to the person charged by
certified or return receipt requested mail, to the person's last known address.
         (d)   In the event that service cannot be accomplished as set forth in
this division, the defendant may be served by any means contemplated or allowed
by the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure or Arizona Rules of Practice for the
Superior Court.
      (2)   The citation shall contain the date and location of the violation,
reference to the code section or provision violated, and notice that within 14
days from the date on which the citation was issued the fine for the violation
must be paid to and received by the Colorado City Magistrate Court or a request
for a hearing be made to and received by the Colorado City Magistrate Court.
      (3)   The citation shall state that if the defendant fails to appear
within the time specified, and either pay the fine for the violation or request
a hearing, judgment by default will be entered in the amount of the fine
designated on the citation for the violation charged plus a penalty amount as
may be established by the Court for the defendant's failure to appear.
      (4)   The Arizona Rules of Procedure in Civil Traffic Violation Cases
shall be followed by the Colorado City Magistrate Court for civil citations
issued pursuant to this code, except as modified or where inconsistent with the
provisions of the zoning and development code or as modified or established for
use by the Colorado City Magistrate Court or the Arizona Supreme Court.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.111 CONTINUATION OF PRIOR ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS.
   Nothing in this code shall prohibit the continuation of previous enforcement
actions undertaken by the town pursuant to previous regulations.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.112 CUMULATIVE PROCEDURES AND REMEDIES.
   The procedures and remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and in
addition to any other procedures and remedies to which the town may be entitled
by law or equity.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
NONCONFORMITIES
§ 152.120 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and restrict uses,
structures, lots, site characteristics, and signs that were established legally
prior to the adoption or amendment of this code but do not conform to the
requirements of this code. All such situations are collectively referred to in
this chapter as "nonconformities."
   (B)   It is the intent of this section to encourage the continuing
improvement of the town by limiting the extent to which nonconforming
structures and uses may continue to be used, expanded, or replaced, while
allowing for improvements in their appearance.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.121 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Authority to continue. Any nonconforming use of land or a
nonconforming use of a conforming structure that lawfully existed as of the
passage of this code and that remains nonconforming, and any nonconformity that
is created as a result of the adoption of this code or any subsequent amendment
to the text of this code, may be continued or maintained as a legal
nonconformity only in accordance with the terms of this section.
   (B)   Determination of nonconformance status. The town shall have the burden
to show that a nonconforming structure, lot or use was unlawfully established
prior to the effective date of this code.
   (C)   Change of ownership or tenancy. Changes of ownership, tenancy, or
management of property with an existing nonconformity may occur, but such
nonconformities shall continue to be subject to the provisions of this section.
   (D)   Maintenance and minor repair. Minor repairs or maintenance of
nonconformities are permitted, provided that the minor repairs and maintenance
do not increase the extent of nonconformity. For purposes of this section,
MAINTENANCE OR MINOR REPAIR shall mean:
      (1)   Repairs that are necessary to maintain and to correct any damage or
deterioration to the structural soundness or exterior or interior appearance of
a building or structure without expanding the building or structure;
      (2)   Maintenance of land areas to protect against health and
environmental hazards; and
      (3)   Repairs that are required to remedy unsafe conditions that cause a
threat to public safety.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.122 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Expansion, enlargement and modification. Any nonconforming use of land
or a nonconforming use of a conforming structure that is not in compliance with
this code shall not be enlarged, extended, moved, or substituted unless the use
is brought into compliance with this code. However, reasonable repairs and
alterations are permissible in accordance with the provisions of §
152.121(D).
   (B)   Change of use.
      (1)   Any nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use and once
such change is made, the use shall not thereafter be changed back to a
nonconforming use. A change to a conforming use shall also not create any
additional nonconforming situations.
      (2)   Where a conforming use is located in a nonconforming structure, the
use may be changed to another conforming use by securing a certificate of
occupancy.
   (C)   Loss of nonconforming status. If a nonconforming use of land or a
nonconforming use of a conforming structure is discontinued for a continuous
period of six months, the rights to a legal nonconforming status shall
terminate. The initial decision as to whether a prior existing, non-conforming
use has been abandoned shall be made by the Zoning Administrator, subject to
said decision being appealed to the Board of Adjustment by the affected
property owner within three months of the ruling by the Zoning Administrator
following the procedures under §
152.086(K).
   (D)   Conditional uses. A use that received a conditional use permit prior
to the effective date of this code and that is permitted in its entirety as a
principal use in the district in which it is located under this code shall not
be deemed a nonconforming use. Such use shall be deemed a permitted principal
use and the Conditional Use approval and conditions of approval relative to the
use shall be null and void.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.123 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Continuance. An existing structure that lawfully existed as of the
passage of this code and that remains nonconforming, and any nonconformity that
is created as a result of the adoption of this code or any subsequent amendment
to the text of this code, may be continued or maintained as a nonconformity
only in accordance with the terms of this section.
   (B)   Expansion, enlargement and modification. No nonconforming structure
may be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity, unless
expansion or alteration of a nonconforming structure complies with development
standards of the zoning district in which it is located, including but not
limited to, setbacks applicable to the use for new construction, parking
regulations and landscaping and screening requirements of this code, and all
other applicable codes and ordinances of the town.
   (C)   Destruction and replacement. Any nonconforming structure when damaged
or destroyed by force majeure, may be restored without impairment to any
nonconforming status, provided:
      (1)   If more than 50% of the current assessed value of any nonconforming
structure is destroyed, it shall not be reconstructed unless it is made to
conform to the requirements of this code.
      (2)   If less than 50% of the current assessed value of any nonconforming
structure is destroyed, it may be reconstructed as long as a building permit is
submitted within 90 days after the date of destruction, provided the resulting
structure complies with current building codes and the size and function of the
nonconforming use shall not be expanded. Upon written request, the Zoning
Administrator may grant a one-time extension for the submittal of a building
permit application.
      (3)   An appraisal, paid for by the owner, shall determine the above
assessed value. The appraisal must be done by an appraiser who has an appraiser
license/certification from the state.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.124 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   Any lot of record that is effective as of the date of this code and is
considered a nonconformity because of noncompliance with lot width or area
requirements may be used for any use permitted in the zoning district in which
it is located, provided compliance with all other applicable regulations of
this code are met.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.125 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   Continuance. Any sign legally existing at the time of the adoption of
this code by the Town Council that, due to changes in this section, no longer
conforms in use, location, height or size with the regulations of this section,
may be continued or maintained as a nonconformity only in accordance with the
terms of this section.
   (B)   Expansion, enlargement and modification. No nonconforming sign may be
enlarged, altered or modified in a way that increases its nonconformity, unless
such change is a reasonable alteration, repair, or maintenance as determined by
the Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   Loss of nonconforming status.
      (1)   The sign may continue in use until such time as it is removed, or
abandoned for a period of two or more continuous months.
      (2)   Except as provided in §
152.125(B), any change in the nonconforming sign shall be considered an
abandonment and the legal nonconforming status of the sign shall become void.
This division shall not apply to directory signs designed with interchangeable
letters or panels.
      (3)   Legal non-conforming sign structures, poles and other related
equipment that have been abandoned or not in use for more than two months shall
be removed and the building, land or site restored to its original state.
   (D)   Destruction and replacement. Damage by force majeure to an extent that
is more than 50% of the sign's replacement value, shall be removed or altered
to become a legally conforming sign with the provisions of this code.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
DEFINITIONS
§ 152.135 PURPOSE.
   This chapter provides definitions of terms and phrases used in this code
that are technical or specialized, or that may not reflect common usage. If any
of the definitions in this section conflict with definitions in other
provisions of the code, the specific section's meaning and application of the
term shall control. If a word is not defined in this section, or other
provisions of the code, or the A.R.S., the Zoning Administrator shall determine
the most appropriate definition in compliance with §
152.136(H).
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.136 GENERAL RULES.
   The following general rules shall apply for construing or interpreting the
terms and provisions of this code.
   (A)   Tenses, plurals, gender and persons. Words used or defined in one
tense or form shall include other tenses and derivative forms. Words used in
the singular number shall include the plural number and words used in the
plural shall include the singular number. The masculine gender shall include
the feminine and the feminine gender shall include the masculine. The word
"person" includes individuals, firms, corporations, associations, trusts and
any other similar entities, including the federal government, another town,
county or school district, except as exempt by law.
   (B)   Illustrations and photographs. Illustrations and photographs are
included in this code for illustrative purposes only. In case of any difference
of meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any illustration
or photograph, the text shall control.
   (C)   Lists and examples. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists of
items or examples that use terms such as “for example,” “including,” and “such
as,” or similar language are intended to provide examples and are not
exhaustive lists of all possibilities.
   (D)   Computation of time. If a deadline or required date of action falls on
a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by the town, the deadline or required
date of action shall be the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or holiday
observed by the town. References to days are calendar days unless otherwise
stated.
   (E)   References to other regulations/publications. Whenever reference is
made to a resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document, it shall be
construed as a reference to the most recent edition of such regulation,
resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document, unless otherwise
specifically stated.
   (F)   Mandatory and discretionary terms. The words "shall," "must," and
"will" are mandatory in nature, establishing an obligation or duty to comply
with the particular provision. The words "may" and "should" are permissive in
nature.
   (G)   Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly suggests the contrary,
conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: “And” indicates that all
connected items, conditions, provisions or events apply; and “Or” indicates
that one or more of the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events
apply.
   (H)   Interpretations. The Zoning Administrator has final authority to
determine the interpretation or usage of terms used in this development code.
Any person may request an interpretation of any term by submitting a written
request to the Administrator, who shall respond in writing within 30 days. The
Community Development Department shall keep a public record of all
interpretations and determinations on usage of terms rendered by the
Administrator.
      (1)   Use interpretation. If an application is submitted for a use type
not listed in the Use Tables, §§
152.025 through
152.033, the Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to make a “Similar Use
Interpretation,” based on the following considerations:
         (a)   The actual or projected characteristics of the activity in
relationship to the stated characteristics of each use type;
         (b)   The relative amount of site area or floor space and equipment
devoted to the activity;
         (c)   Relative amounts of sales from each activity;
         (d)   The customer type for each activity;
         (e)   The relative number of employees in each activity;
         (f)   Hours of operation;
         (g)   Building and site arrangement;
         (h)   Vehicles used with the activity;
         (i)   The relative number of vehicle trips generated by the use; and
         (j)   How the use advertises itself.
      (2)   Use interpretation standards.
         (a)   No similar use interpretation shall allow a use in a zoning
district when that use is a permitted or conditional use in any other zoning
district.
         (b)   No similar use interpretation shall permit any use in any zoning
district unless evidence shall be presented demonstrating that it will comply
with all applicable use standards and all other applicable requirements and
standards of this code.
         (c)   No similar use interpretation shall permit any use in a zoning
district unless the use is more similar to the uses listed for the respective
zone than to permitted or conditional uses allowed in other zoning districts.
         (d)   If the proposed use is more similar to a use allowed only as a
conditional use in the zoning district in which it is proposed to be located,
then any similar use interpretation permitting that use shall require a
conditional use permit.
      (3)   Effect of similar use interpretation. No similar use interpretation
finding a particular use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a
specific district shall authorize the establishment of such use or the
development, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any
building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing, and
processing of applications for any permits and approvals that may be required
by the codes and ordinances of the town or other governmental agencies having
jurisdiction. These permits and approvals include, but are not limited to
conditional use permits, building permits, and certificates of occupancy.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 152.137 SPECIFIC DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this code, unless the content
clearly indicates to the contrary, the following words, phrases, and terms
shall have the following meanings:
   (A)   Basis for use categories. Use categories classify land uses and
activities into categories based on common functional, product, or physical
characteristics. Characteristics include the type and amount of activity, the
type of customers or residents, how goods or services are sold or delivered and
site conditions. The use categories provide a systematic basis for organizing
and assigning present and future land uses into appropriate zoning districts.
   (B)   Specific use type. Specific uses are assigned to the category that
most closely describes the nature of the specific use. Specific uses shall be
considered based on common characteristics and not on what a specific use may
call itself. For example, a use that calls itself "Wholesale Warehouse" but
that sells clothing to the general consumer on a small scale is included in the
"Retail, General" use rather than the "Wholesale Establishment" use. This is
because the actual activity on the site matches the description of the Retail,
General use.
   (C)   Developments with multiple specific uses. When all principal uses of a
development fall within one specific use, the entire development is assigned to
that use. A development that contains a clothing boutique, bookstore and
bakery, for example, would be classified in the Retail, General use type
because all of the development's specific uses are in that use. When the
specific uses of a development fall within different use types, each use is
classified in the applicable use and each use is subject to all applicable
regulations for that specific use.
      ABANDONED.  Any building, structure or real property that is vacant or
occupied by a person without a legal right of occupancy, and/or subject to a
current notice of default and/or notice of trustee's sale, pending tax
assessor's lien sale and/or any real property conveyed via a foreclosure sale
resulting in the acquisition of title by an interested beneficiary of a deed of
trust, and/or any real property conveyed via a deed in lieu of foreclosure/
sale.
      ABUT, ABUTTING. To share, border or physically touch a common boundary,
property line or right-of-way.
      ACCESS. The place, means or ways by which pedestrians, vehicles or both
shall have safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress to a property or use. A
private access is an access not in public ownership and controlled by means of
a deed, dedication or easement.
      ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACE. A parking space that meets the requirements of
applicable state and federal disabilities acts.
      ACCESSORY BUILDING. A secondary detached building situated on the same
lot or building site, the use of which is incidental to that of a main
building.
      ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling unit on the same lot with and of a
nature normally incidental and secondary to the principal structure or use.
This definition shall include any structure or portion of a structure, other
than the principal structure or use, wherein kitchenette facilities and/or
provisions for sanitation (shower, tub and/or water closet) are provided.
      ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A subordinate structure to that of a main building
or structure, which is not served with utilities, enabling human habitation.
      ACCESSORY USE. A use of land or of a building or portion thereof usually
incidental and secondary to the principal use of the land or building and
located on the same lot with such principal use or building.
      ACRE. A unit of measure for land area containing 43,560 square feet.
      ADDITION. An extension or increase in floor area or height of a building
or structure.
      ADJACENT. The condition of being near to or close to but not necessarily
having a common dividing line. Two properties which are separated by only a
street or alley shall be considered as adjacent to one another.
      ADJOINING. The condition of being near to or close to but not necessarily
having a common dividing line. Two properties which are separated by only a
street or alley shall be considered as adjoining one another.
      ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION. Any decision on a development application made
by an authorized town employee pursuant to this chapter.
      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS. Any business establishment where employees,
independent contractors or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage
in or simulate specified sexual activities, or any business establishment which
offers to its patrons services or entertainment distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on matters depicting, exposing, describing, discussing, or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. The
businesses may include, but are not limited to, ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINING
ESTABLISHMENT, ADULT ONLY MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT, ADULT THEATER, or ADULT RETAIL
ESTABLISHMENT such as:
         (a)   ADULT BOOK STORE. A commercial establishment having for sale or
viewing by patrons on its premise a substantial and significant portion of its
stock in trade, books, magazines and other periodicals or printed matter
principally characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
         (b)   ADULT CINEMA. An enclosed building or open-air theater used on a
regular basis for presenting for observation by customers pictorial material or
other visual images by direct or indirect projections, or through coin or slug
operated or electronically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture,
videotape machines or other image-producing devices maintained to show images
or material, a predominance of which is principally distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, in return for the exchange of any form of
consideration, irrespective of the number of patrons who may be able to view
the presentation at any one time.
         (c)   ADULT HOTEL or MOTEL. A hotel or motel which provides as a
predominant part of its major business the presentation of material for viewing
by patrons in exchange for any form of consideration or gratuity material which
is predominantly distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas and which rents its facilities on an hourly or less than daily
basis.
         (d)   CABARET. A nightclub, theater or other enterprise which features
as a predominant component of its business live performances by topless and/or
bottomless dancers, male or female strippers, or other similar exotic
entertainers, where the performances are predominantly distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or features a less
than complete and opaque covering of specified anatomical areas.
      ADVERSE IMPACT. A negative consequence for the physical, social, or
economic environment resulting from an action, use, or development.
      AGRIBUSINESS, ENTERTAINMENT FARMING. A commercial, service and/or
industrial use operated primarily for the direct support of agricultural
activities. It may consist of agricultural equipment sales rental and sales;
the storage, warehousing, transportation and distribution and wholesaling of
agricultural products; agricultural research, development, management and
maintenance services conducted primarily within an office setting; agri-
entertainment, such as pick-your-own operations, pumpkin patches, corn mazes,
farm stores, agricultural festivals, and educational activities; and other
similar agriculture related uses.
      AGRICULTURE, GENERAL. The use of land for agricultural purposes, where
growing and harvesting activities associated with horticulture, floriculture,
viticulture, apiaries, aviaries along with necessary accessory uses (such as
greenhouses, incidental raising of agricultural animals, or the storage of
agricultural related equipment used on the premises and temporary storage of
agricultural products used and/or produced on the premise) takes place;
provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory use shall be
secondary to that of the normal agricultural activities. GENERAL AGRICULTURE
uses may or may not be owner-occupied and may utilize employees who are not
owners or family of the owners. This use does not include: dairies, commercial
animal breeding, concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFO), slaughter and
meat packing plants, or fertilizer yards.
      AIRPORT BOARD. A Board appointed by the Town Council to recommend policy
and uses for the municipal airport for Council approval.
      AIRPORT HAZARD. Any structure or object, man-made and/or natural growth,
located on or in the vicinity of an airport; or any use of land near such
airport which obstructs the air space required for or is otherwise hazardous
to, the flight of aircraft in landing or take-off at such airport.
      AIRPORT MASTER PLAN. The master plan for the municipal airport as adopted
from time to time by the Airport Board and Town Council.
      AIRPORT PROPERTY. The Parcels of land which constitutes the Colorado City
municipal airport.
      AIRSPACE. An area from the ground up within the general operation area of
an airport.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, RETAIL SALES. A retail establishment, such as a
liquor store, licensed to sell alcoholic beverages such as beer, wine, and
liquor. No on-site consumption is allowed.
      ALLEY. A minor way (public or private) that is used primarily for
vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a
street.
      ALLOWED USE. A use of land identified by §§
152.025 through
152.033 as a permitted or conditional use, subject to compliance with all
applicable provisions of this code.
      ALTERATION. Any change, addition or modification that changes the
exterior architectural appearance or materials of a structure or object.
Alteration includes changes in exterior surfaces, changes in materials,
additions, remodels, demolitions, and relocation of buildings or structures,
but excludes ordinary maintenance and repairs.
      ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEM. An energy conversion system, which is intended
to primarily augment on-site consumption of utility power. Examples include
solar panels, wind turbines and associated controls. Does not include utility
scale (major) facilities such as, but not limited to, wind farms or solar
generating facilities.
      AMENDMENT. A change in the wording, context or substance, or the addition
of text to this chapter; an addition, deletion or change in the district
boundaries or classifications on the zoning map.
      ANIMAL HOSPITAL/VETERINARIAN. A facility used by one or more licensed
veterinarians to provide medical services to household pets (e.g., dogs, cats,
rabbits, iguanas, etc.) and/or a facility where pets are provided general
hygienic and similar care using non-prescriptive over-the-counter supplies.
Does not include overnight boarding of animals that are not under medical care.
      ANIMAL KENNEL/SHELTER. A place where four or more dogs over the age of
three months are boarded, bred, or offered for sale. A facility that accepts
and/or seizes domestic animals for the purpose of boarding them overnight,
caring for them, placing them through adoption, or carrying out law
enforcement. A zoo, pet store, veterinary clinic, animal hospital, and animal
husbandry are not considered a kennel.
      ANIMAL TRAINING SCHOOL. A facility that specializes in the training of
household pets.
      ANTENNA. Any device on a tower, building or structure that radiates or
captures electromagnetic waves for the purpose of communicating information.
      APPEAL. An action which permits anyone to arrange for a hearing from
other than the individual or group from whose decision the appellant seeks
redress.
      APPLICANT. Any person applying for any permit, approval or decision
governed or required by this chapter.
      ARBORETUM or BOTANICAL GARDEN. A public or private facility for the
demonstration and observation of the cultivation of flowers, fruits,
vegetables, or ornamental plants. Permitted accessory uses include gift shops,
cafes, snack bars, and parking.
      ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE. The design and/or construction technique and
elements or combination of elements that are the character-defining features of
a structure.
      AREA, GROSS. The land area (acres) within the perimeter of a parcel or
lot, including all non-dedicated streets, alleys, private roadways and/or alley
easements, and canal and/or irrigation easements.
      AREA, NET. The land area (acres) within the perimeter of a parcel or lot,
excluding all dedicated arterial and collector street right-of-ways.
      ARENA, PRIVATE. An indoor or outdoor facility for activities relating to
livestock including, but not limited to, equestrian, cattle, etc. for the sole
use of the property owner and guests.
      ARENA, PUBLIC. An indoor or outdoor facility for activities relating to
livestock including, but not limited to, equestrian, cattle, etc. and for the
general use by the public.
      A.R.S. The abbreviation for the Arizona Revised Statutes.
      ART, PUBLIC. Objects such as sculpture, water features or other
multidimensional designs that would be viewed by the general public as an
attractive amenity in a private development. The objects shall be located in
spaces visible and/or accessible to the public in general so as to be enjoyed
by the community at large. These objects are not to be identified with a
particular business or organization.
      ARTICULATION. The visible expression of architectural elements through
form, structure or materials that break up the scale of building planes to
achieve visual variation.
      ASSEMBLY HALL/AUDITORIUM/CONFERENCE CENTER. A building or structure, or
group of buildings or structures, that may or may not be rented for the
conducting of organized short-term events such as weddings, receptions, and
conferences. Accessory uses may include meeting rooms, kitchen facilities for
preparation of food to be consumed on the premises, parking, and childcare
provided for persons while they are attending assembly functions. Schools
associated with assembly uses are not an accessory use.
      ASSEMBLY, LIGHT. An establishment engaged only in the on-site assembly of
goods. No manufacturing of parts occurs. Goods are shipped to the
establishment, assembled, packaged, and reshipped. Assembly and packaging
involves only the use of hand tools or domestic mechanical equipment not
exceeding two horsepower or a single kiln not exceeding eight kilowatts.
Typical light assembly uses include ceramic studios and custom jewelry
manufacturing.
      ASSESSED VALUE. The financial worth assigned to property by taxing
authorities that is used as a basis or factor against which the tax rate is
applied.
      ASSISTED LIVING CENTER. A residential care institution that provides
resident rooms or residential units for the housing of and caring for the
ambulatory, aged or infirm; other than a nursing home, group home, or hospital;
licensed by the Arizona State Department of Health services for more than 11
persons in a residential setting. Care givers are present at all times, and may
(or may not) reside at the site. Facilities typically include common kitchen
and dining areas, but may contain individual kitchenettes for residents.
      ASSISTED LIVING HOME. A dwelling unit shared for the housing of and
caring for the ambulatory, aged or infirm; other than a nursing home, group
home, or hospital; licensed by the Arizona State Department of Health services
for no more than ten persons excluding staff in a residential setting. Care
givers are present at all times, and typically reside at the site.
      ATTACHMENT, ATTACHED, ATTACH. Accessory structure ie., decks and
stairways when connected to another structure. A garage or shop attached to
another structure by a common wall, breezeway, beam, vertical concrete
structure or similar building material mechanically attaching/adjoining both
structures.
      ATTENTION GETTING DEVICE. A device designed or intended to attract
attention by noise and/or a sudden, intermittent or rhythmic movement, physical
change or lighting change, such as banners, flags, streamers, balloons,
propellers, whirligigs, search lights and flashing lights.
      AUCTIONS, INDOOR. A facility where property is received from other
persons or businesses, when such property is to be sold to third parties, by
auction, either publicly or privately, whether for cash, property or other
consideration, inside the primary structure. Outdoor storage is allowed as an
accessory use.
      AUTOMOBILE. See VEHICLE.
      AUTO WRECKING AND SALVAGE YARD. Any lot upon which two or more motor
vehicles of any kind, which are incapable of being operated due to condition or
lack of license or registration, have been placed for the purpose of obtaining
parts for recycling or resale.
      AWNING. A roof like cover, often of fabric, metal or glass, designed and
intended for protection from weather and providing shade, or as decorative
embellishment, and which projects from a wall or roof of a structure over a
window, walk, door or similar.
      BALLOON. A bag, measuring not more than 18 inches in diameter, made of
thin rubber or other light material, usually brightly colored, inflated with
air or with some lighter-than-air gas and used with flags and/or banners to
attract attention for an event.
      BAR, LOUNGE, OR TAVERN. A structure or part of a structure used primarily
for the sale or dispensing and on-site consumption of alcoholic beverages or
liquor by the drink, which may or may not serve food. Any facility providing
both food and alcoholic beverages or liquor by the drink for on-site
consumption that does not meet the definition of a restaurant shall be
considered a bar, lounge, or tavern.
      BASEMENT. A space having half or more of its floor to ceiling height
below the average level of the adjoining ground and with a floor to ceiling
height not less than six and ½ feet.
      BASIN, DETENTION. Storm water storage facility that temporarily stores
surface runoff and releases it at a controlled rate through a positive outlet.
      BASIN, RETENTION. A storm water storage facility that stores surface
runoff. Stored water is infiltrated into the subsurface or released to the
downstream drainage system or watercourse (via gravity outlet or pump), or
evaporated after the storm event.
      BED AND BREAKFAST, HOMESTAY. See VACATION HOME RENTALS.
      BERM. A mound or embankment of earth.
      BLOCK. That property abutting one side of a street and lying between the
two nearest intersections or intercepting streets on subdivided land.
      BOARDING/SHELTER CARE. A facility in which any of the rooms are provided
or rented/leased to persons on a transient basis, but which does not include
group homes, resident care homes, assisted living facilities, nursing homes,
dormitories, substance abuse detoxification centers or substance abuse
treatment centers.
      BOAT. Any vessel or motorized device used for traveling in or on water,
including, but not limited to, an unpowered vessel; a vessel powered by oars,
paddles, sail, or motor; and a raft, whether ridged, supported by pontoons, or
inflatable.
      BREWERY or DISTILLERY. A facility for the brewing/distilling and
wholesale distribution of beer or distilled alcohol produced onsite, subject to
state licensing.
      BUFFER. A landscaped area intended to separate and partially obstruct the
view of two adjacent land uses or properties from one another.
      BUILDABLE AREA. That portion of a lot upon which construction is
permitted, consisting of an area of the lot which lies within the boundaries of
the front, side and rear yard setback requirements.
      BUILDING. A structure having one or more stories and a roof, designed
primarily for the shelter, support, or enclosure or persons, animals, or
property of any kind. This shall include tents, awnings or vehicles situated on
private property and used for the purposes of a building.
      BUILDING COVERAGE. The ground floor area used by all principal and
accessory buildings on a lot, tract or parcel of land.
      BUILDING FACADE. An exterior building elevation.
      BUILDING HEIGHT. See §
152.033(C).
      BUILDING INSPECTOR. The Building Inspector of the municipality or an
authorized representative.
      BUILDING LINE. A line beyond which the foundation wall or any vertical
structural support or other enclosed portion of a building shall not project.
      BUILDING MATERIAL SALES, INDOOR RETAIL. An establishment for the sale of
materials, hardware, and lumber customarily used in the construction of
buildings and other structures, and where most display and sale of materials
occurs inside the primary structure, such as home improvement stores and
hardware stores. Outdoor storage is allowed as an accessory use. Examples
include home improvement and hardware stores.
      BUILDING MATERIAL SALES, OUTDOOR OR WHOLESALE. Outdoor sale of materials,
hardware, and lumber customarily used in the construction of buildings and
other structures, including facilities for storage.
      BUILDING OFFICIAL. An employee of the town authorized to issue building
permits and certificates of occupancy and to administer all applicable
construction/building codes.
      BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued by the town that is required for the
construction, modification or moving of any building, structure or use in the
town.
      BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building which contains the principal use of the
lot on which it is situated. In any residential zone, any dwelling shall be
deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is located.
      BUSINESS SERVICES. Establishments that primarily provide goods and
services to other businesses on a fee or contract basis, including printing and
copying, blueprint services, advertising and mailing, office security,
custodial services, and photo finishing.
      BUS TERMINAL. Any premises for the transient housing or parking of motor-
driven buses and the loading and unloading of passengers.
      CALIPER. The diameter of the trunk measured six inches above ground level
up to and including four-inch caliper size, and measured 12 inches above ground
level if the measurement taken at six inches above ground level exceeds four
inches. If a tree is of a multi-trunk variety, the caliper of the tree is the
average caliper of all of its trunks.
      CAMPER. A structure providing temporary sleeping and cooking facilities
and designed for mounting on a motor vehicle chassis.
      CAMPGROUND. A parcel of ground where two or more campsites are located,
established, or maintained for occupancy by camping units of the general
public, including recreational vehicles, cabins, or tents as temporary living
quarters for recreation, education, or vacation purposes.
      CANOPY. A structure made of cloth, metal or other materials with frames
affixed to a building or carried by a framework which is supported by the
ground.
      CARGO CONTAINERS. A metal structure specifically constructed for the
shipment of goods by ship, rail or truck that is later sold as a place to store
goods and materials.
      CARPORT. A roofed structure providing space for the parking or storage of
motor vehicles that is entirely open on two or more sides.
      CAR WASH. A facility, coin operated, automatic, or hand wash, for the
cleaning of vehicles, providing either self-serve facilities or employees to
perform washing operations.
      CEMETERY. Land used or dedicated to the interment of human or animal
remains, including columbaria, mausoleums, mortuaries, and associated
maintenance facilities when operated in conjunction with, and within the
boundaries of, such cemetery.
      CENTERLINE. The centerline established by the Public Works Director for
any proposed or dedicated public way.
      CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A document issued by the Zoning Administrator
allowing the occupancy or use of a building and certifying that the structure
or use has been constructed or will be used in compliance with all the
applicable codes of the town. As defined in the current building code adopted
by the town.
      CHANGE OF USE. Any use which differs from the previous use of a building
or land.
      CHANNEL LETTER. Individual letters constructed to be applied singly in
the formation of a building mounted sign or a freestanding sign. Channel
letters may be illuminated or non-illuminated.
      CHILD CARE, CENTER. Any facility licensed by the Arizona State Department
of Health Services in which care and supervision for five or more persons is
regularly provided for compensation for periods of less than 24 hours per day.
This classification includes nursery schools, preschools, day care for children
or adults, and any other non-residential day care facility licensed by the
State of Arizona.
      CHILD CARE HOME. A state certified facility, the primary use of which is
a residence, in which child care for not less than five children and not more
than ten children through the age of 12 or adult day care for at least five and
not more than ten adults is regularly provided for compensation for periods of
less than 24 hours per day. The following uses are not a DAY CARE, HOME; an
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY, GROUP CARE HOME, or DAY CARE, HOME OCCUPATION.
      CHURCH OR PLACE OF WORSHIP.  See RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY.
      CIRCULATION AREA. That portion of the vehicle accommodation area used for
access to parking or loading areas or other facilities on the lot. Essentially,
driveways and other maneuvering areas (but not the parking spaces themselves)
comprise the circulation area.
      CIVIC ORGANIZATION. A group of people who join together for the purpose
of servicing a public or mutual benefit other than the pursuit or accumulation
of profits for its owners or investors.
      CLINIC. An establishment where patient care is administered on an out-
patient basis, not involving overnight housing of patients.
      COFFEE SHOPS/CAFES. Establishments that primarily serve nonalcoholic
beverages, such as coffee, juices, or sodas for consumption on or near the
premises, or a specialty snack, such as ice cream, frozen yogurt, cookies or
popcorn.
      COFFEE SHOPS/CAFES WITH DRIVE-THRU. Same as the above use, but with a
drive-thru facility.
      COLLEGE or UNIVERSITY. A degree-granting institution, other than a trade
school, that provides education beyond the high school level. The use includes,
but is not limited to, classroom buildings, offices, laboratories, lecture
halls, athletic facilities, and dormitories.
      COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
authority/utility pole.
      COLOR CORRELATED TEMPERATURE (CCT). The temperature of an object
(blackbody radiator) in degrees Kelvin that gives the most similar color
(spectral) distribution. Higher CCT usually shifts frequency to the blue. The
CCT value of lamps is now usually included in all packaging.
      COMMERCIAL ENTERTAINMENT, INDOOR. A use providing entertainment,
diversion, or pleasure that comes from watching a performer, sports
competition, etc. whether public or private, conducted indoors as a business,
including concert halls, performance theatres, stadiums, and uses analogous to
these uses.
      COMMERCIAL ENTERTAINMENT, OUTDOOR. A large open or partially enclosed
space most often used for the viewing of games or major events, and partly or
completely surrounded by tiers of seats for spectators. Accessory uses may
include restaurants, bars, concessions, parking, and maintenance facilities.
      COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle currently registered as such with the
state Department of Motor Vehicles or equivalent out-of-state or Federal agency
and is used primarily in the conduct of a business as opposed to private family
or individual use.
      COMMON AREA. Land in a residential development held in common and/or
single ownership and not reserved for the exclusive use or benefit of an
individual tenant or owner.
      COMMON OWNERSHIP. Ownership by one or more individuals in any form of
ownership.
      COMMUNITY PLAYFIELDS and PARKS. A tract of land owned by a public entity
and available to the general public for recreational purposes. This definition
includes indoor recreational facilities, swimming pools, playgrounds, and
lighted and unlighted athletic fields.
      COMMUNITY RECREATION CENTER. A facility providing recreation/pool
facilities and/or meeting rooms, and typically oriented to the recreational
needs of the residents of the surrounding area.
      COMPATIBLE. The use of land or a structure that is capable of existing
together in harmony with other structures or uses of land adjacent or in
proximity to the land use or structure in question.
      COMPREHENSIVE SIGN PLAN. A coordinated and detailed plan demonstrating
consistency of all sign types, their location, design standards, color/material
finishes, lettering and/or graphic style and supporting lighting plan proposed
for multi-tenanted buildings or shopping centers.
      CONCEALED/DISGUISED. Any personal wireless communications device that is
hidden or made to appear to be a natural plant or architectural feature.
      CONDITIONAL USE. A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with all the
conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as specified
in this code.
      CONSISTENT. Means harmony, regularity of steady continuity.
      CONTIGUOUS. In contact with one or more sides.
      CONTINUOUS. Means an uninterrupted extension in space, time or sequence.
      CONVENIENCE STORE. Retail establishments that sell a limited line of
groceries, prepackaged food items, tobacco, magazines and/or other household
goods, primarily for off-premises consumption and typically found in
establishments with long or late hours of operation and a relatively small
building of less than 5,000 square feet.
      CORRAL. A fenced area for the confinement of large ranch/farm animals.
      CORRECTIONAL TRANSITIONAL HOUSE. A supervised dwelling unit where
individuals who are completing a sentence, reside for a defined period of time
for counseling, job placement assistance, and similar services that assist in
transitioning from institutional to community living.
      COUNCIL. The Town Council for the Town of Colorado City, Arizona.
      COUNTRY CLUB, PRIVATE. An area containing, but not limited to, a club
house and available only to a private specific membership. Such a club may
contain as adjunct facilities, a private club and dining room, swimming pool,
tennis courts and similar service and recreation facilities.
      COUNTY. Mohave County, State of Arizona.
      COURTYARD. Any space other than a yard on the same lot with a building or
group of buildings and which is unobstructed and open to the sky from above the
floor level of any room having a window or door opening on such court.
      COVERED PORCH, FRONT. A one story roofed area attached to a street-
fronting building façade that is not devoted to the garage, of which a minimum
of two sides shall be at least 50% open and the minimum dimensions shall be
four feet deep by eight feet wide.
      CREMATORIUM or FUNERAL PARLOR. A location containing properly installed,
certified apparatus intended for use in the act of cremation, or an
establishment for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of
the deceased and rituals connected with, and conducted before, burial or
cremation. This definition may include a facility for the permanent storage of
cremated remains of the dead.
      CURB CUT. A dip in a sidewalk and curb that enables a vehicle to drive to
a driveway, garage, parking lot, loading dock or drive-through.
      CUL-DE-SAC. A local street, one end of which is closed and consists of a
circular turn around.
      DAY CARE, HOME OCCUPATION. A permanent residential unit where an occupant
provides day care and supervision for no more than four children or adults not
residing in the household, whether or not for compensation. The following uses
are not a HOME OCCUPATION DAY CARE use: GROUP HOME; DAY CARE, HOME AND DAY
CARE, CENTER.
      DEAD END STREET. A street having a traffic outlet on one end only.
      DECIBEL. A unit for expressing the relative intensity of sounds from
zero, average least perceptible to 130, average pain level.
      DECK. A projecting non-enclosed portion of a house located at a height of
less than eight feet above the ground.
      DEDICATION. The designation of land by its owner for any general or
public use.
      DENSITY. The total number of dwelling units or lots divided by the gross
area (acres) unless otherwise stated.
      DEVELOPER. A person, firm, partnership, joint venture, trust, syndicate,
association, corporation, limited liability company, or other legal entity who
desires to improve or otherwise engage in any development of property within
the town.
      DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not to limited the construction, reconstruction, conversion,
structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; any mining,
excavation, landfill or land disturbance.
      DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT. An agreement between the town and any person
having a legal or equitable interest in real property for the development of
such property and which complies with the applicable provisions of Arizona
Revised Statutes for such development agreements.
      DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A plan submitted to and approved by the town pursuant
to the town zoning ordinance. Such plan shall describe with reasonable
certainty the density and intensity of use for a specific parcel or parcels of
property associated with a planned area development.
      DIRECT ILLUMINATION. An externally mounted light source that is used for
illuminating a sign; also referred to as EXTERIOR ILLUMINATION.
      DIRECTOR. The director of the Community Development Department.
      DISABILITY.
         (a)   With respect to an individual:
            1.   A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one
or more major life activities of such individual;
            2.   A record of such an impairment; or
            3.   Being regarded as having such an impairment.
         (b)   For purposes of this definition, a qualified individual with a
disability shall not include an individual who is currently engaging in the
illegal use of drugs, when the covered entity acts on the basis of such use,
except as provided in 42 U.S.C. § 12210. The term ILLEGAL USE OF DRUGS means
the use of drugs, the possession or distribution of which is unlawful under the
Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. § 812. Such term does not include the use
of a drug taken under supervision by a licensed health care professional, or
other uses authorized by the Controlled Substances Act or other provisions of
federal law. The term DISABILITY shall be interpreted in a manner consistent
with the definition of disability in the Americans with Disabilities Amendment
Act of 2008.
      DISTRIBUTION YARD, OUTDOOR. An open site, completely enclosed by an
opaque wall, whose primary purpose is facilitating the receiving, storage,
sorting, transfer to larger or smaller vehicles, consolidation into larger
quantities or breaking down into smaller quantities of goods and materials for
reshipment to other locations typically for other businesses.
      DISTRIBUTION/WAREHOUSING CENTER, INDOOR. A building whose primary purpose
is facilitating the receiving, storage, sorting, transfer to larger or smaller
vehicles, consolidation into larger quantities or breaking down into smaller
quantities of goods and materials for reshipment to other locations typically
for other businesses.
      DISTRICT. A portion the town within which certain uniform regulations and
requirements or various combinations of requirements are applied under the
provisions of this code.
      DOMESTIC ANIMAL. An animal which is commonly maintained in residence with
humans.
      DORMITORY. A building used as group living quarters for a student body, a
religious order, or other group as an associated use to a college, university,
boarding school, orphanage, convent, monastery, or other similar use.
Dormitories do not include kitchen facilities, except a group kitchen facility
to serve all residents.
      DRIVEWAY. That portion of the vehicle accommodation area that consists of
a travel lane bounded on either side by an area that is not part of the vehicle
accommodation area.
      DUPLEX. A building occupied for the primary purpose of permanent living
quarters for two families, including a single-family semi-detached dwelling. A
single-family semi-detached dwelling is a single-family dwelling attached to
one other single-family dwelling by a common vertical wall, and each dwelling
located on a separate lot and having one side yard.
      DUST FREE. Treatment of native soil with a covering of asphalt, concrete,
or masonry.
      DWELLING. A building or portion of a building designed or used by one
family for residential purposes as a single housekeeping unit, but not
including hospitals, hotels, motels, and other accommodations for the transient
public, but including group homes.
      DWELLING, DUPLEX. A single building containing two dwelling units located
on an individual lot designed for or used by two families living independently
of each other. Housing units may be side by side or up and down.
      DWELLING, LIVE/WORK. An integrated site built housing unit and working
space, occupied and utilized by a single household in either a detached single-
family structure located behind the principal workplace or a unified structure
that has been designed or structurally modified to accommodate joint
residential occupancy and work activity, and which is in compliance with all
applicable building codes; and the working space is reserved for and regularly
used by one or more occupants of the unit.
      DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure built on or after June 15, 1976,
in accordance with the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety
Standards Act of 1974 and Title VI of the Housing and Community Development Act
of 1974.
      DWELLING, MOBILE HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, that is at least eight feet in width and 32 feet in length and that
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit,
with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to on-site utilities,
and that was not constructed in accordance with the National Manufactured Home
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 and Title VI of the Housing and
Community Development Act of 1974.
      DWELLING, MODULAR HOME. A factory-built building, residential, excluding
mobile homes and manufactured homes defined herein. Such housing is certified
as meeting the state and local building codes as applicable to modular housing
and shall be considered equivalent to a site built building and which requires
substantial assembly on site. Also referred to as "factory built" in Department
of Building, Fire and Safety Rules, State of Arizona.
      DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A single building containing three or more
dwelling units on an individual lot for occupancy by families living
independently of each other. Within apartments, the building and land are under
single ownership and dwelling units are rented or leased. Within a condominium,
ownership consists of the airspace within a unit and the building(s) and all
land within the development is under common ownership.
      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED. A dwelling designed for or used by one
family, located on an individual lot, and having any portion of one or more
walls in common with adjoining dwellings. Housing units are side by side only.
      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED. A dwelling designed for or used by one
family, located on an individual lot, and having no walls in common with
adjoining dwellings.
      DWELLING UNIT. A building or portion of a building designed or used by
one family, as that term is defined in this definition section, for residential
purposes as a single housekeeping unit, but not including assisted living
facilities, hospitals, hotels, motels and other accommodations for the
transient public.
      EASEMENT. Is a right to use a portion of the land of another for a
special purpose or public use such as, by way of example, vehicular or
transportation access, drainage, or public utilities.
      EFFECTIVE DATE. The date on which a permit or other approval becomes
enforceable or otherwise takes effect, rather than the date it was signed or
circulated.
      EGRESS. An exit.
      ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER. A sign that uses computer-generated or
electronic components to change advertising copy, messages or color, including
signs that flip or rotate.
      ELEVATION. The vertical distance above or below a fixed reference level
or a flat scale drawing of the front, rear or side of a building or structure.
      EMERGENCY. A sudden unexpected occurrence demanding immediate action to
prevent or mitigate loss or damage to life, health, property or essential
public services.
      EMPLOYEE/CONTRACTOR QUARTERS. A group dwelling facility located in one or
more buildings that are occupied on a temporary basis by workers (only) that
are not from the immediate area but are employed in the area for specific
purposes (such as seasonal recreation services, construction projects or
similar activities) and for a defined period of time. EMPLOYEE/CONTRACTOR
QUARTERS does not include a hotel, motel, mobile home, a manufactured home, a
manufactured home park, a campground, a recreational vehicle park as defined
and regulated herein.
      ENCROACHMENT.  A right of access or entry that has been agreed upon by
the property owner or mandated by the town, state or federal government.
      ENLARGEMENT. An increase in the size of an existing structure.
      ENTRY FEATURES. A distinctive object or element located at or near the
point at which entrance is made.
      ERECTED. Built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon; any
physical operations on premises which required construction, excavation, fill,
drainage and the like, shall be considered part of an erection.
      EXCAVATION. Removal or recovery by any means whatsoever of soil, rocks,
minerals, mineral substances or organic substances other than vegetation from
water or land from beneath the land surface whether exposed or submerged.
      EXISTING GRADE or ELEVATION. The vertical location of the ground surface
prior to excavating or filling.
      EXISTING USE. The use of a lot or structure at the time of enactment of
this code.
      EXPANSION. The process of becoming greater in size, number, or amount.
      EXTERIOR DISPLAY. Materials and items for sale in conjunction with a
retail business that are displayed outside or underneath a canopy for more than
24-hours and which are not stored within a building. This does not include
outside vending machines or architectural props or decorations.
      EXTERIOR WALL. Any wall that defines the exterior boundaries of a
building or structure.
      FAA. An acronym for the Federal Aviation Administration.
      FABRICATION. Means to construct or assemble from diverse and usually
standardized parts.
      FAÇADE. The entire building front including the parapet.
      FAMILY. One or more persons living together as a single housekeeping
unit, in a dwelling unit.
      FARMERS MARKET, PERMANENT. Commercial activities conducted in an outdoor
area, or in semi-enclosed structure where one or more vendor(s) display,
barter, or sell directly to the customer food, merchandise and products made or
produced locally, such as fresh fruits, vegetables, flowers, herbs, plants, and
home prepared food products. A farmer's market permanent tends to be constant,
and vendors typically occupy the market on an uninterrupted, daily basis.
Farmers market does not mean flea market, occasional arts and craft fairs, or
festivals, or farmers market, temporary.
      FARMERS MARKET, TEMPORARY. Commercial activities conducted as an
accessory use in an outdoor area, or in semi-enclosed temporary structures
where one or more vendor(s) display, barter, or sell directly to the customer
food, merchandise and products made or produced locally, such as fresh fruits,
vegetables, flowers, herbs, plants, and home prepared food products. A farmer's
market, temporary tends to be seasonal, and vendors do not typically occupy the
market on an uninterrupted, daily basis. Farmers market does not mean flea
market, occasional arts and craft fairs, or festivals, or farmers market,
permanent.
      FARMING.  See AGRICULTURE.
      FEED LOT. A structure or parcel of land in which livestock, including
cattle, horses, goats, swine, sheep, fowl, or any other animals are kept for
the purpose of feeding or fattening for subsequent sale at market.
      FEED STORE. An establishment engaged in the retail sale of supplies
directly related to ranching or dairy operations.
      FENCE. An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination
of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
      FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. An establishment that provides banking services,
lending, or similar financial services to individuals and businesses. This
definition includes those institutions engaged in the on-site circulation of
cash money and check-cashing facilities, but shall not include bail bond
brokers.
      FINANCIAL INSTITUTION, WITH DRIVE-THRU. Same as the above use, but with a
drive-thru facility.
      FINISHED GRADE. The final grade and elevation of the ground surface after
grading is completed and in conformance with the approved grading plans.
      FITNESS AND SPORTS CENTER. A facility primarily featuring equipment for
exercise and other active physical fitness and/or recreational sports
activities, such as swimming, skating, racquet sports, aerobic dance, gymnasium
facilities, indoor soccer, yoga, and other kinds of sports and fitness
facilities.
      FLAG. A fabric sheet of square or rectangular or triangular shape which
is mounted on a pole. This includes flags of the United States, State of
Arizona, registered corporations and other registered entities, foreign
nations, as well as decorative flags, and flags supporting activities of the
town or other public facility land use.
      FLEA MARKET. An indoor or outdoor premises where the main use is the sale
of new or used household goods, personal effects, tools, art work, appliances,
and similar merchandise, objects, or equipment in small quantities, in stalls,
lots, parcels, or in bulk, for the use, sale or consumption by the immediate
purchaser in a building, open air, or partly enclosed booths or stalls not
within a wholly enclosed building. This definition does not include temporary
retail sidewalk sales or garage sales or special events.
      FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP. The official map on which the Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and risk
premium zones applicable to the community.
      FLOODPLAIN. Any land areas which are susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source.
      FLOOR AREA RATIO. The numerical value obtained through dividing the gross
floor area of a building or buildings located on a lot or parcel of land by the
total area of such lot or parcel of land.
      FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The sums of the areas of the several floors of a
building, including areas used for human occupancy in basements, attics, and
penthouses, as measured from the exterior faces of the walls. It does not
include cellars, unenclosed porches, or attics not used for human occupancy, or
any floor space in accessory buildings or in the main building intended and
designed for the parking of motor vehicles in order to meet the parking
requirements of this chapter, or any such floor space intended and designed for
accessory heating and ventilating equipment. It shall include the horizontal
area at each floor level devoted to stairwells and elevator shafts.
      FLOOR AREA, NET. The total of all interior useable floor areas of a
building measured from the interior face of interior walls, excluding
stairwells and elevators shafts, unenclosed porches, public corridors, public
toilets, light shafts, equipment rooms and vertical equipment chases.
      FORCE MAJEURE. An event that results from the elements of nature, as
opposed to an event caused by human behavior.
      FRATERNAL OR SOCIAL CLUB, NONPROFIT. Meeting, recreational, or social
facilities of a nonprofit organization primarily for use by members or guests.
This classification includes union halls and social clubs.
      FRONTAGE. The length of the front property line of a lot or tract of land
abutting a public street, road, highway, or rural right-of-way.
      FRONTAGE, BUILDING. The length of an outside building wall.
      FRONTAGE, STREET. A street which is nearby and parallel to a major
arterial or collector street and provides a means of direct ingress and egress
to abutting property and protection from through traffic on such major arterial
or collector street.
      GABLE. The typically triangular section of a wall created when the edges
of two roof pitches intersect.
      GARAGE SALE. A sale of household items conducted on a residential site
and incidental to the principal dwelling.
      GARAGE, PRIVATE. A building devoted partially or wholly to the parking or
temporary storage of a motor vehicle owned by the occupants in the building to
which such garage is accessory.
      GARAGE, SIDE ENTRY. A garage that does not directly face the street and
the entrance is roughly parallel, rather than perpendicular, to the side
property line.
      GENERAL PERSONAL SERVICES. An establishment, whether for consideration or
not, that provides non-medical care, advice, aid, maintenance, repair,
treatment, or similar semi-technical,  technical, or experienced assistance,
other than the practice of a profession and wholesale or retail sale of goods.
Examples included, but are not limited to, shoe repair, beauty and barber
shops, tanning salons, and dry-cleaning shops.
      GENERAL PERSONAL SERVICES, WITH DRIVE-THRU. Same as the above use, but
with a drive-thru facility.
      GENERAL PLAN. The general plan of the Town of Colorado City, and all
elements thereof.
      GENERAL RECREATION, INDOOR. An establishment offering recreation, game
playing, rides, or similar amusements to the public within an enclosed
building. This shall include arcades, bowling alleys, billiard parlors, bingo
parlors, and laser tag parlors.
      GENERAL RECREATION, OUTDOOR. Intensely developed recreational uses where
the general public typically participates, lighted or unlighted, such as
amusement parks, miniature golf courses, batting cages, motocross courses,
water parks or slides, courses for paramilitary games, and archery facilities.
      GLARE. The sensation produced by a bright light source within the visual
field that is sufficiently brighter than the level to which the eyes are
adjusted, causing discomfort and/or loss in visual performance visibility.
      GOLF COURSE, UNLIGHTED. A tract of land laid out with a course having
nine or more holes for playing the game of golf, including any accessory
clubhouse, driving range, office, restaurant, concession stand, picnic tables,
pro shop, maintenance building, restroom facility, or similar accessory use or
structure. This term shall not include miniature golf courses as a principal or
accessory use, nor shall it include driving ranges that are not accessory to a
golf course, nor shall it include lighted golf courses.
      GOVERNMENT OFFICES and CIVIC BUILDINGS. An office of a governmental
agency that provides administrative and/or direct services to the public, such
as, but not limited to: post offices, employment offices, public assistance
offices, or motor vehicle licensing and registration services.
      GRADE, AVERAGE. The average of the finished ground level at the center of
all walls of a building. In case walls are parallel to and within five feet of
a sidewalk, the ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk.
      GREENHOUSE. A greenhouse structure, in which temperature and humidity can
be controlled for the cultivation or protection of plants.
      GREENHOUSE, COMMERCIAL. A commercial enterprise that grows plants or
parts of plants by the application of water to plants that reside within
movable containers, raised beds or lined beds that are disconnected from the
lands and are not deemed to be "irrigated lands" as set forth in Arizona
Revised Statutes.
      GROSS LEASABLE AREA. The total floor area designed for tenant occupancy
and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines, and upper floors, if any,
expressed in square feet and measured from the center line of joint partitions
and from outside wall faces.
      GROUP CARE, HOME. A dwelling unit for a group of no more than six
unrelated persons, excluding staff, who do not have a disability (see RESIDENT
CARE HOME for persons with disabilities), and are not living together as a
single housekeeping unit. Group home facilities may or may not be licensed by
the state or another government authority. This definition shall include
shelter homes for people at risk and halfway/correctional transitional
facilities, but shall not include resident care homes for the developmentally
disabled nor foster care homes as specifically defined and provided for by the
Arizona Revised Statutes.
      GUEST. Any person hiring and occupying a room on a temporary basis for
sleeping purposes.
      GUESTHOUSE. Living or sleeping quarters for the sole use of occupants of
the premises, guests of such occupants or persons employed on the premises.
Such quarters shall not be rented and/or otherwise listed for income purposes.
      GUEST ROOM. Any room or rooms, used or intended to be used by guests on a
temporary basis for sleeping purposes, having no provisions for cooking. School
and college dormitories and fraternity and sorority houses are excluded.
      HABITABLE ROOM. Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage and utility
spaces and similar areas are not considered habitable space.
      HANDICAPPED. See DISABILITY.
      HARDSCAPE. The part of a building's grounds consisting of structures,
such as plazas, retaining walls and sidewalks, made with materials such as
concrete and sidewalk pavers.
      HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance characterized as flammable solids,
corrosive liquids, radioactive materials, oxidizing material, highly toxic
materials, poisonous gases, reactive materials, unstable materials, hypergolic
materials and pyrophoric materials and any substance or mixture of substances
which is an irritant, a strong sensitizer or which generates pressure through
exposure to heat, decomposition or other means, or as otherwise defined by law.
      HEALTH CARE/MEDICAL FACILITY OR CLINIC. A public or private facility
primarily engaged in furnishing, on an outpatient basis, chiropractic, dental,
medical, surgical, medical imaging, or other services to individuals, including
the offices of chiropractors, physicians, dentists, drug therapists,
rehabilitation therapists and other health practitioners, medical and dental
laboratories, outpatient care and outpatient care facilities. Patients are not
kept overnight except under emergency conditions.
      HEIGHT. See §
152.033(C).
      HEAVY RENTAL, OUTDOOR. Retail establishments selling or renting
construction, farm, or other heavy equipment. Examples include cranes, earth
moving equipment, tractors, combines, heavy trucks, etc.
      HOME OCCUPATION. A commercial activity conducted entirely within a
dwelling or accessory structure (in a residential zoning district) that can be
conducted without any significantly adverse impact on the surrounding
neighborhood.
      HOSPITAL. A public or private facility, which can include multiple
buildings, for the accommodation of sick, injured, or infirm persons, and for
the provision of related outpatient services. Services regularly include the
keeping of patients overnight. Accessory uses include heliports and related
facilities, and parking.
      HOTEL or MOTEL. A building or group of buildings with continuous on-site
management and containing nine or more sleeping rooms that are occupied or
intended or designed to be occupied as the temporary abiding place of persons
who are lodged with or without meals, for compensation.
      IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any material that substantially reduces or prevents
the infiltration of stormwater into previously undeveloped land. Impervious
surface shall include graveled driveways and parking areas.
      INDIVIDUAL. Any private individual, tenant, lessee, owner, or any
commercial entity including, but not limited to, companies, partnerships, joint
ventures or corporations.
      INDOOR STORAGE (BOAT, RV). A facility where boats and/or recreational
vehicles are stored inside for 72 hours or more.
      INGRESS. Access or entry.
      INSTRUCTIONAL SERVICES or TRADE SCHOOL. A specialized instructional
establishment that provides on-site training of business, artistic, or
commercial skills, or a trade school that prepares students for jobs in a trade
(e.g., carpentry). Examples include, but are not limited to, fine arts schools,
computer instructional services, and driving schools.
      IRRIGATION PLAN. A plan drawn on a page measuring 24 inches by 36 inches,
prepared to scale, showing the layout and details of an irrigation system,
including the type and location of all materials used.
      IRRIGATION SYSTEM. The combination of elements such as automatic
controllers, meters, pressure vacuum breakers, pipes, valves, emitters,
bubblers, spray heads, tubing and other materials designed for the purpose of
transporting water to landscaping.
      KENNEL, INDOOR. A facility for the commercial boarding, breeding and
training of dogs and/or cats in which all animals are confined indoors.
      KENNEL, INDOOR/OUTDOOR. A facility for the commercial boarding, breeding
and training of dogs and/or cats in which all animals are confined indoors with
the exception of the use of daytime exercise runs.
      KENNEL, OUTDOOR. A facility for the commercial boarding, breeding and
training of dogs and/or cats in which the animals may be worked or housed in
outdoor runs.
      KITCHENETTE. An area used or designed for the preparation of food and
containing a sink, refrigerator and an electrical outlet, which may be used for
a microwave oven. No 220V outlet for a range or oven is provided.
      LANDSCAPE PLAN. A plan drawn on 24 inches by 36 inches format, prepared
to scale, showing elements such as trees, shrubs, groundcover, sculpture,
walls, lighting, water features, walkways and other organic and inorganic
materials. The plan shall include a plant list, indicating the size, quantity,
and name, both botanical and common, of all plant materials to be used.
      LANDSCAPING. The combination of elements such as trees, shrubs, ground
cover, vines, and other organic and inorganic materials for the express purpose
of creating an attractive and pleasing environment. Public art, water features,
plazas, patios, decorative courtyards and lighting may also be considered
landscape elements.
      LATTICE TOWER. Any tower that uses three or more poles to form the base
and lattice bracing to connect the poles and thereby increase structural
support.
      LIBRARY. A permanent facility for storing and loaning books, periodicals,
reference materials, audio and videotapes, computers, and other similar media
open and available to the public.
      LIGHTING PLAN. A plan drawn on a page measuring 24 inches by 36 inches,
prepared to scale, showing the layout and details of lighting and photo
metrics, including the type and location of all materials used.
      LIVESTOCK. Cattle, horses, sheep, goats, fowl and other similar domestic
animals, excluding dogs and cats.
      LOGO. A graphic design representing a product, identity or service.
      LOT. A single tract or piece of property located in a recorded
subdivision having frontage on a publicly dedicated and accepted street or a
private road approved by the town that is described and denoted as such. A lot
also includes a parcel of land, shown in the records of the Mohave County
Assessor's office, divided to be used separately from other parcels of property
by description, as on a recorded survey map or by metes and bounds for purposes
of sale, lease or separate use in a legal manner pursuant to all state, county
and town requirements for the development and proposed use of that property.
      LOT AREA. The total area in square feet within the boundary lines of a
lot.
      LOT AREA, NET. The total horizontal area included within the rear, side,
and front lot lines of the lot, excluding any streets or highways, whether
dedicated or not dedicated to public use, but including off-street vehicle,
vehicle parking areas, easements and other accessory uses.
      LOT COVERAGE. The horizontal surface area of a lot that, if looking down
from above, would be covered by any building, accessory building, roof or
protection.
      LOT, CORNER. A lot having frontage on two public streets which intersect
at a corner of the lot.
      LOT, DEPTH. The average horizontal distance between the front-lot line
and the rear-lot line.
      LOT DEPTH. The depth of a lot is the mean distance between its front
street line and its rear line.
      LOT, FLAG. An interior lot in which the buildable area is located to the
rear of a lot abutting a street, and which has access to the same street by
means of a narrow driveway.
      LOT LINE, FRONT.
         (a)   In the case of an interior lot fronting on a public street, a
line separating the lot from the public street;
         (b)   In the case of an interior lot fronting on a private street, but
not a public street, a line separating the lot from the private street;
         (c)   In the case of a corner lot fronting on two public streets, a
line separating the shorter street frontage of the lot from a public street;
alternatively, a property owner may elect that the front lot line shall be the
line separating the longer street frontage of the lot from a public street.
This election shall be in writing and shall be approved by the Zoning
Administrator and shall be recorded with the Mohave County Recorder's Office;
         (d)   In the case of a corner lot having frontage on one public street
and one private street, a line separating the street frontage of the lot from
the public street; and
         (e)   In the case of a corner lot fronting on two private streets, but
not on a public street, a line separating the shorter street frontage of the
lot from a private street.
      LOT, INTERIOR. Any lot other than a corner lot, but including a through
lot.
      LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line or lines generally opposite or parallel to
the front lot line, except in a through lot. If the rear lot-line is less than
ten feet long or the lot comes to a point at the rear, said rear lot-line is
assumed to be a line not less than ten feet long, lying wholly within the lot,
approximately parallel to the front street line.
      LOT LINE, SIDE.  Any lot line other than a front lot-line or a rear lot-
line.
      LOT, THROUGH. A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two
streets and which is not a corner lot. On such a lot, both lot lines are front
lot lines, except that where a non-access easement has been established, the
front lot line shall be considered as that lot line most distant from the lot
line containing the non-access easement.
      LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured at
the required front setback line. If the side property lines are parallel, the
shortest distance between these side lines; or if the side property lines are
not parallel, the width of the lot shall be the length of a line at right
angles to the axis of the lot at a distance equal to the front setback required
for the district in which the lot is located. The axis of a lot shall be a line
joining the midpoints of the front and rear property lines.
      MAINTENANCE. The repair, painting, trimming, pruning, watering and other
on-going activities which are associated with providing an attractive site
appearance and safe buildings and structures.
      MANSARD. A sloped roof or roof-like facade architecturally comparable to
a building wall.
      MANUFACTURED HOME. See DWELLING MANUFACTURED HOME.
      MANUFACTURED HOME, PARK. A site with required improvements and utilities
for the long-term parking of manufactured homes, which may include services and
facilities for the residents.
      MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION.  A subdivision designed for residential
use with lots for sale where the residence is to be predominantly manufactured
homes.
      MANUFACTURING, HEAVY. An establishment engaged in the manufacture or
compounding process of raw materials. Such activities may include the storage
of large volumes of highly flammable, toxic matter or explosive materials
needed for the manufacturing process. Examples include, but are not limited to:
refining or initial processing of raw materials; rolling, drawing, or extruding
of metals; asphalt batching plants; sawmills; meat slaughtering or packing
house; and manufacture or packaging of cement products, feed, fertilizer,
flour, glue, paint, petroleum products, soap, turpentine, varnish, charcoal, or
distilled products.
      MANUFACTURING, LIGHT. An establishment engaged in the manufacture,
predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or
parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging of
such products, and incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such
products, but excluding basic industrial processing. Examples include, but are
not limited to: airplane, vehicle, or truck assembly, remodeling, or repair;
bottling works; brewery or distillery, boat building, machine or blacksmith
shops; metalworking or welding shops; paint shops; and printing and publishing
shops.
      MARKET GARDEN. A lot or any portion thereof, managed and maintained by a
person, for growing and harvesting, farming, or any other use, which
contributes to the production of organic agricultural, floricultural, or
horticultural products for recreation or direct local consumption rather than
for commercial processing.
      MARQUEE. A permanent roof-like structure or canopy of rigid materials
supported by and extending from the façade of a building.
      MEDICAL MARIJUANA. Means all parts of the genus cannabis whether growing
or not, and the seed of such plants that may be administered to treat or
alleviate a qualifying patient's debilitating medical condition or symptoms
associated with the patient's debilitating medical condition.
      MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION or DISPENSARY.
         (a)   MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION.  The process by which a person,
including a caregiver or dispensary, grows a marijuana plant. A facility shall
mean a building, structure or premises used for the cultivation or storage of
medical marijuana that is physically separate and off-site from a medical
marijuana dispensary.
         (b)   MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY. A non-profit entity defined in
A.R.S. § 36-2801(11), that sells, distributes, transmits, gives, dispenses, or
otherwise provides medical marijuana to qualifying patients.
         (c)   MEDICAL MARIJUANA INFUSION FACILITY. A facility that
incorporates medical marijuana (cannabis spp.) by the means of cooking,
blending, or incorporation into consumable, edible or transdermal goods.
      MEDICAL MARIJUANA QUALIFYING PATIENT. A person who has been diagnosed by
a physician as having a debilitating medical condition as defined in A.R.S. §
36-2801-13.
      MICROBREWERY, CRAFT DISTILLERY or TASTING ROOM.
         (a)   MICROBREWERY or CRAFT DISTILLERY. A facility for the brewing of
beer or distilling of alcohol for onsite consumption as well as wholesale and
retail sale, subject to state licensing requirements. Food and/or other
alcoholic beverages may also be served.
         (b)   TASTING ROOM. A facility for alcoholic beverage tasting and
retail sales of related merchandise to customers who are physically present at
the tasting room, subject to state licensing requirements.
      MOBILE HOME.  See DWELLING MOBILE HOME.
      MODIFICATION (or ALTERATION). Any addition or modification that changes
the exterior architectural appearance or materials of a structure or object.
Alteration includes changes in exterior surfaces, changes in materials,
additions, remodels, demolitions, and relocation of buildings or structures,
but excludes ordinary maintenance and repairs.
      MODULAR HOME.  See DWELLING MODULAR HOME.
      MOVIE THEATER. An indoor theater for the showing of motion pictures.
      MULTI-TENANTED BUILDING. A building complex or shopping center that
contains any number of businesses, greater than one, that share the same site,
use common points of ingress, and egress to and from the site.
      MUNICIPALITY. The Town of Colorado City, Mohave County, Arizona.
      MUSEUM, CULTURAL FACILITY. Any permanent institution for the collection
and display of objects of art or science, sponsored by a public or quasi-public
agency and open and available to the public.
      NATURAL GRADE. The undisturbed natural surface of the land, including
washes.
      NATURE PRESERVES, TRAILS and TRAILHEADS. An area that preserves or
protects desert lands, associated endangered species, washes, critical
environmental features, viewsheds, or other natural elements. Such areas may
include pedestrian or equestrian trails and trailheads.
      NEWSPAPER, GENERAL CIRCULATION. A newspaper published for the
dissemination of local or telegraphic news and intelligence of a general
character, which has a bona fide subscription list of paying subscribers, and
has been established, printed, and published at regular intervals in the state,
county or town.
      NIGHTCLUB. A commercial establishment dispensing alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises and in which dancing and musical entertainments are
permitted.
      NON-CHARTERED FINANCIAL INSTITUTION (CHECK-CASHING FACILITIES). Any
person(s) or establishment engaged in the business of cashing checks or
accepting deferred deposits for a fee, service charge, or other consideration.
Such uses are not licensed banks, trust companies, savings and loan
associations, credit unions, development corporations, mortgage brokers, thrift
companies, pawn brokers, or insurance companies.
      NON-CONFORMING SIGN.  A sign that was lawfully established prior to the
effective date of this chapter or amendments thereto; or was lawfully
established in another political jurisdiction prior to annexation to the town;
and that does not conform to the regulations for signs for the district in
which it is located.
      NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE. A structure that was lawfully erected prior to
the adoption of this ordinance, or any amendments thereto or any annexation to
the town, which does not conform with the standards of lot coverage, yard
spaces, height structures, distance between structures or other standards
prescribed in the regulations for the district in which it is located.
      NON-CONFORMING USE. A structure or land which was lawfully established
and maintained prior to the adoption of this chapter, or any amendment thereto
or any annexation to the town, which does not conform to the use regulations
for the district in which it is located.
      NURSERY, COMMERCIAL. A full service retail sales establishment which
sells plants that are purchased wholesale from off site. Accessory items can
include packaged fertilizer, seed, mulch, and topsoil, as well as other
packaged items commonly associated with a retail plant nursery, as long as such
items are stored inside of a solid or screened structure. However, the sale or
outdoor storage of bulk items, and/or the on-site storage of commercial
vehicles or heavy equipment, shall be prohibited.
      NURSING HOME. Establishment with individual rooms supported by communal
facilities (such as kitchen, dining, living, and recreation) that provides 24-
hour medical, convalescent or chronic care to individuals who, by reason of
advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves,
and is licensed as a skilled nursing facility by the State of Arizona,
including but not limited to, rest homes and convalescent hospitals, but not
ASSISTED LIVING CENTER or HOME, HOSPITALS, or CLINICS.
      OCCUPANCY, CERTIFICATE OF. A document issued by the Chief Building
Official and/or Zoning Administrator allowing the occupancy or use of a
building and certifying that the structure or use has been constructed or will
be used in compliance with all the applicable codes of the town.
      OCCUPANCY, CHANGE IN. The discontinuance of an existing use and the
substitution therefore of a use of a different kind or class.
      OCCUPANT. The person occupying or having custody of a structure or
premises as a lessee or other.
      OFF-SITE. Not located within the area of the property to be developed.
      OFF-STREET. Land which is not within the right-of-way of any street or
alley.
      OFFICE, BUSINESS or PROFESSIONAL. An establishment that provides
executive, management, administrative, or professional services, but not
involving the sale of merchandise except as incidental to a permitted use, and
not including a medical office or clinic. Typical examples include real estate,
insurance, property management, investment, employment, travel, advertising,
law, architecture, design, engineering, accounting, broadcasting, call centers,
and similar offices.
      ON-SITE. Located on the lot that is the subject of discussion.
      OPAQUE. Means that the material shall not transmit visible light.
      OPEN SPACE. An area that is intended to provide light and air, and is
designed for either environmental, scenic, or recreational purposes. OPEN SPACE
may include, but is not limited to, lawns, decorative planting, walkways,
active and passive recreation areas, playgrounds, fountains, swimming pools,
wooded areas, and water courses. OPEN SPACE shall not be deemed to include
driveways, parking lots, or other surfaces designed or intended for vehicular
travel.
      OUTDOOR DISPLAY. The placement of goods, equipment, merchandise or
exhibits at a location visible to the public view, other than within a
building.
      OUTDOOR MUSICAL ENTERTAINMENT. Any outdoor music or vocal singing
projected by natural or amplified means from an individual or individuals for
the purpose of entertainment.
      OUTDOOR SALES. The display of products or services that are intended for
retail or wholesale purchase not within a completely enclosed building.
      OUTDOOR STORAGE. The keeping in an unroofed area, of any goods, junk,
material, merchandise or vehicles in the same place for more than 24-hours.
      OUTDOOR VENDING. Any privately-owned vending stand, vending trailer,
mobile food vehicle, or any other non-stationary device that is utilized for
the purpose of temporarily displaying, exhibiting, carrying, transporting,
storing, selling or offering for sale any food, beverages, goods, wares or
merchandise. This definition shall not include; very short duration, primarily
non-profit uses such as lemonade and Girl Scout cookie stands and accessory
outdoor display and sales areas as specified in §
152.046(f)(8).
      OUTDOOR STORAGE (BOAT, RV STORAGE). A facility where boats and/or
recreational vehicles are stored outside for 72 hours or more.
      OVER-THE-COUNTER. The sale of goods, or products from a stock or
inventory of goods or products stored on the premises for delivery to the
customer at the point of sale.
      OWNER. A person recorded as such on the records of the County Assessor,
or a person who has been granted written authorization by the owner to act on
his or her behalf.
      PARAPET. The extension of a false front or wall above a roofline.
      PARKING AISLES. That portion of the parking area consisting of the
driving lanes providing access to the individual parking spaces.
      PARKING AREA. That portion of a lot that is used by vehicles for access,
circulation, parking and loading and unloading. It comprises the total of
circulation areas, loading and unloading areas, and parking areas (spaces and
aisles).
      PARKING LOT. An area not within a building where motor vehicles may be
stored for the purposes of temporary, daily, or overnight off-street parking.
      PARKING LOTS and PARKING STRUCTURE. A paved area used for the sole
purpose of parking motor vehicles or a structure designed with one or more
levels partially or fully enclosed, used for the parking of motor vehicles. The
facility may be above, below, or partially below ground. This use does not
include private carports or garages.
      PARKING, OFF-STREET. Marked or unmarked parking located within a parcel
and outside a private or public right-of-way.
      PARKING, ON-STREET. Marked or unmarked parking located within a private
or public right-of-way.
      PARKING, SHARED. The development and use of parking areas on two or more
separate properties for joint use by the businesses on those properties.
      PARKING SPACE, COMPACT. Any permanently maintained space, having a width
of not less than eight feet and a length of not less than 15 feet, so located
and arranged as to permit the storage of a passenger vehicle of compact size.
      PARKING SPACE, STANDARD. A portion of the parking area identified for the
parking of one vehicle.
      PARKING SPACE, TANDEM. A parking configuration where one vehicle parks
directly behind another and the vehicle in back must be moved in order for the
front vehicle to leave.
      PAVED. An artificial covering on a street, road, parking lot, driveway,
walkway, patio, or other natural surface of the ground composed of a material
as specified by the engineering standards or as approved by the Town Engineer
unless otherwise stated herein.
      PERMITTED USE. Any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to any
restrictions applicable to that zoning district.
      PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, social or fraternal
organization, corporation, estates, trust, receiver, syndicated, branch or
government or any other group or combination of groups acting as a unit.
      PETS, HOUSEHOLD. Dogs, cats, birds, reptiles, rabbits, and amphibians
which are commonly kept as pets and whose primary value is personal enjoyment
which shall not be raised for breeding or commercial purposes and which shall
be limited to species whose presence in the neighborhood does not arouse
unusual community interest or curiosity sufficient to attract the community
residents to a specific neighborhood.
      PORCH, FRONT. See COVERED PORCH, FRONT.
      PREMISES. Any property or properties developed as a unit, including all
building(s), off-street parking, points of access, common area and any other
appurtenances, all of which allows the parcel to function as a whole.
      PRINCIPAL (PRIMARY) USE. A use that fulfills a primary or predominant
function of an establishment, institution, household, or other entity and
occupies at least 70% of the gross floor area.
      PRIVATE STREET. Real property recorded as improved roadway for pedestrian
and motor vehicle traffic, constructed and maintained by private parties.
      PROHIBITED USE. A use which is not specifically permitted or analogous to
those specifically permitted.
      PUBLIC BUILDING. Facilities for conducting public business by various
public agencies, including all federal, state, county and town offices and
buildings.
      PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITY. The conduct of publicly owned safety and
emergency services, such as, but not limited to, fire stations, police
stations, and emergency medical and ambulance service.
      PUBLIC UTILITY. Private or public facilities for distribution of various
services, such as water, power, gas, communications, etc., to the public.
      RANCHING, COMMERCIAL. A commercial use for the keeping of agricultural
animals (e.g., cattle, goats, sheep, swine, etc.), along with necessary
accessory uses such as heavy equipment storage and limited crop production.
Allowed ranch uses shall include; grazing livestock; animal husbandry; equine
stables for riding, boarding, breeding, training, and lessons; the sale of
ranch animals; rodeos, 4-H and other public or youth-related activities. This
use does not include INTENSIVE ANIMAL OPERATION (i.e. dairy, poultry farming,
egg farming, feed lot, etc.)
      RECORDED PLAT. A final plat bearing all certificates of approval required
by this chapter and the Arizona Revised Statues and duly recorded in the Mohave
County Recorder's Office.
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicular unit, other than a mobile home, which
is designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation use,
and which is either self-propelled, mounted on, or pulled by another vehicle.
Examples include, but are not limited to, a travel trailer, camping trailer,
truck camper, motor home, fifth-wheel trailer or van.
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE, PERSONAL. A vehicle designed for recreational usage
that includes, but is not limited to, boats, personal watercraft and other
marine vehicles, quads and other off-road vehicles, and trailers
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. A site with required improvements and
utilities for both short-term and long-term parking of recreational vehicles,
which include services and facilities for the residents.
      RECYCLING CENTER. A facility in which recoverable resources such as
newspapers, glassware, plastics, and metal cans are recycled, reprocessed, and
treated to return such products to a condition in which they can again be used
for production, and in which some of the operations or storage take place
outside of an enclosed building. This facility is not a junkyard or salvage
yard.
      RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY. A facility used primarily to provide assembly and
meeting areas for religious activities. Accessory uses include cultural events,
parking, caretaker's housing, buildings ancillary to a religious function,
pastor's housing, and group living facilities such as convents.
      RESEARCH LABORATORY. A facility for conducting medical or scientific
research, investigation, testing, or experimentation; however, this does not
include facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as
incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory. This definition includes
electronic and telecommunications laboratories, including assembly.
      RESIDENT CARE HOME. Housing for a group of no more than six unrelated
persons who live in a dwelling because of disability (see "group home" for
persons without disabilities) and may include staff persons, who may or may not
be domiciled in the dwelling, who provide support services, including but not
limited to domestic, medical, habilitation, rehabilitation, or other similar
services. This definition shall include homes for the developmentally disabled
or foster care homes as specifically defined and provided for by the Arizona
Revised Statutes, and sober living/substance abuse treatment centers but shall
not include halfway/correctional transitional facilities or shelter homes for
people at risk.
      RESORT, CABINS, LODGES. A group or groups of buildings containing more
than five dwelling units and/or guest rooms and providing outdoor recreational
activities that may include golf, horseback riding, swimming, shuffleboard,
tennis, and similar activities. A resort may furnish services customarily
furnished by a hotel, including a restaurant, cocktail lounge, and convention
facilities.
      RESOURCE EXTRACTION. The on-site extraction of surface or subsurface
mineral products or other natural resources, including but not limited to
quarries, borrow pits, sand and gravel operations, oil and gas extraction, and
mining operations.
      RESTAURANT, WITH DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES. Establishments providing food
and beverage services to patrons remaining in vehicles.
      RESTAURANTS. Restaurants providing space for on-premises preparation,
consumption, retail sales, and service of food and beverages.
      RETAIL, GENERAL. The retail sale or rental of merchandise not
specifically listed under another use classification. This classification
typical provides goods directly to the consumer, where such goods are available
for immediate purchase and removal from the premises by the consumer. Examples
include, but are not limited to: pharmacies, jewelry stores, bait shops,
bakeries, bookstores, and florists.
      RETAIL, GENERAL WITH DRIVE-THRU. Same as the above use, but with a drive-
thru facility.
      RETAIL, LARGE. A single retail establishment that provides goods directly
to the consumer, where such goods are available for immediate purchase and
removal from the premises by the consumer, and which occupies more than 25,000
square feet of floor area. Examples include, but are not limited to: grocery
stores, apparel shops, appliance stores, electronic stores, department stores,
furniture stores, membership based retail stores, and factory outlet stores.
      RETAIL, SMOKE/VAPE SHOP. A cigar shop, hookah lounge, head shop,
electronic cigarette or other retail establishment where the primary activity
is the sale of tobacco and smoking related goods/paraphernalia. Smoke shops do
not include any individual business establishments that contain tobacco
departments/sections that are ancillary to their primary use.
      RETAIL, PAWN SHOP. A business in which a principal business activity
involves advancing money on the security of pledged goods or purchasing
tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or
repurchased by the seller for a fixed or variable price within a fixed or
variable period of time.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. A public way established or dedicated for public purposes
by duly recorded plat, deed, grant, governmental authority, or by operation of
the law.
      ROADWAY. The actual surface area of any public street, right-of-way, or
access way utilized for vehicular travel on any street.
      ROOF MOUNTED. Anything affixed to or located on the roof structure of a
building.
      RUNWAY. An artificially surfaced strip of ground that is designed and
used at an airport for the landing and takeoff of aircraft.
      SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA. A round, parabolic antenna intended to receive
signals from orbiting satellites and other sources. Noncommercial dish antennas
are defined as being less than 13.12 feet (four meters) in diameter, while
commercial dish antennas are usually those larger than 13.12 feet and typically
used by broadcasting stations.
      SALVAGE YARD. Any land or building used for the abandonment, storage,
keeping, collecting, or bailing of paper, rags, scrap metals, or other scrap or
discarded materials, or for the abandonment , demolition, dismantling, storage,
or salvaging of vehicles or other vehicles not in running condition, or
machinery, or parts thereof for commercial purposes.
      SCHOOL, BOARDING. Private education institutions having curricula of
general academic education consistent with the requirements of the State of
Arizona that include group living quarters for a student body or religious
order as a normal accessory use. This does not include degree-granting college
or universities.
      SCHOOL, PUBLIC or PRIVATE K-8. Facilities for primary education,
including public schools, charter schools, and private institutions having
curricula of general academic education consistent with the academic
requirements of the State of Arizona, including kindergarten, elementary, and
junior high school, including accessory facilities traditionally associated
with schools, such as athletic fields, cafeterias and libraries.
      SCHOOL, PUBLIC or PRIVATE 9-12. Facilities for secondary high school
education, including public schools, charter schools, and private institutions
having curricula of general academic education consistent with the academic
requirements of the State of Arizona. This includes accessory facilities
traditionally associated with schools, such as athletic stadia, cafeterias and
libraries.
      SCHOOL, NURSERY. A school or the use of a site or a portion of a site for
an organized program devoted to the education or day care of five or more
children of elementary school age or younger, other than those residents on the
site. Includes day care center.
      SCHOOL, TRADE. Schools offering instruction in the technical, commercial
or trade skills, such as real estate schools, business colleges, electronics
schools, automotive and aircraft technicians' schools, and similar commercial
establishments.
      SCREENING. A wall, fence, hedge, informal planting, or berm, provided for
the purpose of buffering a building or activity from neighboring areas or from
the street.
      SCREENING DEVICE. Any structure intended to conceal, fully or partially,
an activity or mechanical element from the public view, adjacent uses,
properties and/or streets.
      SECTION. A section of this code, unless some other code or statute is
mentioned.
      SELF-STORAGE, INDOOR. A building or group of buildings with controlled
access that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized, and
controlled access garages, stalls or lockers for the storage of customers'
goods or wares. This use does not include outdoor storage or indoor or outside
storage (Boat, RV).
      SERVICE STATION. Establishments engaged in retailing automotive/boat
fuels and may be in combination with providing convenience services.
      SERVICE STATION WITH CAR WASH. Same as the above use, but with a drive-
thru car wash facility.
      SETBACK. The required minimum horizontal distance between the building
line and the related front, side, or rear property line.
      SETBACK LINE. A line that is the required minimum distance from the
street right-of-way line or any other lot line that establishes the area within
which the principal structure must be placed.
      SIGHT VISIBILITY TRIANGLE. The area of visibility on a street corner to
allow for safe operations of vehicles, pedestrians, and cyclists in the
proximity of intersecting streets, rail lines, sidewalks, and bicycle paths.
      SIGN. Any visual element, or combination of elements, including words or
symbols, designed or placed to attract attention or convey information,
including any device providing identification, advertising or directional
information for a specific business, service, product, person, organization,
place, or building, including graphic devices such as logos, obtrusive colored
fascia or architectural elements, banners, balloons, streamers, inflatable
structures, exterior merchandise displays, projected picture signs, holographic
projection signs and other attention attracting media and devices.
      SIGN, ABANDONED. A sign that is no longer associated with the location,
product or activity conducted on the same premises upon which the sign is
located.
      SIGN, ADVERTISING. A temporary or permanent sign which includes any copy
and/or graphics relating to any business, service, product, person,
organization, place, or building in addition to simple identification.
      SIGN, A-FRAME. A temporary sign, normally supported by its own frame and
not affixed to a structure or permanently ground mounted. It is positioned
upright in a manner that forms an "A" when in use; also referred to as a
sandwich or tent sign.
      SIGN, ANIMATED. A permanent sign with actual motion, including light
changes or color changes, or the illusion of motion.
      SIGN AREA. See §
152.058(F)(7).
      SIGN, ATTACHED or WALL MOUNTED. A permanent sign that is directly
attached to the façade or face of a building.
      SIGN, AWNING/CANOPY. A permanent sign displayed on, or attached flat
against, the surface or surfaces of an awning, canopy or any other surface
attached to a building that provides shelter.
      SIGN, BANNER. A temporary sign made of fabric, plastic, or other pliable
material without a rigid structural support or internal illumination on which
advertising copy or graphics may be displayed.
      SIGN, BUILDING MOUNTED. Any sign mounted onto the vertical surface of a
building; see SIGN, WALL.
      SIGN, BUSINESS. A permanent sign that directs attention to a business or
profession or to a commodity or service sold, offered or manufactured or to an
entertainment offered on the premises where the sign is located.
      SIGN, BUSINESS ANNIVERSARY. A temporary sign indicating that the business
displaying the sign is celebrating its annual or multi-annual anniversary of
its opening.
      SIGN, CABINET. An enclosed frame constructed to hold internal components
and covered by a face to hold the advertising sign.
      SIGN, CANOPY. See SIGN, AWNING/CANOPY.
      SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY. A permanent sign constructed to hold individual
letters or individual text sections that are mounted in or on a track system.
Changeable copy signs are usually used as directory signs.
      SIGN, CONSTRUCTION. A temporary sign erected on the premises where
construction is taking place during the period of such construction indicating
the names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors or
similar artisans and the owner, financial supporter, sponsors and similar
individuals or firms having a role or interest with respect to the structure or
project.
      SIGN COPY. Any graphic image, symbol, text or numerals that advertise or
identify an establishment, product, goods or service.
      SIGN, DEVELOPMENT. A permanent sign situated on the subject property
indicating the name of a park, complex or center usually located at or near the
entry and which may be internally or externally illuminated.
      SIGN, DIRECTIONAL. A sign, supplying pertinent maneuvering guidance for
the purpose of promoting safety and the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic
(i.e. “one way,” “entrance,” “exit,” etc.).
      SIGN, DIRECTORY. A sign listing the names and/or uses, and/or locations
of the various tenants or activities within a building, or in a multi-tenant
development, or group of buildings. DIRECTORY SIGNS may also be constructed as
changeable copy signs.
      SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER. A permanent sign that uses computer-
generated or electronic components to change advertising copy, messages or
color, including signs that flip or rotate.
      SIGN, EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED. A permanent or temporary sign exposed to
external artificial lighting (and shielded to prevent light spillage).
      SIGN FACE. The area or display surface used for the message.
      SIGN, FASCIA. A sign that is permanently affixed to the horizontal member
or surface at the edge of a projecting roof.
      SIGN, FLASHING. A permanent sign with an intermittent, repetitive or
flashing light source.
      SIGN, FREESTANDING/MONUMENT. A permanent sign that has its own supporting
structure independent of the building or business it identifies.
      SIGN, FUEL PRICE. A permanently mounted, two component sign displaying
business identification and the retail cost of a gallon of gas/diesel on the
premises of the retail establishment.
      SIGN, FUTURE DEVELOPMENT. A temporary sign which announces the proposed
development of property prior to the issuance of a building permit.
      SIGN, GARAGE SALE. A temporary sign indicating that a private residence
is holding a sale on its property of any items previously used on the property.
      SIGN, GAS-FILLED. Any sign that uses neon, argon, krypton or any similar
gas to illuminate transparent or translucent tubing or other materials, or any
use of neon, argon, krypton or any similar gas lighting on or near the exterior
of a building or window.
      SIGN, GOING OUT OF BUSINESS. A temporary sign indicating that the
business displaying the sign will cease and be discontinued at a specific
location and date.
      SIGN, GROUND MOUNTED. A freestanding sign with no visible base.
      SIGN, HOLIDAY DECORATION. A temporary sign in the form of decorations
and/or window painting that are clearly incidental to and customarily and
commonly associated with any national, state, local or religious holiday.
      SIGN, IDENTIFICATION. A sign that contains only the name of the business,
person, organization, place, or building at that location.
      SIGN, ILLUMINATED. A permanent sign, that is lighted, either externally
or internally.
      SIGN, INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED. A sign constructed with a light source
within the sign structure and positioned behind the face of the sign.
      SIGN, LEGAL NON-CONFORMING. Any permanent sign in existence or under
construction, as of the effective date of this chapter, which does not conform
to the provisions of this chapter but which was or is being constructed,
erected or maintained in compliance with all previous regulations.
      SIGN, MANSARD. A sign permanently affixed to a wall or surface not more
than 20 degrees from vertical at the upper edge of a building and extending
parallel with the mansard roof line or parapet upon which the sign is attached.
Any sign proposed for a building with a mansard roof shall have the top of the
sign mounted no higher than the lowest point of any portion of the roofline.
      SIGN, MENU BOARD. A permanent sign with a changeable face oriented to the
drive-through lane of a business that advertises the menu items or services
available from the drive-through window.
      SIGN, MULTI-TENANT BUILDING IDENTIFICATION. A permanent sign for a
building complex or center that contains any number of businesses, greater than
one, that share the same site and use common points of vehicular ingress and
egress to and from the site.
      SIGN, NAMEPLATE. A permanent sign that may include street number and
name, business hours, and business logo.
      SIGN, OFF-SITE/OFF-PREMISE. Any permanent or temporary sign that may
display a message, whether commercial or noncommercial, that may not
necessarily relate to the premises upon which the sign is located.
      SIGN, ON-SITE/ON-PREMISE. Any permanent or temporary sign which pertains
to the business operated, activity conducted or products sold or manufactured
on the premises upon which the sign is located; or which displays a
noncommercial message installed or caused to be installed only by the property
owner and/or lessee of the property upon which the sign is located.
      SIGN PANEL. The area enclosing the copy and graphic components of a sign.
      SIGN, PARAPET. A sign mounted to the face of a building parapet.
      SIGN, PERMANENT. Any sign set in the ground with its own foundation or
which is painted on or otherwise anchored to a building, wall or other
permanent structure and any of which are installed to achieve a lasting and
enduring condition and location.
      SIGN, POLITICAL. A temporary sign that identifies a person, expresses a
position, conveys a message concerning, or advocates a position on, the
candidacy of a person, party or issue on an upcoming ballot.
      SIGN, PORTABLE. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other
permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not
limited to, signs designed to be transported by persons or wheels; signs
converted to A-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs;
umbrellas for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles.
      SIGN, PROJECTING. A permanent sign that extends more than 12 inches from
a building wall over a property line or right-of-way line.
      SIGN, PYLON. A freestanding sign constructed with a support structure
that is more than 10% of the height of the total sign and less than 90% of the
width of the sign. The sign support structure shall not be included in the
aggregate sign area computation.
      SIGN, READER/SIGN BOARD. A permanent, non-electronic sign only for public
facility land uses that conveys schedules of events, rules, regulations,
announcements, or similar messages.
      SIGN, ROOF. Any sign affixed on, above or over the roof of a building so
that it projects above the roofline is prohibited. The top of a parapet wall
shall be considered the roofline. The vertical portion of a mansard roof shall
be considered the roofline. The top of the fascia of a hipped roof shall be
considered the roofline. Where a parapet wall is combined with a mansard roof,
the roofline shall be the top of the parapet.
      SIGN, SANDWICH. See SIGN, A-FRAME.
      SIGN, SPHERICAL. A permanent sign that is three dimensional and embodies
imagery of a symbol (i.e. book, shoe, glasses, etc.) that assists in
advertising a business.
      SIGN, STREET ADDRESS. A permanent sign located on-site, consisting of
numerals and letters identifying a property address.
      SIGN, SUBDIVISION IDENTIFICATION. A set of two permanent and identical
signs that identify the residential subdivision, are attached to a screen wall
or landscape planter adjacent to the adjacent public street, and are designed
and sited in a manner consistent with the architectural style and landscape
theming of the site.
      SIGN, TEMPORARY. A sign intended to display either commercial or non-
commercial messages of a transitory or temporary nature. Portable signs, any
sign not permanently embedded in the ground, or signs affixed to a building,
wall, fence, or sign structure for a non-permanent time period, are considered
temporary signs. A banner, pennant, flag, poster, balloon, construction sign,
political sign or an A-frame sign shall be considered a temporary sign.
      SIGN, TWO-PART. A permanent sign composed of two sign panels, at an angle
equal to or more than 45 degrees, whose aggregate sign area shall be computed
from the total of both panels.
      SIGN, WALKER. A person who wears, holds or balances a portable sign.
      SIGN, WALL. A permanent sign which is fastened to any vertical portion of
a building; see also SIGN, BUILDING MOUNTED.
      SIGN, WEEKEND DIRECTIONAL. A temporary sign typically placed on weekends
within the right-of-way that is designed for providing direction and/or
orientation for pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
      SIGN, WINDOW. Any permanent sign, pictures, symbols or combination
thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business,
commodity, event, sale or service that is affixed to, or located within any
area six feet behind a window pane, positioned to be read from the exterior of
a building.
      SIGN, YARD. Small placard-type signs that are typically associated with,
but not limited to, the advertisement of real estate, political campaigns, and
meeting or event announcements.
      SINGLE HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. Any number of related, or unrelated, persons
living as the functional equivalent of a traditional family, whose members are
an interactive group of persons jointly occupying a single dwelling unit,
including the joint use of and responsibility for common areas, and sharing
household activities and responsibilities (e.g. meals, chores, household
maintenance, expenses, etc.) and where, if the dwelling unit is rented, all
adult residents have chosen to jointly occupy the entire premises of the
dwelling unit, under a single written lease with joint use and responsibility
for the premises, and the makeup of the household and length of stay is
determined collectively by the residents of the dwelling unit rather than the
landlord or property manager.
      SITE. The building area leased or owned by or on behalf of any business
together with its adjacent privately-owned walkway or parking area.
      SITE BUILT. A structure or dwelling constructed on the site by craftsmen
utilizing materials delivered to the site. Said structure shall consist of
footings and foundations poured in place, permanently attached to the walls.
Roofing materials, interior and exterior finishes shall be applied on the site.
All construction shall be in conformance with all uniform codes in force at the
time of construction. This definition does not include relocated site built
homes.
      SITE PLAN. A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with
complete dimension, the boundaries of a site and the location of all buildings,
structures uses, principal site development features, or any other information
required by this chapter, which is proposed for a specific parcel of land.
      SLAUGHTERHOUSE. A structure or parcel of land in which livestock,
including cattle, horses, goats, swine, sheep, fowl or any other animals are
killed, skinned, gutted, or otherwise prepared for subsequent sale as food.
This shall not include retail butcher shops when operated within a completely
enclosed building in which no livestock is killed, skinned or gutted.
      SLOPE. An inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed
as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.
      SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications:
         (a)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of not more than six
cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements,
the antenna and all of the antenna's exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of not more than six cubic feet in volume.
         (b)   All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is
cumulatively not more than 28 cubic feet in volume. The following types of
associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment
volume pursuant to this definition:
            1.   An electric meter;
            2.   Concealment elements;
            3.   A telecommunications demarcation box;
            4.   Ground-based enclosures;
            5.   Grounding equipment;
            6.   A power transfer switch;
            7.   A cut-off switch; and
            8.   Vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other
services.
      SOCIAL SERVICE FACILITY. Facilities providing a variety of supportive
services for disabled and homeless individuals and other targeted groups on a
less-than-24-hour basis. Examples of services provided are counseling, meal
programs, personal storage lockers, showers, instructional  programs,
television rooms, and meeting spaces. This classification is distinguished from
a hospital, nursing home, day care center, group care home, treatment facility,
health clinic, or emergency shelter providing 24-hour or overnight care.
      SOLAR GENERATION FACILITY. An electrical energy generation plant
comprised of one or more freestanding, ground-mounted devices that capture
solar energy and convert it to electrical energy for use by an off-site
electric utility provider. Solar generation stations typically utilize
photovoltaic solar cells, but they can also be combinations of light
reflectors, concentrators, and heat exchangers. A solar generation station is
also known as a solar plant, solar generation plant, solar farm, concentrated
solar power plant, solar power plant, or solar thermal power plat (if non-
photovoltaic).
      SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT. A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator for the
purpose of any fair, parade, march, procession, festival, street dance, circus,
carnival, concert, performance, rodeo, race, Christmas tree sales lot or
another temporary activity using outdoor spaces and inviting public
participation and patronage (with or without charge) whether held on public or
private property. There are two types of special events: civic events and
commercial activities.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Less than completely and opaquely covered
human genitals, pubic region, buttock and female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; and human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or
sodomy; fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.
      STORE/STAY QUARTERS. An attached unit to a principal indoor storage
(boat, RV) building or unit that may be used as a temporary residence by the
owner, subject to the provisions of §
152.046(F)(3).
      STORY. That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there is no floor above
it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. STORY
includes a basement, but not a cellar.
      STORM SEWER. A channel or conduit, open or closed, necessary, useful or
convenient for the collection and carrying of surface waters to a drainage
course.
      STREET. A right-of-way, dedicated to public use, which provides the
principal vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties.
      STREET, ARTERIAL. A street designed to carry large volumes of traffic and
provides for efficient vehicular movement between large areas of the town as
designated on the functional street classification map in the town's general
plan.
      STREET, COLLECTOR. Streets that conduct and distribute traffic between
other residential streets of lower order in the streets hierarchy and higher
order streets or major activity centers. This is the highest order of street
appropriate to a residential neighborhood and residential street frontage along
it should be prohibited or severely restricted.
      STREET, PRIVATE. An area intended for local vehicular traffic, owned and
maintained by a private corporation, individual, or group of individuals.
      STREET WIDTH. The shortest distance between street lines, measured at a
right angle to the street right-of-way.
      STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change in the supporting components of a
building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or
any complete rebuilding of the roof or exterior walls.
      STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected which requires a fixed
location on the ground, or is attached to something having a fixed location on
the ground.
      SUBDIVISION. In accordance with ARS § 9-463.02, a SUBDIVISION means
improved or unimproved land or lands divided for the purpose of financing, sale
or lease, whether immediate or future, into four or more lots, tracts or
parcels of land, or, if a new street is involved, any such property which is
divided into two or more lots, tracts or parcels of land, or, any such
property, the boundaries of which have been fixed by a recorded plat, which is
divided into more than two parts. SUBDIVISION also includes any condominium,
cooperative, community apartment, townhouse or similar project containing four
or more parcels, in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the
right of exclusive occupancy of any unit located thereon, but plats of such
projects need not show the buildings or the manner in which the buildings or
airspace above the property shown on the plat are to be divided. SUBDIVISION
does not include the following:
         (a)   The sale or exchange of parcels of land to or between adjoining
property owners if such sale or exchange does not create additional lots;
         (b)   The partitioning of land in accordance with other statutes
regulating the partitioning of land held in common ownership; or
         (c)   The leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space
within a building or trailer park, nor to mineral, oil or gas leases.
      SUBDIVISION PLAT. Means a map of a subdivision (see RECORDED PLAT).
      SUBSTANCE ABUSE DETOXIFICATION CENTER. An inpatient health facility
staffed by medical professionals providing therapy and/or rehabilitation for
substance-dependent individuals. Methadone distribution centers are included.
      SUBSTANCE ABUSE TREATMENT CENTER. A health facility providing therapy
and/or rehabilitation for substance-dependent individuals on an outpatient
basis. Methadone distribution centers are included.
      TASTING ROOM. A facility for alcoholic beverage tasting and retail sales
of related merchandise to customers who are physically present at the tasting
room, subject to state licensing requirements.
      TEMPORARY USE or BUILDING. A use or structure permitted under this code
to exist for a limited period of time.
      TOTAL AGGREGATE SIGN AREA. The entire area of the sign surface upon which
sign copy and/or imagery may be placed, excluding any supporting structure.
      TOUR SERVICES. Businesses primarily engaged in providing recreation and
other leisure based activities for tourists, as well as local residents,
including, but not limited to: jeep tours, helicopter tours, hiking tours and
rafting tours.
      TOWN. The Town of Colorado City, Arizona
      TRAILER, BOAT. A vehicle designed for transportation on its own wheels
and drawn by another vehicle and designed for the purpose of transportation of
a pleasure boat and its accessories.
      TRAILER, COMMERCIAL. A vehicle designed for transportation upon its own
wheels and drawn by another vehicle and used to conduct a business or
occupation, or as a selling or advertising device, even though mounted on
jacks, blocks, foundations or supports.
      TRANSLUCENT. Admitting and diffusing light so that objects and the light
source beyond cannot be clearly perceived.
      TRUCK STOP. A commercial facility whose primary purpose is to provide
service and maintenance to diesel powered trucks and tractor trailers, may
includei bays for truck washing, truck maintenance and fuel dispensing, but
excluding the overhaul of large diesel trucks or engines. Other facilities may
also be present, such as convenience markets, motels and restaurants.
      UNDERLYING DISTRICT. The base zoning district classification applying to
a group of properties upon which additional overlay district regulations are
superimposed.
      USE. The principal purpose for which a lot or the main building is
designed, arranged, or intended, and for which it may be used, occupied, or
maintained.
      USE, ACCESSORY. A use of a building or lot which is customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the main building or lot.
      USE, CONDITIONAL. Any use which may be established in the particular
zoning district in which it is allowed only upon meeting the conditions and
limitations as prescribed by this chapter.
      USE, PERMITTED. A use which is lawfully established in a particular
district and which conforms with specified development standards.
      UTILITY FACILITY and SERVICE YARD, MAJOR. A service of a regional nature
that normally entails the periodic construction/expansion of buildings or
structures, and that typically has employees on the site on an ongoing basis.
Examples include, but are not limited to: wastewater treatment plants, water
treatment plants, reservoirs, power plants, and accessory maintenance yards.
      UTILITY FACILITY, MINOR. A service that is necessary to support
development within the immediate vicinity and that involves only minor
structures. Employees typically are not located at the site on an ongoing
basis. Examples include, but are not limited to: electric transformer stations;
gas regulator stations; telephone exchange buildings; well, water, and sewer
pumping stations; water storage tanks; and water pressure regulating stations.
      VACATION HOME RENTALS. Vacation home rentals are limited to individually
or collectively owned single-family or one-to-four-family house or dwelling
units or any unit or group of units in a condominium, cooperative or timeshare,
that is also a transient public lodging establishment or owner-occupied
residential home offered for transient use if the accommodations are not
classified for property taxation under A.R.S. § 42-12001. Use of any other
unit, dwelling or group of units or dwellings as a vacation rental or short-
term rental is prohibited. Vacation rentals do not include a unit that is used
for any nonresidential use, including retail, restaurant, banquet space, event
center or other similar use.
      VEHICLE. Any vehicle designed to carry one or more persons, which is
propelled or drawn by mechanical power, such as vehicles, trucks, and
motorcycles.
      VEHICLE/BOAT RENTALS. Rental of vehicles or boats, including storage and
incidental maintenance.
      VEHICLE/BOAT REPAIR, MAJOR. Repair of vehicles, boats, trucks,
motorcycles, motor homes, and recreational vehicles, including the sale,
installation, and servicing of related equipment and parts, generally on an
overnight basis. This classification includes auto/boat engine repair shops;
body, hull and fender shops, transmission shops, restoration, refurbishing, but
excludes auto/boat dismantling or salvaging and tire re-treading or recapping.
      VEHICLE/BOAT REPAIR, MINOR. The service and repair of vehicles, boats,
light-duty trucks, and motorcycles, including the sale, installation, and
servicing of related equipment and parts. This classification includes quick-
service oil, tune-up, wheel and brake shops, muffler shops, auto glass
services, propeller service, battery replacement and tire sales and
installation, where repairs are made  or service provided in enclosed bays and
no vehicles are stored overnight. This classification excludes establishments
providing engine repair, body, hull and fender work, vehicle/boat painting, or
towing. It also excludes repair of heavy trucks, construction vehicles, or
boats that exceed nine feet in width by 30 feet in length.
      VEHICLE/BOAT SALES AND LEASING. Sales or leasing of vehicles,
motorcycles, trucks, motor homes and boats, including storage and incidental
maintenance.
      VEHICLE, ELECTRIC. A vehicle which uses one or more electric motors for
propulsion.
       VEHICLE, INOPERATIVE. Any motor vehicle that cannot be operated lawfully
on a public street or highway for any reason other than the lack of current
vehicle registration, or that cannot be moved under its own power
      VEHICLE STACKING. Generally refers to a circumstance where a parking
area, driveway or garage is intentionally designed to provide for one car to be
parked directly behind another vehicle, or "stacked" whereas the first vehicle
is unable to move without the second vehicle also moving.
      VISIBILITY TRIANGLE. A triangular area formed by two intersecting curb
lines or property lines and a line connecting them at a point 30 feet from the
intersection of the two lines. Also see SIGHT TRIANGLE.
      VISIBLE. Capable of being seen (whether or not legible) by a person of
normal height and visual acuity walking or driving on a public road.
      WALL. An artificially constructed barrier of solid stucco, masonry, rock
or concrete material erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
      WALL, BUILDING. Any exterior surface of a building or any part thereof,
including windows.
      WASTE FACILITY, LANDFILL. A planned and approved method or system of
waste disposal in which the waste is disposed or buried in layers, compacted by
earth or other approved methods, also known as sanitary landfill.
      WASTE FACILITY, TRANSFER STATION. A facility or site where solid waste
from households, businesses, and industries is transferred from one type of
collection vehicle or container to another. Transfer activities are entirely
within covered structures. A transfer station is an intermediary point between
the locations of waste generation and the sites of ultimate processing or
disposal. Does not include liquid waste transfer, hazardous or toxic waste
disposal, solid waste disposal, or liquid waste recycling or refining
activities.
      WATCHMAN'S QUARTERS. An attached unit to a principal building that may be
used as a permanent residence for employees of businesses or property owners
when their presence is required for security purposes by the employer 24 hours
a day, subject to the provisions of §
152.046(F)(2).
      WHEEL STOP. A physical barrier sufficient in size to prevent the movement
of vehicles or other vehicles over or past such barrier.
      WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment primarily engaged in the sale
or distribution of goods and materials in large quantity to retailers or other
businesses for resale to the general public or business customers, and limited
retail uses when directly associated with the wholesale use. This term shall
not include heavy manufacturing, resource extraction, bulk storage of hazardous
materials, or scrap or salvage operations.
      WIRELESS FACILITY. Wireless facilities transmit analog or digital voice
or communications information between or among points using electromagnetic
signals via antennas, microwave dishes, and similar structures. Supporting
equipment includes buildings, shelters, cabinets, towers, electrical equipment,
parking areas, and other accessory development. Specific use types include, but
are not limited to:
         (a)   TOWER. Including any facility with a tower. A structure in a
fixed location used as an antenna or to support antennas for the primary
purpose of transmitting and/or receiving electronic signals. This use includes
wireless communication facilities with towers. This definition also includes
non-residential broadcast, communication, transmission, and similar towers,
either freestanding or attached to an adjacent broadcasting or transmitting
facility.
         (b)   BROADCASTING or RECORDING STUDIO. No tower. A building or
portion of a building used as a place for radio or television broadcasting or
recording but without a transmission tower.
         (c)   SATELLITE EARTH STATION. A telecommunication facility that
transmits to and/or receives signals from an orbiting satellite.
         (d)   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES. See SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY.
         (e)   TRANSMITTING STATION. No tower. Any facility utilized for the
transmission of broadcast information but without a transmission tower. This
use includes wireless communication facilities without towers.
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION, AMATEUR SERVICE. A radio communication
service for the purpose of self-training, intercommunication and technical
investigation carried out by amateurs, that is, by duly authorized persons
interested in radio technique solely with a personal aim and without pecuniary
interest.
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION, AMATEUR STATION. The term amateur station
means a radio station operated by a duly authorized person interested in radio
technique solely with a personal aim and without pecuniary interest.
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION, ANTENNA. Any devise used to collect or
radiate electromagnetic waves, excluding any antenna support structure other
than mounting brackets.
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION, ANTENNA ARRAY. An assembly of antenna
elements with dimensions, spacing, and illumination sequence such that the
fields for the individual elements combine to produce a maximum intensity in a
particular direction and minimum field intensities in other directions.
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION, ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE/TOWER. A
commercially manufactured structure designed and constructed specifically to
support an antenna or antenna array and equipment associated with a single or
collocated WCF, and may include a monopole, self-supporting (lattice) tower,
guy wire support tower and other similar structures.
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION, ATTACHED WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY. An
attached WCF is an antenna array that is attached to an existing building or
structure, which structures shall include but not be limited to utility poles
and water towers, with any accompanying pole or attachment device which
attaches the antenna array to the existing building or structure, transmission
cables, and an equipment facility which may be located either inside or outside
of the attachment structure.
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION, BROADCAST. To transmit information over the
airwaves to two or more receiving devices simultaneously. Information can be
transmitted over local television or radio stations, satellites systems or
wireless communications systems.
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION, CAMOUFLAGED. A wireless communication
facility that is disguised, hidden, part of an existing or proposed structure
or placed within an existing proposed structure is considered camouflaged.
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION, CO-LOCATION. Use of a common WCF or common
site by two or more wireless license holders or by one wireless license holder
for more that one type of communications technology and/or placement of a WCF
on a structure owned or operated by a utility or other public entity.
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION, COMMERCIAL MOBILE SERVICES. Commercial mobile
services are defined in § 332 of the Communications Act and the FCC's rules,
and include cellular telephone services regulated under Part 22 of the FCC's
rules, SMR services regulated under Part 90 of the FCC's rules, and PCS
regulated under Part 24 of the FCC's rules. 47 C.F.R.o 20.9.
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION, COMMON CARRIER/CARRIER. The term COMMON
CARRIER or CARRIER means any person engaged as a common carrier for hire, in
interstate or foreign communication by wire or radio or in the interstate or
foreign radio transmission of energy, but a person engaged in radio
broadcasting shall not be deemed a common carrier.
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION, DIRECT-TO-HOME SATELLITE SERVICES. The term
direct-to-home satellite services means the distribution or broadcasting of
programming or services by satellite directly to the subscriber's premises
without the use of ground receiving or distribution equipment, except at the
subscribers premises or in the uplink process to the satellite.
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION, FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration and
any legally appointed, designated or elected agent or successor.
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION, FCC. The Federal Communications Commission
and any legally appointed, designated or elected agent or successor.
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION, HEIGHT. When referring to a WCF, height shall
mean the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the WCF
antenna support structure including the antenna.
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION, SETBACKS. When referring to an antenna
support structure, setback shall mean the required distance from the antenna
support structure to the property line of the parcel on which the WCF is
located.
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION, TEMPORARY WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY
(TEMPORARY WCF). A WCF which is to be placed in use for a limited period of
time, is not deployed in a permanent manner, and does not have a permanent
foundation.
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION, TOWER/ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A structure
designed and constructed specifically to support an antenna or antenna array,
and may include a monopole, self-supporting (lattice) tower, guy-wire support
tower and other similar structures.
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION, UN-LICENSED WIRELESS SERVICE. Un-licensed
wireless services are defined as the offering of telecommunications services
using duly authorized devices which do not require individual licenses; direct-
to home satellite services are excluded from this definition. 47 U.S.C. 332 (c)
(7)(C)(iii).
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION, WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY. A WCF is any
facility used for the transmission and/or reception of wireless communication
services, usually consisting of an antenna array, transmission cables,
equipment facility, and antenna support structure(s).
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION, WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SERVICES. Wireless
communication services shall mean any personal wireless services as defined in
the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 which includes commercial mobile
services, un-licensed wireless service, common carrier wireless exchange access
services, and similar services that currently exist or that may in the future
be developed.
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION, CABINETS, SHELTERS. A building or an existing
structure, pedestals and other similar structures.
      YARD. Open space on the same lot with a building or group of buildings,
lying between the building (or outer building of a group) and the nearest lot
or property line and unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward.
      YARD, REQUIRED FRONT. An open space extending the full width of the lot
between the front lot line and the front line of the building projected to the
side lines of the lot. A front yard setback is established parallel to the
front lot line.
      YARD, REQUIRED REAR. An open unoccupied space extending the full width of
the lot between the rear lot line and the rear line of the building. A rear
yard setback is established parallel to the rear lot line.
      YARD, REQUIRED SIDE. An open space extending from the required front yard
to the required rear yard between a side setback and a side lot line.
      YARD, SIDE. Open space between the side-lot line, the side-property line,
or the proposed side-property line, and the building line and extending from
the front yard to the rear yard.
      YARD, STREET SIDE. Open space between the side-lot line adjacent to a
public or private street and the building line and extending from the front
yard to the rear yard.
      ZERO LOT LINE. The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that
one or more of the building's sides rests directly on a lot line.
      ZONE. An area within which certain uses of land and buildings are
permitted and certain others are prohibited; yards and other open spaces are
required; lot areas, building height limits, and other requirements are
established; all of the foregoing being identical for the zone in which they
apply.
      ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The town employee responsible for the enforcement
and interpretation of the zoning ordinance. Also known as the Community
Development Director.
      ZONING CLEARANCE. The approval by the Zoning Administrator of a plan that
is in conformance with the zoning ordinance of the town.
      ZONING DISTRICT. A designated area in which the same zoning regulations
apply through the geographic area.
      ZONING ORDINANCE. The chapter that identifies the specific district areas
and what is allowed or not allowed to occur in those geographic areas of the
town.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 4-13-2020)
CHAPTER 153: LAND DIVISION
Section
Authority, Exceptions and Enforcement
   
153.001   Title
   
153.002   Purpose
   
153.003   Authority
   
153.004   Planning Commission creation and responsibilities
   
153.005   Appeals and variances
   
153.006   Approval of subdivision required
   
153.007   Exception from standards for special circumstances
   
153.008   Processing fee required
   
153.009   Enforcement
   
153.010   Interpretation
   
153.011   Effective date
Sketch Plan Requirements
   
153.020   General
   
153.021   Sketch plan
   
153.022   Evaluation of sketch plan
   
153.023   Approval
   
153.024   Denial
   
153.025   Appeal
Preliminary Plat
   
153.035   General
   
153.036   Preliminary plat contents
   
153.037   Traffic impact analysis
   
153.038   Water supply
   
153.039   Sewage disposal
   
153.040   Additional requirements and accompanying statements
   
153.041   Distribution for evaluation
   
153.042   Commission review and recommendations
   
153.043   Town Council action on the preliminary plat application
Final Plat
   
153.055   Review process
   
153.056   Final plat submittal
   
153.057   Submittal specifications for final plat
   
153.058   Additional requirements and accompanying statements
   
153.059   Form of final plat
   
153.060   Signature blocks
   
153.061   Staff response to final plat submittal
   
153.062   Action by the Town Council
   
153.063   Recording of final plat
   
153.064   Failure to meet conditions of approval
   
153.065   Amendments
   
153.066   Reversion to acreage/plat of abandonment
Assurances for Completion of Improvements
   
153.080   Disclosure of financial assurances
   
153.081   Acceptable financial assurances for required improvements (subject to
Town Council approval prior to recordation)
   
153.082   Duration of performance bonds
   
153.083   Partial assurance reduction
   
153.084   Partial release of lots
   
153.085   Default
   
153.086   Inspection and release
   
153.087   Subdivision street maintenance
Design Standards
   
153.100   General
   
153.101   Watercourses
   
153.102   Survey monuments
Land Splits
   
153.115   Purpose
   
153.116   Authority
   
153.117   General standards
   
153.118   Application requirements
   
153.119   Application process
Lot Line Adjustment
   
153.130   Purpose
   
153.131   General standards
   
153.132   Application requirements
   
153.133   Application process
 
   
153.999   Penalty
AUTHORITY, EXCEPTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 153.001 TITLE.
   These regulations shall hereafter be known, cited and referred to as the
"Town of Colorado City Land Division Ordinance."
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.002 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of these regulations is to provide for the health, safety,
general welfare, orderly growth and planned development of the town; defining
subdivision development, setting forth subdivision platting procedures and
requirements, establishing subdivision design principles and standards,
establishing street and utility improvement requirements, coordinate with
adjoining subdivisions and for other purposes.
   (B)   Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used
safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood
or other menace, and land shall not be subdivided until sufficient public
facilities and improvements are arranged for and proper provision has been made
for drainage, water, sewerage, power, improved street access, adequate traffic
circulation, individual property lots of reasonable utility and livability,
capital improvements such as schools, parks, recreation facilities,
transportation facilities and improvements, and other health and safety
requirements.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.003 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   General. By authority of the Colorado City Town Council adopted
pursuant to powers and jurisdictions vested through A.R.S. § 9-463.01
pertaining to subdivision of lands within incorporated areas, and other
applicable laws, statutes, orders and regulations of the State of Arizona, and
the Town of Colorado City, the Town Council does hereby exercise the power and
authority to review and approve or disapprove, based upon recommendation of the
Town of Colorado City Planning and Zoning Commission and its Director, plats
for division of land within the town. The Town Council may, in the exercise of
its police power or for purposes previously identified, amend, add to, delete
or change this Land Division Ordinance.
   (B)   Applicability. These regulations shall apply to all subdivisions of
land, as detailed herein, located within the Town of Colorado City. No land
shall be subdivided until the subdivider or his or her agent complies with
these regulations and obtains the necessary approvals detailed herein. In
addition, no land shall be considered officially divided until the approved
survey/plat is filed with and recorded by the Mohave County Recorder's Office.
   (C)   Water adequacy. The subdivider must demonstrate an adequate water
supply to the satisfaction of the Town of Colorado City as required by state
statute under A.R.S. § 9-463.01.
   (D)   Building construction. No building permit shall be issued for any
parcel or plat of land which was created by subdivision after the effective
date of, and not in conformity with, the provisions of these subdivision
regulations. The town may declare a moratorium on construction and require
compliance with these regulations and take whatever steps necessary to ensure
compliance.
   (E)   Public conflict. The regulations are not intended to interfere with,
abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other
provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by the provision of any other ordinance, rule or
regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more
restrictive or impose higher standards shall control.
   (F)   Private conflict. These regulations are not intended to abrogate any
easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction, provided that
where the provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher
standards or regulations than the easement, covenant or other private agreement
or restriction, the requirements of these regulations shall govern.
   (G)   Severability. If any part or provisions of these regulations or
application thereof to any person or circumstances is adjudged invalid by any
court of competent jurisdiction, that judgment shall be confined in its
operation to the part, provision or application directly involved in the
controversy in which the judgment shall have been rendered, and shall not
affect or impair the validity of the remainder of these regulations or the
application thereof to other persons or circumstances.
   (H)   Conditions. Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment
of reasonable conditions to land subdivision is an exercise of valid police
power delegated by the State of Arizona to its political subdivisions. The
subdivider has the duty of compliance with reasonable conditions laid down by
the Town Council for design, dedication, improvement and restrictive use of the
land so as to conform to the physical and economical development of the
municipality and to protect the safety and general welfare of the future lot
owners of the subdivision and the community at large.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.004 PLANNING COMMISSION CREATION AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   A Colorado City Planning Commission is hereby created in accordance
with the provisions of A.R.S. Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 6, as amended
(“Municipal Planning”).
   (B)   The Commission shall consist of 5 members appointed by the Mayor with
the consent of the Town Council. Members shall be selected without respect to
political affiliation and shall receive a stipend pay for each Commission
meeting attended, as set by the Council.
   (C)   The initial terms of office for the appointive members of such
Commission shall be 2 years for 2 members, 4 years for 2 members and 6 years
for the remaining member. Thereafter, the terms of office for each appointive
member, shall be 6 years.
   (D)   Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of term
shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor, with the consent of the Town
Council. Notwithstanding the length of term, members shall serve at the
pleasure of the Town Council and may be removed at any time with or without
cause.
   (E)   The Colorado City Planning Commission may, by separate
intergovernmental agreement, hold joint meetings with the Hildale City Planning
Commission. These members shall constitute a quorum. Meetings shall be open to
the public and minutes shall be kept and filed with the office of the Town
Clerk.
   (F)   The Colorado City Planning Commission shall among other things,
provide for the health, safety, general welfare, good order, comfort,
convenience, aesthetics, and harmonious development of the community.
   (G)   To accomplish these purposes the Commission shall have the following
powers and duties:
      (1)   Recommend and administer a General Plan, maps and amendments;
      (2)   Recommend and administer subdivision regulations and amendments;
      (3)   Recommend and administer zoning ordinances, maps and amendments;
      (4)   Hear and recommend proposed subdivision developments;
      (5)   Hear and decide commercial and industrial development proposals;
      (6)   Hear and determine land use controls including conditional uses,
easements, restrictive covenants, and development agreements;
      (7)   Require the conformance with these regulations and standards,
specifications and details for public infrastructure and facilities, including
streets, flood control, domestic water and sanitary sewage disposal; and
      (8)   Undertaking all activities usually associated therewith and
commonly known as “planning and zoning.”
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014; Am. Ord.
2015-04, passed 5-11-2015)
§ 153.005 APPEALS AND VARIANCES.
   (A)   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-462.06, a Hearing Officer is hereby established
to hear and decide requests for variances from the terms of the land use
ordinances, appeals from decisions applying the land use ordinances, and
appeals from a land use fee charged. The Hearing Officer shall be appointed by
resolution of the Town Council. The Hearing Officer shall act in a quasi-
judicial manner and serve as arbiter of issues involving the interpretation or
application of land use ordinances.
   (B)   Any appeal proceeding shall be conducted in a public meeting called
for that purpose. The Hearing Officer shall fix a reasonable time to hear the
appeal or variance. The hearing officer shall have the power to administer
oaths and take evidence. Minutes of the proceedings and actions shall be filed
with the office of Town Clerk.
   (C)   As a condition precedent to judicial review, each aggrieved person
shall specifically file a notice of appeal from a land use decision with the
Town Clerk within 15 days of the decision, specifying the grounds thereof. Only
those decisions in which the town has applied a land use ordinance to a
particular application, person, or parcel may be appealed.
   (D)   An appeal stays all proceedings in the matter appealed from, unless
the Planning and Zoning Administer certifies by the facts stated in the
certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. Upon such
certification, proceedings shall not be stayed except by restraining order
granted by the Hearing Officer, Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on
application and notice to the Planning and Zoning Administrator. Proceedings
shall not be stayed if the appeal requests relief which has previously been
denied by an appeal except pursuant to a special action in district court.
   (E)   The town shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal, and shall
give notice of hearing by both publication in a newspaper of general
circulation and posting the notice in conspicuous places close to the property
as well as due notice to the parties in interest. Upon the hearing, any party
may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. The appellant has the burden
of proving that the town erred.
   (F)   The Hearing Officer may grant a variance if:
      (1)   Literal enforcement of the ordinance would cause an unreasonable
hardship for the applicant that is not necessary to carry out the general
purpose of the land use ordinances. The Hearing Officer may not find an
unreasonable hardship if the hardship is self-imposed or economic;
      (2)   There are special circumstances attached to the property that do
not generally apply to other properties in the same zone such as size, shape,
topography, location, or surroundings;
      (3)   Granting the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a
substantial property right possessed by other property in the same zone;
      (4)   The variance will not substantially affect the general plan and
will not be contrary to the public interest; and
      (5)   The spirit of the land use ordinance is observed and substantial
justice done.
   (G)   In granting a variance, the Hearing Officer may impose additional
requirements or conditions on the applicant that will mitigate any harmful
effects of the variance or serve the purpose of the standard or requirement
that is waived or modified. Variances run with the land.
   (H)   The Hearing Officer shall determine the correctness of a decision of
the town in its interpretation and. application of a land use ordinance. The
Hearing Officer shall make written findings of facts and conclusions of law
giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal conclusions from such facts
in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order requirement, decision or
determination which comes before it. The decision must be made within a
reasonable time (15 to 45 days). A decision of the Hearing Officer takes effect
on the date when a written decision is issued.
   (I)   The Hearing Officer may not make any changes in the uses permitted in
any zoning classification or zoning district, or make any changes in the terms
of the zoning ordinance except for granting variances pursuant to the
conditions listed above.
   (J)   A Board of Adjustment is hereby created in accordance with the
provisions of A.R.S. § 9-462.06, and shall hear and decide appeals from the
decisions of the Hearing Officer.
   (K)   The Board of Adjustments shall consist of 5 members appointed by the
Council. Members shall be selected without respect to political affiliation and
shall receive a stipend pay for each Board of Adjustments meeting attended, as
set by the Town Council.
   (L)   The initial terms of office for the appointive members of such Board
of Adjustments shall be 2 years for 2 members, 4 years for 2 members and 6
years for the remaining member. Thereafter, the terms of office for each
appointive member, shall be 6 years.
   (M)   Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of term
shall be filled by appointment by the Town Council. Notwithstanding the length
of term, members shall serve at the pleasure of the Town Council and may be
removed at any time with or without cause.
   (N)   The Board of Adjustments shall act in a quasi-judicial manner to hear
appeals from decisions of the Hearing Officer. Appeal proceedings shall be
conducted as outlined in subsections (B) through (I) above. Action taken by the
shall be by concurrence of a majority of the members of the Board of
Adjustments.
(Ord. 2015-04, passed 5-11-2015; Am. Ord. 2017-03, passed 11-13-2017)
§ 153.006 APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Unlawful. No person shall subdivide a parcel of land without previous
approval of the Colorado City Town Council as set forth under these
regulations, and by A.R.S. §§ 9-463.01 and 9-463.02.
   (B)   Subdivision defined. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      SUBDIVISION.
         (a)   Improved or unimproved land or lands divided for the purpose of:
            1.   Financing, sale or lease, whether immediate or future, into 4
or more lots, tracts or parcels of land; or
            2.   If a new street is involved, any such property which is
divided into 2 or more lots, tracts or parcels of land, or any such property,
the boundaries of which have been fixed by a recorded plat, which is divided
into more than 2 parts.
         (b)   Subdivision also includes any condominium, cooperative,
community apartment, townhouse or similar project containing 4 or more parcels,
in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of
exclusive occupancy of any unit located thereon, except that plats of the
projects need not show the buildings or the manner in which the buildings or
air space above the property shown on the plat are to be divided. Subdivision
does not include the following:
            1.   The sale or exchange of parcels of land to or between
adjoining property owners if the sale or exchange does not create additional
lots;
            2.   The partitioning of land in accordance with other statutes
regulating the partitioning of land held in common ownership;
            3.   The leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space
within a building or manufactured home park, nor to mineral, oil or gas leases,
except residential condominiums as referenced in division (b) above;
            4.   Land splits and lot line adjustments as defined by this
chapter, which are subject to a separate review process;
            5.   The public acquisition of land for streets, highways and
rights-of-way;
            6.   Thirty-six acre or larger parcel divisions; or
            7.   Subdivision into or development of parcels, plots or
fractional portions for the purpose of creating burial plots within the
boundaries of a cemetery.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.007 EXCEPTION FROM STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES.
   (A)   Any plat or land division survey submitted with a deviation(s) from
these regulations or deviation(s) from required improvements shall be
accompanied by an application for variance from these regulations or associated
design or improvement standards made on a form provided by the town for this
purpose.
   (B)   Any person seeking variances to the requirements of these regulations
shall file 2 copies of the application with the Town Clerk in concert with the
sketch plan application.
   (C)   The application shall be a request for a variance to an ordinance
provision in response to a circumstance actually delineated on the sketch plan.
Requests shall include the specific reason for each and every variance
requested.
   (D)   The application for variance shown on the sketch plan shall follow the
appeal and variance process outlined in §
153.005 above.
   (E)   The Hearing Officer may recommend that the Planning Commission and
Town Council authorize exceptions to any of the requirements in these
regulations. In order to do so, it shall be necessary for the Hearing Officer
to find the following facts with respect thereto:
      (1)   There are extraordinary circumstances or conditions affecting the
property or the purpose of these regulations may he served to a greater extent
by an alternative proposal;
      (2)   That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the
public safety, health and welfare or injurious to other property in the area in
which the subject property is situated;
      (3)   The conditions upon which the request for an exception is based are
unique to the property for which the exception is sought and are not applicable
generally to other property; and
      (4)   That it will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and
purpose of the town’s general plan, transportation plan, Zoning Ordinance or
these regulations.
   (F)   The Planning Commission shall forward a recommendation to the Town
Council regarding approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the variance
to any portion of these regulations.
   (G)   Upon receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendation, the Town
Council may approve or deny the variance. The Council may approve the
preliminary subdivision plat and associated plans with the exceptions and
conditions deemed necessary to substantially uphold the objectives of these
regulations.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014; Am. Ord.
2017-03, passed 11-13-2017)
§ 153.008 PROCESSING FEE REQUIRED.
   The submission of a sketch plan, preliminary plat, final plat, revised or
amended plat, application for reversion to acreage plat of abandonment, or
other submission governed herein, shall be accompanied by a filing fee
according to the fee schedule approved by the Town Council by resolution. The
filing fee shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Department
simultaneously with submittal of a completed application.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.009 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Any use or development of property contrary to the provisions of
the subdivision regulations shall be unlawful, against the public safety and
welfare, and a public nuisance, and the town may immediately commence all
necessary actions or proceedings for the abatement, enjoinment and removal
thereof in the manner provided by law, and may take other lawful steps and may
apply to the court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as
will abate, enjoin and restrain any person, firm, partnership, or corporation
from setting up, developing, erecting, building, moving or maintaining any such
building or using or selling any property contrary to the provisions of these
subdivision regulations, or otherwise violating these subdivision regulations.
      (2)   It is the responsibility of the subdivider to comply with these
regulations. At any time in the processing of the subdivision plat or
construction of improvements associated with the approved subdivision plat or
construction drawings that non-compliance with these regulations or approved
subdivision plat is determined, notification of same shall be transmitted to
the subdivider. If compliance is re-established, processing of the plat or
construction of associated improvements may proceed from the date of compliance
as authorized by the Planning and Zoning Director.
   (B)   Violations and penalties. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation
or other legal entity who violates any provision of these regulations shall be
guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
by fine and/or imprisonment as denoted in §
153.999. The imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the offender from
compliance with the requirements of these regulations and provisions of the
ordinance.
   (C)   Remedies. All remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not
exclusive. The conviction and punishment of any person hereunder shall not
relieve that person from the responsibility to comply with the requirements of
these regulations, or to correct or remove prohibited conditions. In addition
to the other remedies provided in this section, any adjacent or neighboring
property owner who shall be specially damaged by the violations of any
provisions of these subdivision regulations may institute, in addition to the
other remedies provided by law, injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, abate, correct or remove the
unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, maintenance or
use.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.010 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare and shall be
interpreted in light of what will promote public health, safety and general
welfare.
   (B)   Saving provision. These regulations shall not be construed as abating
any action now pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision
regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty
accruing or about to accrue or as affecting the liability of any person, firm,
partnership, or corporation, or as waiving any right of the town under any
section or provision existing at the time of adoption of these regulations, or
as vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any person, firm, partnership,
or corporation, by lawful action of the town, except as shall be expressly
provided for in these regulations.
   (C)   Amendments. For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety and
general welfare, the Town Council may from time to time amend the provisions
imposed by these subdivision regulations in the manner prescribed by law.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.011 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The provisions of these regulations shall be effective upon final approval
and adoption by the Colorado City Town Council, as provided in the Arizona
Revised Statutes, as amended.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
SKETCH PLAN REQUIREMENTS
§ 153.020 GENERAL.
   Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any contract is made
for the sale of any part thereof, and before any permit for the erection of a
structure in the proposed subdivision is granted, the subdividing owner
(subdivider), or his or her authorized agent, shall apply for and secure
approval of the proposed subdivision in accordance with the procedures outlined
herein.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.021 SKETCH PLAN.
   (A)   General. All subdivision plans shall observe the requirements of the
sketch plan review process. The purpose of the sketch plan is to provide a
conceptual level of information that will help to establish a preliminary
determination regarding the feasibility of the proposed development, compliance
with the intent of the general plan, and the capacity of the land to support
the development.
   (B)   Pre-submittal conference. Prior to the submittal of a sketch plan, the
subdivider shall schedule a pre-submittal conference with the Director and/or
Planning and Zoning Department staff to present the subdivision concept and
give an overview of the development including the number and size range of
lots, zoning, land use, public streets and utilities, any significant
exceptions that will be requested, and other information the subdivider deems
important for the town to know.
   (C)   Sketch plan submittal. Following the pre-submittal conference, and
based on input received from Town staff, the subdivider shall submit a sketch
plan of the proposed development to the Planning and Zoning Department. The
sketch plan shall be circulated to and reviewed by the town staff and related
reviewing agencies to highlight development opportunities or apparent
constraints prior to accepting a preliminary subdivision plat submittal.
Additional items may be required.
   (D)   Sketch plan contents. The following items shall be provided by the
subdivider as part of the sketch plan submittal:
      (1)   Vicinity map;
      (2)   Name of development and title "sketch plan;"
      (3)   Location by Section, Township and Range (GandSRM);
      (4)   Legal description. Dimensions are to be shown by either a metes and
bounds description or description by aliquot part or by reference to a tract or
parcel shown on a previously recorded subdivision or record of survey plat.
There must be a tie (by scale or legal description) to at least 2 aliquot
government section corners (section, quarter-section and the like) or by
reference to a tract or parcel shown on a previously recorded subdivisions or
record of survey plat;
      (5)   Boundaries of proposed development clearly identified;
      (6)   North arrow;
      (7)   Scales (both graphic and equivalent inch to feet) using standard
engineering intervals. The map scale shall not to exceed 1 inch = 100 feet;
      (8)   Date of preparation plus date of any amendments since original
submittal;
      (9)   Contact information. Names, addresses, phone numbers and notation
of relationship to development for landowners, subdivider/development agents,
engineers, surveyors, land planners, landscape architects, architects,
hydrologists or others responsible for platting and design (include respective
Arizona registration numbers);
      (10)   Zoning. Existing and proposed zoning;
      (11)   Topography by contours (maximum 2-foot interval for areas with
less than a 10% slope (a rise of 10 feet over a 100-foot run), and a maximum of
5-foot interval for areas with 10% or greater slopes, unless otherwise approved
by the Planning and Zoning Director) relating to North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD 1988) survey datum and/or town benchmark (shown on the same map as
proposed development). Include the description and elevation of the bench mark
used. Features information must be sufficient in detail to allow for an
acceptable review as determined by the Planning and Zoning Department.
Topography shall be depicted a minimum of 100 feet beyond project boundary. The
site plan shall identify all slopes of 20% or greater. A slope analysis diagram
will be required for any subdivision with slopes exceeding 10% grade;
      (12)   Existing and proposed land uses by area as well as ownership, land
uses and zoning for all tracts within 300 feet;
      (13)   Tentative lot and tract layout;
      (14)   Proposed circulation plan. The subdivider shall submit a proposed
vehicular, bicycle, pedestrian and equestrian circulation plan. The circulation
plan shall include:
         (a)   In narrative form, identify general traffic impacts to adjacent
property and existing streets and non-motorized vehicle facilities, as well as
specific high traffic generation points and uses on site;
         (b)   Show all existing and proposed streets (public or private) and
their classification (arterial, collector, local street, other) within the
project and within 1/2 mile of the project boundaries. Show all proposed
connections to the public transportation system. The scale of the
transportation system map shall not exceed 1 inch = 500 feet. The map shall
also demonstrate legal primary and secondary access routes, as well as existing
or proposed street right-of-way widths; and
         (c)   Existing or proposed sidewalks, bike lanes, multiuse pathways,
and other pedestrian, bicycle and equestrian facilities and trail networks and
open space features affected by or intended to be implemented as part of future
subdivision design.
      (15)   Drainage concept plan. Illustrate and discuss in narrative form
the proposed methods of handling storm drainage and floodplains that affect the
property. Include retention basins required to handle the 100-year storm
without flooding developed lots and properties, per Chapter 151 of this Code or
any successor ordinance;
      (16)   Land use table. Identify in chart, table or note form on the
sketch plan map the following:
         (a)   Total acreage, acreage for each use and each phase;
         (b)   Number of units/lots for each type of use by phase;
         (c)   Average area and range of areas per lot/unit proposed;
         (d)   Percent open space, exclusive of streets, building envelopes and
parking areas;
         (e)   Water source (if new source, indicate potential well field and
storage tank on sketch plan);
         (f)   Sewer service provider and type, if available, and if not
available, describe how sanitary sewer waste disposal is to be handled;
         (g)   Proposed utility providers; and
         (h)   Identify unique site conditions including rock outcroppings,
major drainage features and the like. These items may necessitate submittal of
a slope analysis diagram and other additional information as required;
         (i)   Identify any unbuildable tracts and the proposed disposition of
those tracts.
      (17)   Preliminary title report. Submit 2 copies of a preliminary title
report or a policy of title insurance issued by a title insurance company
within the preceding 30 working days to the owner of the land, covering the
entire land within the sketch plan or subdivision area and showing all record
owners, liens and encumbrances. The preliminary title report shall contain the
status of legal access to the proposed subdivision and identify any parcels
which do not have legal access.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.022 EVALUATION OF SKETCH PLAN.
   (A)   A complete submittal shall include a digital copy of the sketch plan,
in a format determined by the Planning Zoning Director. If any reviewing
agencies or departments request a printed copy the applicant shall provide a
blueline or blackline copy scaled to fit on a 24-inch by 36- inch sheet. Within
20 working days from deposit of the complete sketch plan and accompanying
material, the sketch plan shall be evaluated and discussed in a meeting that
may include the subdivider, reviewing agency representatives, planning and
zoning staff and representatives from other Town Departments.
   (B)   The Planning and Zoning Director shall route the sketch plan and
supporting documents to all reviewing Town Departments and agencies.
   (C)   No response from Town Departments or reviewing agencies within the
prescribed review period shall be construed as such department or agency not
having an objection to the continued processing of the sketch plan.
   (D)   Upon receipt of reviewing agency comments, the Planning and Zoning
Director or staff designee shall compile Town Department and agency comments
and respond to the applicant or the subdivider agents as the proposed project
relates to the following:
      (1)   Conformance to Town of Colorado City general or specific area plan
(s);
      (2)   Suitability of the site for development, existing and proposed land
use and zoning, and potential development opportunities and constraints;
      (3)   The improvements, design and dedications required by these
regulations; and
      (4)   Zoning requirements.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014; Am. Ord.
2021-06, passed - -)
§ 153.023 APPROVAL.
   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Director shall, in the response, determine
whether or not the sketch plan meets the purposes and intents of these
regulations and related town ordinances and shall, where the Director deems it
necessary, make specific recommendations to be incorporated by the subdivider
into a preliminary plat submittal.
   (B)   Approval of a sketch plan is approval of the proposal in concept only,
and is not final subdivision plat or improvement plan and project approval.
Further revisions to the plan may be required throughout the process of plat
review. Approval is valid for a period of 12 months after sketch plan approval.
If a preliminary plat has not been submitted within this approval period, a new
pre-submittal conference shall be held to determine if an updated sketch plan
needs to be submitted.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.024 DENIAL.
   If the Planning and Zoning Director determines that the sketch plan is not
consistent with the town's general or specific area plan(s), these regulations
or zoning requirements, the Director may deny the sketch plan application or
request modifications to be incorporated into a revised sketch plan prior to
authorizing a preliminary plat submittal.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.025 APPEAL.
   If the subdivider objects to a decision by the Director to deny a sketch
plan or to recommend a modification to same, the Director’s decision may be
appealed to the Hearing Officer following the appeal and variance procedure
outlined in § 153.005 above.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014; Am. Ord.
2017-03, passed 11-13-2017)
PRELIMINARY PLAT
§ 153.035 GENERAL.
   (A)   After the pre-submittal conference and general approval of the sketch
plan, the subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat of the proposed
subdivision, prepared by a licensed professional surveyor; and other exhibits
as hereinafter specified. The subdivider shall submit to the Planning and
Zoning Department a digital copy of the preliminary plat, in a format
determined by the Planning and Zoning Director. If any reviewing agencies or
departments request a printed copy the applicant shall provide a blueline or
blackline copy scaled to fit on a 24-inch by 36-inch sheet.
   (B)   Processing will not officially commence until all required documents
and fees are received. If the subdivider fails to submit a preliminary plat for
review within 1 year of any approved sketch plan, or at the end of an extension
approved by the Planning and Zoning Director, a new pre-submittal conference
shall be held to determine if an updated sketch plan needs to be submitted.
   (C)   If during processing, deviations from the requirements of these
regulations are noted, the subdivider or their representative shall be notified
of the appropriate action necessary on his or her part for the continuation of
the processing (see § 153.006).
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014; Am. Ord.
2021-06, passed - -)
§ 153.036 PRELIMINARY PLAT CONTENTS.
   (A)   The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn to an accurate
scale not to exceed 100 feet to the inch.
   (B)   Sheet size shall be 22 inches by 34 inches.
   (C)   The plat shall include the following:
      (1)   Title/locators. Each sheet shall have a title block with the title
"preliminary plat"; the proposed name of the subdivision; its location by
section, township and range; small scale vicinity map showing relative location
of the plat; scale (both graphic and equivalent inch to feet); north point;
reference by dimension and bearing to section corners and quarter-section
corners; and subdivision boundaries clearly identified;
      (2)   Contact information. Name, address and phone number of landowner
(and subdivider, if not the same); engineer, surveyor preparing the plat,
including registration stamp;
      (3)   Dates. Date of preparation, including dates of any subsequent
revisions;
      (4)   Topography. Topography with contours relating to North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD 1988), or other datum approved in writing by the Town
Engineer, to be shown on the same map as the proposed subdivision layout.
Location, description and elevation of the bench mark used should also be shown
and/or described on the plat with a maximum contour interval of 2 feet unless
another contour interval is approved by the Planning and Zoning Director.
Source and date of topography shall be noted on the preliminary plat.
Topography shall be depicted a minimum of 100 feet beyond project boundary. The
plat shall identify all slopes of 20% or greater (a rise of 20 feet over a 100-
foot run). A slope analysis diagram will be required for any subdivision with
slopes exceeding 10% grade;
      (5)   Drainage related items. Special flood hazard areas including
floodways and 100-year floodplain areas, if any, shall be delineated on the
preliminary plat. Finished floor elevations for building pads shall be
identified within flood hazard areas. Include retention basins required to
handle the flow from a 100-year storm without flooding building sites. Show
culverts, flood control dikes, bridges and crossings. Arrows should indicate
general flow in all water courses;
      (6)   Adjacent improvements. Location, widths (paving and right-of-way),
ownership status and names of all existing streets and improvements therein;
highways; recorded utility or other easements or rights-of-way, including any
existing facilities therein; public areas; all existing structures, fences and
utilities with an indication of whether or not they are to remain; and
municipal corporation lines within or adjacent to the tract. Access to the
proposed subdivision shall be shown and described to its intersection with an
existing public street right-of-way;
      (7)   Adjacent properties. Name and Mohave County Recorder's Office book
and page numbers of any recorded subdivisions within or having a common
boundary with the tract, or the notation "unsubdivided" and the property
owner's name and address;
      (8)   Traffic connections. Location, width and names of existing and
proposed streets and alleys; location and dimensions of pedestrian/equestrian
trails, drainageways, sidewalks, cross-walks and easements including all
connections to adjoining platted or unplatted tracts. A typical cross-section
shall be depicted on the plat where applicable describing the aforementioned
improvements;
      (9)   Lot layout. Identify lot dimensions; dimensions of all corner lots
and lots on curvilinear sections of street; number all lots and blocks by
consecutive numbers; show acreage of each lot and total acres of the entire
subdivision;
      (10)   Public reservations. Designation of all land to be dedicated or
reserved for public or semi-public use, as may be required pursuant to A.R.S. §
9-463.01(D) through (F), with reservation by use indicated;
      (11)   Utilities. Reference by note to source of proposed electricity,
gas, telephone service, solid waste disposal (including method of collection
and recycling options), police and emergency service agencies, and water and
sewer services as outlined in §
153.038 and §
153.039; and
      (12)   Land uses/zoning. Existing and proposed land uses for all areas of
the entire subdivision shall be clearly designated together with existing
zoning classification, present district boundary lines and status of any
pending zoning change. Include a re-zone application as applicable. A statement
regarding availability of utilities and the direction and distance thereto and
preliminary letters of serviceability shall be submitted in conjunction with
the application.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.037 TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS.
   (A)   A traffic impact study shall be performed in accordance with the
latest version of Traffic Impact analyses section in the traffic studies
chapter of the ADOT Traffic Engineering Policies, Guidelines, and Procedures
(PGP) manual. The Planning and Zoning Director may waive the requirement to
complete and submit a traffic impact analysis on a case-by-case basis.
   (B)   The traffic impact analysis shall be funded by the subdivider and upon
submittal to the Planning and Zoning Department shall be transmitted to and
reviewed by the Town Engineer. Copies shall be made available to other
governmental agencies which may be affected by increased traffic.
   (C)   Generally, the following criteria are considered when determining if a
traffic impact analysis is warranted:
      (1)   Significant changes in land uses are proposed or higher density
zoning is sought;
      (2)   Access to a collector or arterial street is requested or the
existing location of access to the property is changed;
      (3)   The proposed increased activity or intensity of development will
significantly impact vehicular or pedestrian traffic on town streets;
      (4)   A total of 50 or more vehicular trips during an a.m. or p.m. peak
hour is expected to be generated by the proposed development; and
      (5)   Whether proposed streets are designed for on-street parking or if
parking is provided on individual sites/lots or in common parking areas.
   (D)   The subdivider shall be required to provide financial assurances or
complete the installation of any improvements, including pedestrian trails,
determined necessary to maintain or improve traffic circulation, operations and
traffic safety in direct proportion to the impact caused by the proposed
development (see §§ 153.080 through 153.087 below).
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.038 WATER SUPPLY.
   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to furnish the town such
evidence as the town may require for its satisfaction as to the facilities for
supplying domestic water. A statement as to the type of facilities proposed
shall appear on the preliminary plat. A statement of water adequacy is required
from the Arizona Department of Water Resources either for the proposed
subdivision or for the water company (private or public) which will serve the
subdivision pursuant to A.R.S. § 45-108.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.039 SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to furnish the Town
Water and Sewer Department such evidence as that department may require for its
satisfaction as to the design and connection to the town sanitary sewage
system.
   (B)   Sewage disposal systems will not be by individual lot septic tanks,
except as provided for in Town Code
Chapter 156, Development Standards.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014; Am. Ord.
2017-03, passed 11-13-2017)
§ 153.040 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND ACCOMPANYING STATEMENTS.
   (A)   Engineering plans. Engineering plans in support of the preliminary
plat shall be prepared under the direction of, and signed and sealed by, a
professional engineer registered in the State of Arizona.
   (B)   Supplemental submittals. Supplemental submittals at this stage, such
as grading, drainage or street plans, should be preliminary plans, not final
design construction plans. They are the type of plans that clearly show the
intent of the design and are needed to evaluate the viability of the
preliminary plat and to allow the reviewing agencies to make reasonable
decisions. The plans may generally be prepared using scaled distances and
elevations taken from the topographic map used for the preliminary plat. All
supplemental submittals must be consistent with each other and the preliminary
plat.
   (C)   Submission. The following material shall accompany the submission of
all preliminary plats (if this data is not included on the preliminary plat,
then digital copies are required).
   (D)   Covenants. A preliminary draft of the proposed deed restrictions or
protective covenants to be incorporated in the final plat submittal, including
provisions for use and maintenance of commonly-owned facilities, if any, shall
accompany the submission of the preliminary plat.
   (E)   Street names. Submit a list of the proposed street names. Street names
and numbers shall conform to the town's master street address guide.
   (F)   Preliminary grading plan. A preliminary grading plan shall be required
when cuts or fills are reasonably expected to exceed 5 feet in height in areas
or will extend outside of the normal street right-of-way. The preliminary
grading plan shall be in sufficient detail to convey the extent of grading
activities such that their impact can be evaluated by the reviewing agencies.
The scale of the preliminary grading plan shall be smaller than 1"=100'. The
plan shall include existing and finished grade contours and limits of cut and
fill areas. Driveway and building locations shall be shown when topographic or
other constraints are reasonably expected to require specific locations or
special site grading. A geotechnical report certified by a registered
professional engineer in the State of Arizona shall accompany the grading plan
to support the slope stability facets of the grading plan, and to make
recommendations regarding the grading of streets and lots, the compaction of
embankment areas and fill sections, and the design recommendations for
pavements and foundations.
   (G)   Preliminary street plans. Grades shall be given to the nearest whole
percent grade. Street plan and profile sheets shall be prepared at a scale
sufficient to allow evaluation of the proposed streets, but in no case shall
the scale be smaller than 1"=50'. Proposed drainage structures within the
street right-of-way shall be shown on the preliminary street plans. The
preliminary grading plan may be shown on the preliminary street plans if all of
the grading will be related directly to the street construction. The reviewing
agency's interests in these plans are:
      (1)   Height, stability and slope of cut and fills;
      (2)   Affected drainage patterns;
      (3)   Potential roadway geometric layout;
      (4)   Impacts of the streets on adjacent lots and properties;
      (5)   Access to the subdivision and needed off-site street improvements;
      (6)   Drainage facility concepts for cross-street drainage and for on-
street drainage; and
      (7)   Other items that may be specific to the streets for the proposed
subdivision.
   (H)   Preliminary utility plan.
      (1)   A preliminary utility plan shall be prepared to illustrate the
proposed location of utilities and verify that the necessary easements and
rights-of-way are proposed on the preliminary plat.
      (2)   For sewers, this will include location and size of proposed lines;
and location and depths of existing manholes and cleanouts. For water
installations, this should include location and size of proposed water lines,
fire hydrants, valves, meter vaults and the like. The location and size of the
existing water lines to be connected to, and nearby off-site fire hydrant and
water valve locations, shall also be shown.
      (3)   Detailed and specific construction improvement plans are to be
submitted at the final plat stage. It is recognized that final utility
locations are decided by the individual utility companies, but the objective of
the preliminary utility plan shall be to encourage cooperation by the various
utilities with the subdivider and the town in the planning and design of
utilities to serve the proposed subdivision.
      (4)   A statement regarding availability and adequacy of existing
utilities and the direction and distance thereto, shall be shown on the
preliminary utility plan and preliminary letters of serviceability from the
respective utility companies shall be submitted.
   (I)   Preliminary drainage report. A preliminary drainage report, covering
the details of surface stormwater runoff and of flood conditions and the
specific effects of floods on the area being subdivided, shall be submitted
with identified impacts from upstream flows on the project and impacts on
downstream properties. The drainage report shall identify the location and
preliminary sizes for retention basins required to handle the 100-year storm
without flooding building sites, per Town Code
Chapter 151, or any successor ordinance.
   (J)   Exceptions. Describe any exceptions from ordinance standards being
requested in response to special circumstances which may be posed by the site
and submit an application for exception from these regulations or associated
design or improvement standards on a form provided by the town for this purpose
(see §
153.005).
   (K)   Assurances. The anticipated type or form of assurance that will be
made for completion of improvements in a subdivision in accordance with A.R.S.
§ 9-463.01 and §§
153.080 through
153.087.
   (L)   Phasing. A development phasing plan and schedule with completion dates
shall be submitted for any multi-phase subdivision.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014; Am. Ord.
2021-06, passed - -)
§ 153.041 DISTRIBUTION FOR EVALUATION.
   (A)   Agency review. When the preliminary subdivision plat and accompanying
materials are received by the Planning and Zoning Director, copies of the
subdivision plat and accompanying materials will be transmitted, as may be
required, to the following agencies as deemed appropriate by the Planning and
Zoning Director: Town Engineer; County Environmental Health Services (if
needed); Arizona Department of Transportation if it the subdivision contains or
abuts a state or federal highway; utility providers; state or federal land
management agency if adjacent to public lands; Fire Marshal or affected fire
district, irrigation district, schools and other interested or affected
agencies.
   (B)   Response time line. Reviewing agencies shall have 25 working days,
from the date received from the Planning and Zoning Department, to complete
their comments pertaining to the proposed subdivision. Agencies shall submit
their comments to the Planning and Zoning Director. No reply by an agency
within the time limit specified shall be deemed as having received no
objections from that
agency to approval of the preliminary plat. When all replies have been
received, or the specified date of reply reached, the Planning and Zoning
Department staff shall prepare a report on the proposed subdivision, including
comments from all town departments and other agencies, and forward a copy to
the subdivider and the subdivider's land surveyor and civil engineer of record.
   (C)   Follow up. Following receipt of reviewing agency comments, the
Planning and Zoning Department staff may coordinate a meeting between the
subdivider and/or his or her agent; and the various responding agencies for the
purpose of clarifying comments and outstanding issues arising from the
subdivision plat review. The purpose of this coordination meeting is to promote
compliance with the intent of these regulations and attempt to reach consensus
on issues prior to presentation of the preliminary plat of subdivision to the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (D)   Public review. If the preliminary plat is in conformance with these
regulations, it shall be placed on the agenda for review at the next scheduled
Planning and Zoning Commission meeting. The subdivider or his or her
representatives shall be mailed a notification of the time and place set for
consideration of the preliminary subdivision plat at least 7 days prior to the
meeting.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.042 COMMISSION REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATIONS.
   (A)   The Commission shall, at the scheduled meeting or such further meeting
to which the matter may be continued, hear or consider all evidence presented
relating to the preliminary plat.
   (B)   If satisfied that all objectives of these regulations have been met,
the Commission shall recommend approval of the preliminary plat to the Town
Council.
   (C)   If the Commission is not satisfied that all objectives of these
regulations have been met, the Commission shall recommend denial of the
preliminary plat to the Town Council or the plat shall be held over or
continued pending revision, re-submittal, processing or for other reasons.
   (D)   A copy of the Planning and Zoning Department's report on the proposed
subdivision and the Director's formal recommendation shall be filed with the
Town Clerk and minutes setting out the action of the Commission shall be
transmitted to the Town Council, to the subdivider and/or owner and to
reviewing departments and agencies as may be deemed advisable by the
Commission.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.043 TOWN COUNCIL ACTION ON THE PRELIMINARY PLAT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Council options.
      (1)   On receipt of the report and recommendation by the Commission, the
Town Council may approve, conditionally approve or deny the preliminary plat.
      (2)   The action of the Council shall be taken at any regular or special
meeting at which the Council may desire to hear it, but not until after receipt
of the Planning and Zoning Department's report and Commission meeting minutes.
      (3)   In conformity with these regulations or other requirements, Town
Council may deny the plat specifying its reason or reasons therefore, and shall
advise the subdivider in writing of the denial and of the reasons for the
denial.
   (B)   Denial/re-submittal.
      (1)   If the preliminary plat is denied by the Town Council, the Planning
and Zoning Director shall forward in writing, a statement to the subdivider,
the reason or reasons the plat was denied.
      (2)   After a 6-month period, a new filing of a subdivision application
for the same parcel(s), or any part thereof, may be made and the new filing
shall follow the aforementioned procedures and shall be subject to payment of
the required fees.
   (C)   Basis for approval. Preliminary plat approval is conditional upon the
following terms:
      (1)   The basic conditions under which the preliminary plat is granted
will not be changed prior to the expiration date of the approval;
      (2)   Approval is valid for a period of 12 months from date of Council
action; and
      (3)   Preliminary approval may, upon written application to the Planning
and Zoning Director by the subdivider, and subsequent Commission and Council
approval, be extended for an additional period of 1 year if, in the opinion of
the Commission and Council, there has been no change in conditions within or
adjoining the preliminary plat that would warrant a revision in the design of
the original preliminary plat. If any additional improvements are required at
this time by the Council, they shall be so specified.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
FINAL PLAT
§ 153.055 REVIEW PROCESS.
   (A)   The final plat stage includes submittal, review and approval of the
final plat and required supporting documents by the Town Council, and recording
of the plat with the County Recorder.
   (B)   The final plat shall be prepared by a licensed professional surveyor.
Evaluation of the final plat shall include the following steps:
      (1)   Review of final plat. Unlike the preliminary plat, the final plat
is not reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission unless substantial
changes have been proposed since the Council approval of the preliminary plat,
as determined by the Planning and Zoning Director;
      (2)   Council review of final plat and other materials. The Town Council
shall not approve the final plat of subdivision until they are satisfied that
all requirements of final plat approval have been satisfactorily addressed as
advised by the Planning and Zoning Director. The review of the final plat by
the Town Council also includes the approval of the associated subdivision
construction plans and assurances for the required site improvements; and
      (3)   Recordation. The final plat must be recorded with the Mohave County
Recorder before lots can be sold and transferred. The Planning and Zoning
Director will not record the plat until all requirements of final plat approval
have been addressed including payment of the recording fees to the Town by the
Subdivider as provided for herein.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.056 FINAL PLAT SUBMITTAL.
   (A)   Following approval of the preliminary plat, a final plat shall be
prepared in accordance with the time limit established under §§
153.035 through
153.043 above and in accordance with the following:
      (1)   The preliminary subdivision plat, as approved, with only minor
authorized changes allowed and with any stipulations attached thereto;
      (2)   These regulations; and
      (3)   Any applicable town ordinance or regulation and state or federal
laws.
   (B)   For any approved preliminary subdivision plat, the final plat may be
submitted in phases with each phase processed and recorded as a separate final
plat. However, the initial final plat shall include the entire area of the
preliminary plat with the respective future final plat phases identified as
future development phases.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.057 SUBMITTAL SPECIFICATIONS FOR FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   Submittal. A complete submittal shall include a digital copy of the
final plat, in a format determined by the Planning Zoning Director. If any
reviewing agencies or departments request a printed copy the applicant shall
provide a blueline or blackline copy scaled to fit on a 24-inch by 36- inch
sheet and accompanying documents to the Town of Colorado City Planning and
Zoning Department. The final plat of subdivision shall also be submitted
digitally in an electronic file format containing the documents in a format
acceptable to Colorado City (i.e. AutoCAD, dwg or dxf format as well as pdf
format). The submittal will not be scheduled to be considered by the Town
Council unless it contains all of the required information and is found to be
in compliance with all applicable requirements.
   (B)   Index. When a final plat consists of 3 or more sheets, a key map
showing the relation of the sheets shall be placed on each sheet.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014; Am. Ord.
2021-06, passed - -)
§ 153.058 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND ACCOMPANYING STATEMENTS.
   (A)   Material. At the time of submitting the final plat with the planning
staff, the subdivider shall also file therewith the following accompanying
material.
   (B)   Title report. An updated title report or a policy of title insurance
issued by a title insurance company within the preceding 30 working days to the
owner of the land, covering the entire area of land included within the
subdivision and showing all record owners, liens and encumbrances. The title
report shall contain the status of legal access to the proposed subdivision and
identify any parcels which do not have legal access.
   (C)   Deed restrictions. Any covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC and
R’s) to be recorded shall be submitted with the final plat. The town is not
responsible for enforcement of deed restrictions. Submittal of the proposed
covenants, conditions and restrictions is required in order to address land use
issues which may arise in the review of the subdivision proposal.
   (D)   Construction plans. The construction plans of all improvements,
including a Storm Water Management Plan (both on-site and off-site), shall be
submitted with the final plat. Plans shall have a minimum scale of 1 inch=50
feet on a sheet size of 22 inches by 34 inches. Separate detail sheets shall be
provided at the discretion of the engineer of record or as required by the Town
Engineer, to show standard and special construction details. All details and
sections shall be fully depicted and dimensioned to allow for construction of
the proposed improvements in accordance with the intent of the approved design.
   (E)   Construction cost estimates. The Engineer’s cost estimate for
constructing all the required improvements, signed and sealed by a professional
engineer who is registered to practice in the State of Arizona, must be
provided with the final plat if a bond or letter of credit form of assurance is
being proposed.
      (1)   The method and type of assurance, including the cost estimate (if
applicable), shall be approved by the Town Engineer and Town Attorney prior to
Town Council approval of the final plat.
      (2)   The actual assurance must be executed and presented to the town
before the subdivision plat is approved by Town Council and recorded. (See §§
153.080 through
153.087 regarding cost estimates and assurances).
   (F)   Fee. The fee(s) for processing and review of the final subdivision
plat and supporting documents, as adopted by Council resolution, shall be
submitted with the plat and plans to initiate the review process.
   (G)   Private street maintenance. If private streets are proposed in the
development, then provisions for perpetual street maintenance shall be provided
for in a manner acceptable to the Colorado City Town Council and shall be
submitted with the final subdivision plat.
   (H)   Final drainage report.
      (1)   A final drainage report shall be submitted in conjunction with
final plat and improvement construction plans. The final plat grading plan and
drainage report will show, with drawn directional arrows, how each individual
lot, within the area covered by the final plat, will drain to an approved point
or points of discharge. In general, drainage from individual lots should
discharge to the street, or approved discharge point otherwise shown, or be
retained on the lot. If an approved discharge point is across another lot, then
a drainage easement shall be shown on the final plat map.
      (2)   The purpose of the final drainage report is to update and finalize
the drainage concepts, provide all information not previously provided, and to
present the specific design details for the drainage facilities.
   (I)   Arizona Department of Real Estate. The subdivider’s draft public
report shall be submitted to the town and the Arizona Department of Real
Estate. The report may not be required for nonresidential subdivisions as
determined by the Planning and Zoning Director in consultation with the Arizona
Department of Real Estate.
   (J)   Arizona Department of Environmental Quality. An ADEQ certificate of
approval of sanitary facilities are required. ADEQ approvals are required for
construction of drinking water facilities (approval to construct certificate).
Other ADEQ approvals and permits may be necessary.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014; Am. Ord.
2021-06, passed - -)
§ 153.059 FORM OF FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   Presentation. Presentation of the plat shall be neat, clear, legible
and complete in all respects and shall be sufficiently detailed convey all
required information.
   (B)   Standards for original transparency, graphics and signatures. In
addition to all other submittals required by this chapter, the final plat shall
be submitted on 3 transparent reproducible polyester film originals (1 each for
the town, subdivider and County Recorder); and shall be on a sheet or sheets
measuring 24 by 36 inches, with a left margin of 2 inches and remaining margins
of 1/2 inch, and include a block for recorder's information. The plat shall be
drawn to an accurate scale not to exceed 100 feet to the inch (1 inch = 100
feet).The final plat shall include dedications, affidavits, certificates and
acknowledgments with a minimum font size of 11 points. Any highlighted areas
(e.g. abandonments) shall be cross-hatched, rather than blocked-out. All
stamped or written matter, including signatures, shall be made with opaque ink
so that legible blue line prints may be obtained therefrom. Red ink is not
permitted. All final plats shall be drawn to reasonable accuracy standards,
consistent with acceptable professional standards.
   (C)   Sheet details. Every sheet comprising the plat shall bear the title
(but not subtitle on subsequent sheets), scale (both graphic and equivalent
inch to feet), north point, legend, date of plat preparation, sheet number, and
the total number of sheets comprising the final plat. Its relation to each
adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. The basis of bearings shall also be
noted in the legend.
   (D)   Title specifics and locator map. The title of each plat shall consist
of the subdivision name placed at the top of each sheet. Below the title on the
first sheet shall appear a subtitle consisting of a general description of all
the property being subdivided by reference to governmental subdivisions or
portions thereof; by section(s), townships and range; or by reference to
subdivision plat previously recorded in the office of the Recorder of Mohave
County. In addition, a small scale location or vicinity map, showing the
relative location of the subdivision with respect to township, range, section
and any access streets, shall be shown on the face sheet.
   (E)   Basis for legal description. Location and description of section and/
or quarter corner, either found or set, and ties to such corners, all
dimensions, angles, bearings, basis of bearings and similar data on the plat
shall be referred to, indicated and referenced on the plat sheets. Boundaries
of the tract to be subdivided shall be fully balanced and closed, showing all
bearings and distances determined by an accurate survey in the field. Corners
of the subdivision shall be noted, and monuments found or set shall be
indicated and described; 2 corners of the subdivision traverse shall be tied by
course and distance to separate section corners or quarter section corners or
other survey monuments acceptable to the Town Engineer.
   (F)   Boundaries and bearings. Tract boundary lines, lot and parcel lines,
easement lines, street centerlines and section lines, all showing accurate
bearings and dimensions with dimensions expressed (rounded) in feet and
decimals thereof to the hundredth, shall be shown on the final plat.
   (G)   Area totals. The final plat will include the total area of the
subdivision, and the area of each lot to the nearest hundredth of an acre if
greater than 1 acre or the area in square feet if less than 1 acre.
   (H)   Measurements. Width of street rights-of-way, width of easements and
indication of their purpose, angles, curve radius, tangent and length of all
curves shall be shown on the final plat.
   (I)   Locations of monuments and identification of benchmark elevations. The
final plat shall show the location and description of existing, found, or set
monuments, such as section corners and subdivision boundary corners, lot
corners, elevation of bench marks for a condominium development, and rights-of-
way and easements, if any.
      (1)   The legend shall specify the type of monuments found and/or set.
      (2)   The final plat shall indicate if the lot corner monuments have been
or are to be set. If they are not set, a cost estimate to set all monuments and
assurance must be provided.
   (J)   Contiguous subdivisions, easements and rights-of-way. Where there are
contiguous developments, show name of the subdivision with reference of
recording information, street right-of-way lines, street names, street width,
easements clearly dimensioned, labeled and identified, if any, and note if the
parcel is unsubdivided. Easements shall be clearly dimensioned, labeled and
identified, and, if already of record, properly referenced to the recording
information. If any easement is not definitively located of record, a statement
of the non-recorded easement shall appear on the title sheet.
   (K)   Subdivision boundary. The boundary of the subdivision shall be
indicated by a heavy line, recognizable as a border clearly showing the
boundary of the subdivision, and all of the property being offered for
dedication for public use and/or as easements. This bold boundary line shall
not interfere with the legibility of figures or other data.
   (L)   Excepted parcels. Any excepted parcel(s) within the plat boundary
shall be accurately depicted by bearings and distances on the plat. Excepted
parcels are properties which have been excluded from the subdivision plat.
   (M)   Lot layout. Each lot shall be numbered as per the approved preliminary
plat and each block may be numbered or lettered. Each street shall be named.
All lots not intended for sale or resale for private purposes, and all parcels
offered for dedication for any purpose, public or private, and any private
streets permitted shall be so designated. Label and identify all lots, parcels,
tracts, excepted parcels and the like, for ease of identification, description
and to ensure no misunderstanding about intended use, ownership or maintenance.
   (N)   Floodplain and drainage easements. The limits of any 100-year
floodplain identified using the standards set forth by the Director of the
Arizona Department of Water Resources Requirement for Floodplain Delineation in
Riverine Environments, shall be illustrated and dimensioned in the final plat.
      (1)   The lowest allowable finished floor elevation shall be shown on
each lot that is impacted by the floodplain. A note shall be placed on the plat
indicating that floodplain limits, base flood elevations and regulatory
elevations may be revised by subsequent studies performed or approved by the
local, state or federal authorities.
      (2)   Final plats shall show all drainage easements in conformance with
the approved preliminary plat along with the associated dedication language.
The actual dedication language should be related to the type of drainage
facility and method of maintenance.
   (O)   Engineer's information. The final plat shall contain the name and
registration number of the registered professional civil engineer that is
responsible for the engineering that is necessary in preparation of the
proposed subdivision improvement plans.
   (P)   Other data. The plat shall also any show and all other data required
by law.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.060 SIGNATURE BLOCKS.
   (A)   Certifications and signature blocks included. The final plat shall
include the following (or substantially corresponding) certifications and
signature blocks.
   (B)   Final plat ratification and dedication certificate. The subdivider
shall provide a certification or ratification statement signed and acknowledged
by all parties having any record title interest in the land subdivided
consenting to the preparation and recordation of the plat. Rights-of-way,
easements or other interests may be acknowledged by endorsements on the plat.
   (C)   Certificate of land surveyor. A certificate for execution by the land
surveyor of record shall be provided on the plat as follows:
      This is to certify that the boundary survey and dividing of the property
described and platted hereon was made under my direction and supervision and is
accurately represented on this plat. I also certify that the plat is in
substantial conformance to the approved preliminary plat and that this plat is
correct and accurate as shown.
      _______________________________         
___________________________________
      Registered Land Surveyor               Date, Registration Number, Seal
   (D)   Certificate of Town Engineer, Public Works Director and others. A
certificate shall be provided on the plat for signature by the Town Engineer,
Town Public Works Director, County Environmental Services Director (if needed)
and County Flood Control District Administrator (if needed) as follows:
      This plat has been checked for conformance to the approved preliminary
plat, and any special conditions attached thereto, to the requirements of the
Town of Colorado City Land Division Ordinance, and to any other applicable
regulations, and it appears to comply with all requirements within my
jurisdiction to check and evaluate.
      ________________________________      
___________________________________
      By (Title)                           Date
   (E)   Mayor's endorsement. An endorsement certificate shall be provided on
the plat for signature by the Town Mayor as follows:
      The Colorado City Town Council reviewed and approved this plat, subject
to stipulations on ________________, and accepted on behalf of the public all
parcels of land offered for dedication for public use in conformity with the
terms of the offer of dedication, and received satisfactory assurance necessary
to guarantee completion of all required improvements.
            __________________________________
            Colorado City Mayor
      Attest:    ________________________________                   SEAL
            Colorado City Town Clerk
   (F)   Town Attorney. A certificate shall be provided on the plat for
signature by the Town Attorney as follows:
      I hereby certify that my office has reviewed this subdivision plat and
approve it as to form.
      _________________________________                ___________________
      By (Town Attorney)                               Date
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.061 STAFF RESPONSE TO FINAL PLAT SUBMITTAL.
   (A)   Distribution and agency review. The staff shall refer prints of the
final plat and supporting documents to the Town Engineer, and other reviewing
or interested agencies, for their evaluations as to conformance of this plat to
the approved preliminary subdivision plat, Town of Colorado City subdivision
regulations and all other applicable town requirements. The head of each town
department who has received a copy of the final plat and applicable supporting
plans and documents, and who has been requested to reply, will determine
whether or not the material is acceptable and will transmit a statement thereon
to the Planning and Zoning Director. Failure of any department or reviewing
entity to reply within the time specified will be interpreted as no objection
taken by the department to the approval of the final plat as submitted.
   (B)   Response. The Planning and Zoning Director shall inform the subdivider
of any changes or additions necessary to the final plat and supporting plans
and documents.
   (C)   Corrections. If significant changes or additions are necessary, such
as a significant design variation from the approved preliminary plat, revised
submitals as required in §
153.058(A) above, shall be submitted as for a new final plat submittal.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014; Am. Ord.
2021-06, passed - -)
§ 153.062 ACTION BY THE TOWN COUNCIL.
   (A)   Council review. The Council shall consider the final plat, the plan of
subdivision, the recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the
Planning and Zoning Director, the title report, other supporting documents, the
offers of dedication, and the agreements and guarantees, if any, for deferred
improvements.
   (B)   Council approval. If the Council determines that the plat is in
conformity with the requirements of the law and of any requirements duly made
relating thereto, and if the agreement and guarantees for deferred
improvements, if any, and unpaid taxes or assessments are in order, and the
plat conforms to the approved preliminary plat, it shall approve the plat; and
the Mayor shall so certify this action by signature on the final plat.
      (1)   The Council may require such conditions as will, in its judgment,
secure substantially the objectives of these regulations.
      (2)   If the Council determines that the plat is not in conformity with
the preliminary plat or if other public health, safety, welfare or planning
issues are not satisfactorily addressed, it shall disapprove the plat
specifying its reason or reasons therefore; and shall advise the subdivider in
writing of the disapproval and of the reason for the disapproval.
      (3)   All streets and other public improvements built by the subdivider,
and parcels offered for dedication for public use by the plat, will be formally
accepted for maintenance by separate Council action, subject to conditions.
Approval of the final plat does not imply acceptance of streets and other
public improvements into the town's street and utility systems for maintenance
by the town. Formal acceptance for maintenance must occur by Town Council
resolution, but cannot occur until after the final plat is recorded and the
street is actually built to town standards.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.063 RECORDING OF FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   Council approval required. No subdivision plat shall be recorded
unless approved by the Town Council. Streets, easements and other public
improvements shall be dedicated as required.
   (B)   Time limit. Within 12 months of approval by the Council, the owner/
subdivider shall provide all required materials and demonstrate that all
conditions of plat approval have been met. The plat will then be presented to
the Planning and Zoning Director for recording.
   (C)   Re-submittal of final plat. When a final plat, construction plans and
all required supporting documents are acceptable to the Town Engineer, and the
Planning and Zoning Director, the subdivider upon notice thereof shall deposit
with the Planning and Zoning Department, 3 reproducible sets of the final plat
(1 each for the town, subdivider and County Recorder) as per form of final plat
requirements and completely executed by:
      (1)   All parties required to sign or endorse the same for the purpose of
passing a good and sufficient title to the public rights-of-way, easements and
parcels offered for dedication and to join in the subdivision of the property;
and
      (2)   The land surveyor (R.L.S.) preparing the plat and any and all other
parties required to execute certificates thereon, other than the required town
signatures.
   (D)   Additional submittal requirements following Town Council approval. The
following items are required to be submitted following Council approval and
before the subdivision plat will be recorded by the town:
      (1)   Fee. The fee for recording the final plat and accompanying deed
restrictions and any ratification or pertinent documents is required to be paid
by the subdivider once the final plat is approved by the Town Council and the
subdivider has addressed the stipulations of approval and the plat is ready for
recording. If the recording fee is submitted in the form of a check, it must be
made payable to the Mohave County Recorder;
      (2)   ADRE questionnaire. A copy of the developer's completed subdivision
questionnaire to the Arizona Real Estate Commissioner shall be submitted prior
to approval for lot sales. Prior to the recordation of a final plat, the
subdivider shall submit to the Planning and Zoning Director the final, approved
public report for the subdivision, as submitted to the Arizona Department of
Real Estate;
      (3)   Conditions, covenants and restrictions. The subdivider shall also
submit a copy of the subdivision's deed restrictions before any lots are sold;
      (4)   Assurances. Assurances for all required improvements in accordance
with the requirements and provisions of §§
153.080 through
153.087 below; and
      (5)   Taxes. No subdivision final plat shall be recorded unless all
current and back taxes, and any other type of assessments, have been paid in
full by the property owner of the land being subdivided, and written evidence
of the payment has been received by the Planning Director within 30 working
days prior to the recordation of the plat.
   (E)   Signatures and recordation. After receiving the properly executed
final plat for recording, together with the materials evidencing that all of
the stipulations of Council approval have been satisfied and necessary
recording fees have been provided, the Planning and Zoning Director or designee
shall obtain necessary signatures from town representatives and cause the final
plat to be recorded by the town.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.064 FAILURE TO MEET CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
   At the end of 1 year after Town Council approval, if the conditions of
approval have not been satisfied, or if the recording version of the final plat
has not been provided to the town, or if the final plat has been found not to
be acceptable for recording, the final plat shall be referred back to the Town
Council for action, including possible revocation of approval.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.065 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Minor or material amendments.
      (1)   Subdivision plat proposals may be amended during the course of plat
review. The process for amendment depends on whether the change is determined
to be major or minor in scope, and at what stage the change is being proposed
(preliminary plat, final plat, or recordation).
      (2)   A determination will be made by the Planning and Zoning Director
upon receipt of comments from reviewing town departments whether the changes
are "minor authorized" changes and the final plat may be presented to the Town
Council or if the changes are material and a "revised" preliminary plat will be
required for consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town
Council.
      (3)   Minor authorized changes may include adjustment, variation and
reduction of lots, lot lines, easements or statements contained in the
preliminary plat if they are found by the Planning and Zoning Director to be
consistent with the intent and design of the approved preliminary plat.
      (4)   Adding lots, streets or creating exceptions to the town's design
standards are changes which will require a "revised" preliminary plat.
   (B)   Amendments between preliminary plat and before final plat. Any minor
amendment proposed following Commission approval of the preliminary plat will
be highlighted for consideration by the Town Council as part of the final plat
application. Major amendments to the preliminary plat shall be returned to the
Commission for further consideration.
   (C)   Amendments following approval of final plat and before recording. The
Planning and Zoning Director may administratively approve any minor amendment
(i.e., change of street names, decrease in the number of lots, nominal
increases or decreases of lot sizes; nominal changes in the location of
streets, easements, and other public rights-of-way), to a final plat which has
already been approved by the Town Council. Any major amendment to a final plat
which follows Council approval will be referred back to the Town Council.
   (D)   Amendments which follow recording. Any plat of a subdivision that has
been filed for record with the Mohave County Recorder may be amended to correct
an error in any course or distance or other necessary item that was omitted
therefrom, or to correct a drafting, graphic, technical or similar type errors,
determined to be minor in scope by either the Planning and Zoning Director or a
representative Committee delegated to evaluate the amendment proposals
(scrivener's errors), and the corrected and amended plat may be subsequently
recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Director shall examine the amended plat,
and if the examination discloses that the only changes on the amended plat are
changes authorized above, he or she shall certify this to be a fact over his or
her signature on the amended plat. Thereafter, the amended plat shall be
entitled to be recorded in the office of the Mohave County Recorder in which
the original map was recorded. The map shall be marked "Amended Map of (insert
name of subdivision) ."   
      (2)   For any change in a recorded subdivision plat which exceeds the
criteria noted above, that change shall require approval of the Town Council.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.066 REVERSION TO ACREAGE/PLAT OF ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   (1)   Streets, alleys, rights-of-way, easements, reserve strips or
other public use ways or facilities may be abandoned by the Town Council
pursuant to the provisions of this section.
      (2)   If none of the improvements have been made in accordance with the
assurance for completion of improvements, the Town Council may on its own
motion hold a public hearing after notice and conditions outlined herein, to
determine whether the approval of the final plat should be revoked. The
revocation shall be effective upon recordation of a certified copy of the
resolutions.
   (B)   In order to initiate an abandonment proceeding for all or a portion of
a recorded subdivision or a public road, an application for abandonment must be
filed with the Planning and Zoning Director. If the abandonment is proposed by
a private citizen, a preliminary title report shall be submitted by the
property owner(s) for the property proposed to be abandoned or reverted to
acreage. The application fee shall be paid by the applicant at the time of
filing.
   (C)   (1)   Upon receipt of the application, the Planning and Zoning
Director shall conduct an investigation and shall distribute the request to
reviewing agencies for comment including but not limited to the Town Public
Works Department, Town Engineer, County Assessor, local fire district,
emergency service agencies and municipalities within 3 miles of the
subdivision, County Treasurer and/or other agencies as deemed appropriate by
the Director. Reviewing agencies shall have 25 working days, from the date the
abandonment application was received by the Planning and Zoning Department, to
complete their comments pertaining to the proposed abandonment. No reply by an
agency within the time limit specified shall be deemed as having received no
objections from that agency to approval of the abandonment. Upon receipt of the
reviewing agency comment(s), if any, the Director shall prepare a report for
presentation to the Town Council at a duly noticed public hearing.
      (2)   The application may necessitate consideration for re-zoning if the
Council deems it necessary or desirable.
   (D)   Within 60 days of receipt of an abandonment application, the Council
shall conduct a duly noticed public hearing. Upon completion of the hearing,
the Council shall approve, approve in modified form, or deny the application as
well as indicate whether or not zoning changes should accompany any action for
abandonment. Any action to recommend approval of abandonment shall be based
upon the following findings:
      (1)   That the abandonment is in the interests of the general welfare of
the town and is in correlation with the General Plan;
      (2)   That the abandonment would not prohibit or unduly inhibit access by
the public-at-large, nearby property owners and public utilities with proposed
development in adjacent areas; and
      (3)   That the abandonment would not eliminate public access ways which
may be presently in use or desirable for future use.
   (E)   Upon Town Council approval of an abandonment application, the
applicant shall prepare the proper abandonment documents and plat, including
any required deeds of conveyance, and submit them, along with the recording
fee, to the Planning and Zoning Director for review, approval and recording.
The abandonment shall be effective when recorded by the town along with the
abandonment resolution of the Town Council in compliance with Arizona Revised
Statutes.
   (F)   Whenever an abandonment action is approved for publicly owned rights-
of-way, the rights-of-way shall vest in the abutting property to the center
line of the right-of-way. Zoning for abandoned rights-of-way shall be the same
as the properties to which they are conveyed. Rights-of-way or easements for
existing sewer, gas, water, irrigation or similar pipelines and appurtenances,
and for canals, laterals or ditches and appurtenances, and for electric,
telephone, cable television and similar cables and lines and appurtenances,
shall continue as they existed prior to the abandonment. The applicant shall
provide easement plats and descriptions as required for any utility facility
remaining in place and for recording the easement documents with the Mohave
County Recorder.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS
§ 153.080 DISCLOSURE OF FINANCIAL ASSURANCES.
   (A)   No final subdivision plat will be recorded by the Town of Colorado
City unless an approved method of assurance is submitted with the final plat
and approved by the Town Council. Utility service assurances shall be provided
by letter from water, sewer and other utility providers to guarantee
installation of their respective improvements.
   (B)   The subdivider shall furnish with the final plat a detailed line item
cost estimate for construction of the required on and off site improvements,
signed and sealed by a professional engineer. The amount of the assurance shall
be based on the engineer's cost estimate for all required and remaining site
improvements, including a ten percent contingency fund to provide for any
increased costs that may arise during construction and an additional amount for
reasonable costs for project administration and inspections, as approved by the
Town Engineer, unless a third party trust agreement will be used as financial
assurance.
   (C)   (1)   If the subdivider chooses to construct the required improvements
prior to the recording of the final plat, he or she shall first obtain the
necessary permits from the town before construction begins.
      (2)   A certificate by the engineer of record on the as-built plans
stating that the construction has been completed in substantial conformance to
the specifications and standards contained within the approved construction
plans, must be reviewed and found acceptable by the Town Engineer, prior to
authorizing recordation of the final plat.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.081 ACCEPTABLE FINANCIAL ASSURANCES FOR REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS (SUBJECT TO
TOWN COUNCIL APPROVAL PRIOR TO RECORDATION).
   (A)   A method of financial assurance for required improvements will be
provided by the subdivider. The assurance shall be entered into in the form of
a written agreement between the subdivider, the town and the financial
institution, title insurance, escrow company, bonding agent or other third
party.
   (B)   The assurance shall cover water distribution system (including fire
hydrants); sanitary sewer collection system; other utility systems; street
grading, base course and asphaltic concrete paving; concrete curbs, gutters and
sidewalks; drainage facilities and structures where required; street signs;
survey monuments in streets including swing ties; lot corner monuments and
other improvements required as a condition of approval. The assurance is
subject to review and approval by the Town Attorney and the Town Council.
   (C)   Any 1 or more of the following are examples of acceptable financial
assurances.
      (1)   Performance bond. The subdivider may file with the Town of Colorado
City an irrevocable security bond executed by a surety company holding a
license to do business as a surety in the State of Arizona. The bond shall be
payable to the Town of Colorado City, in an amount equal to the cost of
improvements required by these regulations, including the 10% construction
contingency fund and the cost of construction administration and inspection as
approved by the Town Engineer. The bond shall also ensure the timely completion
of improvements as determined by the engineer of record and approved by the
Town Engineer.
      (2)   Trust agreement. The subdivider may place on deposit in a bank or
trust company in the name of the town, and approved by the Town Attorney, in a
trust account a sum of money equal to the estimated cost of all site
improvements required by this chapter, including the 10% construction
contingency fund and the cost of construction administration and inspection as
determined by the Town Engineer. The cost and time of completion shall be
approved by the Town Engineer. Periodic withdrawals may be made from the trust
account for a progressive payment of installation costs. The amounts of the
withdrawals shall be based upon progress work estimates and approved by the
Town Engineer. All such withdrawals shall be approved by the trustee.
      (3)   Unconditional guarantee. The subdivider may file with the town a
letter of credit, signed and notarized by the principal officer of the
financial institution acceptable to the Town of Colorado City and approved by
the Town Attorney, agreeing to pay the Town of Colorado City on demand, a
stipulated sum of money to apply to the estimated cost of installation of all
improvements for which the subdivider is responsible under these regulations.
The guaranteed payment sum shall be determined from the estimated costs and
scheduling as approved by the Town Engineer, and shall include the 10%
construction contingency fund and the cost of construction administration and
inspection as approved by the Town Engineer. The letter shall state the name of
the subdivision and shall list the improvements which the subdivider is
required to provide together with a schedule for completion.
      (4)   Third party trust agreements. Third party trust agreements are
subject to review by town staff and approval by the Town Attorney and the Town
Council.
      (5)   Other methods. Other methods of assurance may be presented for
review, consideration and approval by the town staff, Town Attorney and Town
Council, at their sole discretion, including a letter of credit, certificate of
deposit and certified check. The approval of any "other methods" shall be made
by the Town Council, in written form to the subdivider.
      (6)   Property escrow.
         (a)   If the subdivider wishes to record a final plat prior to the
completion of improvements, he or she may set up a property escrow account with
a title insurance company, whereby no lots may be offered for sale until the
improvements have been completed and accepted by the Town Council, and the Town
Council has released the property for sale.
         (b)   The Town Engineer shall review the improvements and forward a
report to the Town Council, recommending whether or not the improvements should
be accepted and the lots should be released for sale. Approval of the
subdivision is subject to the revocation provisions of §
153.067.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.082 DURATION OF PERFORMANCE BONDS.
   The performance bond or other assurance shall be sufficient in an amount and
duration to achieve their stated purpose. Extension of time in 1-year
increments may be granted by the Town Council by the subdivider showing just
cause. The assurance (surety) shall remain in force and effect until it is
released by the Council, or has been authorized for partial release as provided
for herein.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.083 PARTIAL ASSURANCE REDUCTION.
   (A)   The Town Engineer, upon receipt of a certification from the engineer
of record, may recommend to the Council a reduction of the assurance for the
work completed in accordance with the approved cost estimate and construction
plans.
   (B)   Ten percent of the estimated cost of completed improvements will be
retained to insure completion of the site improvements, final inspections and
preparation of final "as-built" plans. This retainage will be released upon
acceptance of the improvements by Town Council and expiration of the warranty
period as stipulated below.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.084 PARTIAL RELEASE OF LOTS.
   The Town Engineer, upon receipt of a certification from the engineer of
record, may recommend to the Council to release lots from a third party trust
in accordance with the document.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.085 DEFAULT.
   (A)   In the event that the subdivider defaults or fails or neglects to
satisfactorily install the required improvements within the time agreed upon
for performance, the Town Council may declare the bond, or other assurance
forfeited, and the town may make or cause the required improvements to be made,
using the trust funds or proceeds of the collection of the bond or other
assurance to defray the expense thereof.
   (B)   In addition, the Planning and Zoning Director shall notify the State
Real Estate Commissioner of the default.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.086 INSPECTION AND RELEASE.
   (A)   The subdivider, using the services of an Arizona registered
professional engineer and plans as approved by the Town Engineer, shall be
responsible for the quality of all materials, workmanship and compliance with
the approved plans, specifications, details, and standards. The Town Engineer
shall be notified 48 hours prior to any construction on the project site and
shall be notified of completion of all underground utilities prior to any
street preparation work. Upon review of the site, receipt of passing test
results and certification of satisfactory completion by the engineer of record,
the Town Engineer may authorize the subdivider to proceed with the installation
of street improvements.
   (B)   The Town Engineer will perform periodic inspections throughout the
course of construction, including the subgrade base prior to the placement of
overlaying materials. These inspections or interim approvals do not signify
that the town has accepted any of the improvements for maintenance. The
subdivider's engineer shall submit monthly progress reports to the Town
Engineer throughout the progress of the construction and shall include the
results of all tests taken during the month.
   (C)   At the completion of the work, or not less than 30 days prior to the
release date of the bond or other assurance, the engineer of record shall make
an inspection of the improvements and shall submit a set of “as-built”
construction plans if complete or a report on the status of improvements, along
with a punch list of uncompleted items, if the improvements are only partially
complete, to the Town Engineer. The Town Engineer will perform a final
inspection after the installation of survey monumentation and will review the
as-built plans and/or report and notify the subdivider of any noncompliance
with the approved construction plans or with these regulations. As-built
construction plans shall include 1 set of mylars, a digital copy, in a format
determined by the Planning and Zoning Director and 2 sets of copies, along with
a final engineer’s report and warranty statement to the Town Engineer. If the
Town Engineer determines that compliance has been made, he or she will then
submit a report to the Town Council, setting forth the conditions of the
facilities with a recommendation for acceptance of the constructed
improvements.
   (D)   The warranty period begins on the day that the Town Council accepts
the public improvements. A warranty period of 2 years for all utilities and 1
year for roadway pavement and structures shall apply to all subdivision
improvements; however the warranty period may extend beyond that time period as
determined by the Town Engineer based on the test results, the engineer’s
report, the inspection records, and his or her professional opinion. During the
warranty period the subdivider is responsible for repair work to any of the
public improvements as may be required by the Town Engineer. The Town Engineer
will periodically inspect the public improvements and will notify the
subdivider of the necessary repair work. The subdivider is responsible for
having the repair work completed prior to the end of the warranty period. Upon
completion of the warranty period and acceptable repair of any necessary
warranty items, the remainder of the financial assurances retained by the town
will be released.
   (E)   The certification below shall be sealed by the engineer of record,
duly registered in the State of Arizona, on the as-built plans. Plans must be
approved by the Town Engineer and presented to the Town Council prior to the
surety release. If all conditions are found to be satisfactory and the
improvements comply with town standards, the Town Council shall release the
surety. If the condition of materials and/or workmanship does not comply with
town standards or the approved construction plans, the Town Engineer will
present this information to the Town Council who may declare the subdivider in
default. The certification statement shall read as follows:
      In my professional opinion, the construction of [the specific site
improvements required for approval] has been completed in substantial
conformance with the construction plans and specifications including authorized
changes and addendums. My professional opinion is based, in part, upon
observation of the construction work and the completion of certain tests and
measurements and/or the review of the results of such tests and measurements
completed by others.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014; Am. Ord.
2021-06, passed - -)
§ 153.087 SUBDIVISION STREET MAINTENANCE.
   The subdivider shall notify the town in writing that all improvements are
completed. Once the improvements are approved, accepted and the surety
released, the Town Council will review the streets for acceptance into the town
system for maintenance according to town public works standards.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 153.100 GENERAL.
   (A)   Subdivider's responsibility.
      (1)   It is the subdivider's responsibility to design, furnish, install
and otherwise provide the property being subdivided with adequate public
infrastructure and utilities, as required by these regulations, in accordance
with other regulations of the county and state, and as disclosed by the
developer to the Arizona Department of Real Estate in the public report.
      (2)   Land shall not be approved for final plat use unless and until
adequate public infrastructure and utilities have been provided and have been
adequately assured for by the developer, in accordance with the minimum
requirements for assurance stated in these regulations.
   (B)   Access to town street system. Adequate primary, secondary and
emergency access, if necessary, shall be provided from an existing dedicated
public street to the land being subdivided. Approval of the access shall be a
condition of the plat approval by the Commission and/or Town Council.
   (C)   Inclusion of properties. Portions of any contiguous property within
the control of the subdivider shall not be excluded from within the boundaries
of a subdivision when needed or required for any traffic, public utility,
drainage, or flood control facility pertinent to the subdivision.
   (D)   Qualified designers. The design of those improvements of a subdivision
such as structural matters, streets, drainage provisions, water supply and
sewage disposal shall be made by an engineer registered in the State of Arizona
and qualified to specify the standards for the design.
   (E)   Supplemental design standards.
      (1)   In addition to the standards in this chapter, the subdivider shall
comply with Town Code,
Chapter 156, Development Standards.
      (2)   These standards may be revised in response to changing
circumstances or requirements or technological improvements justifying those
changes.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014; Am. Ord.
2017-03, passed 11-13-2017)
§ 153.101 WATERCOURSES.
   (A)   Easements. In the event that the subdivision is traversed by or is
contiguous to lakes, streams, washes, ditches or other bodies of water or
drainage structures, the subdivider shall provide an easement or right-of-way
for storm drainage substantially conforming to the line or path of any natural
watercourse, channel, stream or creek, or provide an acceptable realignment of
the watercourse. Easements may be required to provide for access to the
watercourse at various locations along the corridor, and as may be indicated by
the Town of Colorado City General Plan.
   (B)   Conformance to flood prevention regulations. Subdividers shall be
required to comply with the rules and regulations of the flood damage
prevention regulations,
Chapter 151 of this Code. The preliminary and final plat submittals shall
include information as specified by these regulations and shall depict
information including but not limited to floodway and flood fringe locations
and minimum finished floor elevations within the floodplain.
   (C)   Review by Town Engineer. The Town Engineer shall review all
subdivision plat materials regarding flood information provided and provide
professional recommendations and analysis to the Planning and Zoning Commission
and/or Town Council.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.102 SURVEY MONUMENTS.
   (A)   Manner of placement. Monuments shall conform to state statutes and
public works standards.
   (B)   Placement interval. Within streets, survey monuments will be required
at all street and alley intersections and at the point of curvature (PC) and
point of tangency (PT) of all curves and shall be set in accordance with public
works standards. Survey monuments are also required at all lot corners, angle
points, point of curvature (PC) and point of tangency (PT) and at such other
points along lot lines as may be required by the Town Engineer.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
LAND SPLITS
§ 153.115 PURPOSE.
   Land splits.  Provide for the division of land of 2.5 acres or less into 2
or 3 parcels through a process that is more expeditious than the subdivision
process; maintains accurate records of maps created to divide existing parcels
or lots; ensures adequate legal access to lots or parcels; and ensures that
land splits do not constitute a subdivision. Certain basic improvements and
design standards may be necessary and desirable in order to ensure proper
development of an area experiencing an increase in density. These provisions
are necessary to prevent circumventing the intent and spirit of these land
division regulations and to ensure responsible development.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.116 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Authority. By authority of the Colorado City Town Council adopted
pursuant to powers and jurisdictions vested through A.R.S. §§ 9-240, 9-463 and
9-463.01 pertaining to subdivision of lands within incorporated areas, and
other applicable laws, statutes, orders and regulations of the State of Arizona
and the Town of Colorado City, the Colorado City Town Council does hereby grant
the Planning and Zoning Director, hereafter referred to as "Director," the
power and authority to administratively review and approve or disapprove of
land splits within the town, as per the regulations contained herein.
   (B)   Definition. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      LAND SPLITS means the division of improved or unimproved land of 2.5
acres or less into 2 or 3 parcels for the purpose of sale or lease.
   (C)   Subdivision. The division of any property greater than 2.5 acres into
4 or more parcels, or into 2 or more parcels if a new street is involved, or
into more than 2 parcels if the boundaries of the property have been fixed by a
recorded plat, shall proceed through the subdivision process, as described
above.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.117 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   All lots created through land splits shall comply with all
requirements for the specific zoning district in which the land is located.
This includes compliance with the standards in Town Code
Chapter 156.
   (B)   No lot or parcel shall be divided so that any division of the lot or
parcel results in the creation of a non-conforming structure or use.
   (C)   No lot or parcel shall be divided so that any division of the lot
results in a lack of legal access to any lots or parcels created by or
resulting from the division. Access to all individual lots and parcels shall be
assured for current and future property owners and for emergency services.
   (D)   No lot or parcel shall be divided so that any division of the lot
results in the creation of a lot or parcel that does not abut a dedicated
public street improved to town improvement and design standards and connecting
directly to the public street system.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014; Am. Ord.
2017-03, passed 11-13-2017)
§ 153.118 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   This section outlines the minimum information needed to enable the
town to make informed and expeditious decisions regarding applications for land
splits.
      (1)   Unless more restrictive requirements are indicated, all mapped data
shall be drawn to an accurate scale of not greater than 1 inch equals 100 feet;
and shall be submitted digitally with all required supplementary materials, in
a format determined by the Planning and Zoning Director. If any reviewing
agencies or departments request a printed copy the applicant shall provide a
blueline or blackline copy scaled to fit on a 24-inch by 36-inch sheet.
      (2)   Unless exempted by the Director, the information contained in this
section shall be provided by each applicant.
   (B)   Complete a land split application on the form prepared by the town.
   (C)   Submit copies of the Land Split Survey Map and related documents from
signed and sealed by a land surveyor registered in the State of Arizona
containing the following information:
      (1)   Title, which shall read "Land Split Map for (name of applicant)";
      (2)   Location by section, township and range;
      (3)   Legal description of land involved;
      (4)   Name, address and phone number of property owner of record;
      (5)   Scale, north point and dates of preparation and revisions;
      (6)   Name, address, registration number and seal of the registered land
surveyor of record preparing the map with signature;
      (7)   Certificates shall appear on the plat as described in §
153.060;
      (8)   Boundaries of the tract to be divided fully balanced and closed
showing basis of bearings and all bearings and distances determined by an
accurate survey in the field. All dimensions shall be clearly identified;
      (9)   Location and dimensions of all lots within the land split plat map.
All sides of the proposed lots shall be identified by bearing and distances;
      (10)   Indicate the size of each lot, tract or parcel with measurements
shown in square feet and acres;
      (11)   Show existing streets (public and private); and lot, tract or
parcel lines. Indicate lot number and subdivision name or recorded deed
information for the tract of land for abutting parcels for identification
purposes;
      (12)   Identify existing and proposed easements, including utility,
drainage and other easements, by course, length and width;
      (13)   A statement of the flood zone designation according to FEMA/FIRM
maps;
      (14)   All lots shall be identified by number or letter and shall include
the street address;
      (15)   If questions pertaining to property boundaries develop, the
Planning and Zoning Department may require location of existing physical and
natural features to be shown, including, but not limited to, buildings,
structures, driveways, bridges, culverts, walls, fences, drainage courses,
slopes and similar features;
      (16)   The plat shall include provisions for signatures by the Planning
and Zoning Director and the Town Engineer;
      (17)   Space for recorder's information;
      (18)   Identify any public utility extensions or upgrades, when required,
to serve all proposed land split lots; and
      (19)   Provide other information as deemed necessary by the Director to
enable the town to determine if the proposed land split conforms to applicable
ordinances and regulations.
   (D)   Payment of a fee, as set by the Town Council, for review of the
application and for revisions of official town maps to reflect the land split.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014; Am. Ord.
2021-06, passed - -)
§ 153.119 APPLICATION PROCESS.
   (A)   Pre-application meeting.
      (1)   The applicant shall meet with the Director, or his or her designee,
to discuss the proposed land split.
      (2)   The Director shall advise the applicant of the specific objectives
of this section and the specific procedures, standards and approval process
regarding the review of the application.
      (3)   The Director shall advise the applicant regarding the standards to
determine whether the proposed land split would constitute a subdivision.
   (B)   Review. The Planning Department shall route copies of the proposed
land split to applicable reviewing entities for review and comment prior to
final decision by the Planning and Zoning Director.
   (C)   Review process. Upon receipt of a completed application, the Director,
or his or her designee, shall provide a decision on the application within 30
working days. Review by town departments will be completed and comments
returned to the Director prior to a final decision. Approval or denial may be
based upon the requirements listed in Town Code
Chapter 156  and §
153.117 above describing general standards. Failure of any department or
reviewing entity to reply within the time specified will be interpreted as no
objection by the department or reviewing entity to the approval of the land
split application and plat as submitted. Approval is valid for a period of 12
months. If the land split plat has not been recorded at the Mohave County
Recorder’s Office within the 12 month approval period, the approval expires and
a new land split application would need to be made to effect the division of
the property.
   (D)   Appeal. Any applicant for a land split who is dissatisfied or
aggrieved by the decision of the Planning and Zoning Director may appeal the
decision by following the appeal process in §
153.005 above.
   (E)   Actions after final approval. If approved, the applicant shall submit
the following:
      (1)   A final, recordable, reproducible, map 24 inches by 36 inches or 18
inches by 24 inches consistent with the approved plan as described in §
153.118 above for the land split plat map, together with one 8-1/2 inch by 11
inch and one 11 inch by 17 inch reduced size reproduction of the plat map, and
10 copies of all required supplementary materials. The final land split map
shall also be submitted in an electronic file in a format acceptable to
Colorado City;
      (2)   The format for recording shall meet all requirements of the Mohave
County Recorder's Office, including size of map, type of paper material,
margins, type size and other required elements;
      (3)   The subdivider shall provide a cashier's check, certified check, or
money order in the amount of the land split recording fee made payable to the
Mohave County Recorder;
      (4)   After approval by the town, and conditions of divisions (4) and (5)
below have been met, the Planning and Zoning Director shall record the land
split map with the Mohave County Recorder's Office; and
      (5)   In reviewing a land split application where public improvements for
dedication to the town are proposed, the following criteria apply:
         (a)   The applicant shall be responsible for the preparation of a
complete set of engineering plans prepared by an Arizona registered civil
engineer, satisfactory to the Director and Town Engineer, for the construction
of the required improvements. The plans may be prepared in conjunction with or
following the approval of the minor land division plat.
         (b)   The land split plat shall not be recorded until all engineering
plans for the required improvements have been approved by the Director and Town
Engineer;
         (c)   Except where expressly modified or permitted by the Director,
proposed streets shall be in conformity with the minimum street design
standards as specified in the town's subdivision regulations. The construction
of streets shall not commence until improvement plans and specifications have
been approved by the Director and Town Engineer; and
         (d)   Following Town Council approval of the land split map, no
building permit for any lot created will be issued until all required right-of-
ways are dedicated and public improvements are constructed to the minimum
standards and the work accepted by the Town Engineer, Public Works Director and
Utilities Departments, unless the developer provides construction assurance in
a form acceptable to the Town Attorney.
      (6)   The applicant's surveyor shall set survey monuments at each parcel
corner (or line point) prior to recording the land split map with the Mohave
County Recorder's Office.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014; Am. Ord.
2017-03, passed 11-13-2017)
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT
§ 153.130 PURPOSE.
   (A)   By authority of the Colorado City Town Council adopted pursuant to
powers and jurisdictions vested through A.R.S. § 9-462.01 pertaining to zoning
regulations, and A.R.S.§§ 9-240 and 9-463 pertaining to subdivision of lands
within incorporated areas, and other applicable laws, statutes, orders and
regulations of the State of Arizona and the Town of Colorado City, the Colorado
City Town Council does hereby grant the Planning and Zoning Director, hereafter
referred to as "Director," the power and authority to administratively review
and approve or disapprove of minor adjustments of lot line boundaries for
parcels within the Town of Colorado City, as per the regulations contained
herein.
   (B)   A lot line adjustment is an agreement between adjoining property
owners to adjust, revise or move a common boundary line which does not result
in a net gain in the number of lots, tracts or parcels. For purposes of this
section, a lot line adjustment shall conform to the following provisions:
      (1)   A lot line adjustment shall be between owners of adjoining
properties and shall be done solely for the purpose of revisions to common
boundary lines;
      (2)   Additional lots or parcels are not being created by this process;
and
      (3)   Following the adjustment, all lots shall contain conforming
setbacks and minimum lot size, width, depth and frontage, and shall meet all
other lot development standards of the Town of Colorado City.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 153.131 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   All lot line adjustments shall comply with all requirements for the
specific zoning district in which the divisions are located. This includes
compliance with the standards in Town Code
Chapter 156.
   (B)   No lot line adjustment shall result in the creation of a non-
conforming structure or use.
   (C)   No lot line adjustment shall result in a lack of legal access as
defined Town of Colorado City standards.
   (D)   No lot line adjustment shall result in a split zoning classification
on a single lot or parcel.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014; Am. Ord.
2017-03, passed 11-13-2017)
§ 153.132 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   This section outlines the minimum information needed to enable the
town to make informed and expeditious decisions regarding applications for lot
line adjustments. Unless exempted by the Director, or his or her designee, the
information contained in this section shall be provided by each applicant.
   (B)   All mapped data shall be drawn to a scale of not greater than 1 inch
equals 100 feet. Unless otherwise directed, the map data shall be drawn on a
sheet size of 22 inches by 34 inches or 18 inches by 24 inches or 11 inches by
17 inches.
   (C)   The following information is required at the time of application:
      (1)   Completed lot line adjustment application form;
      (2)   Completed lot line adjustment survey map including buildings,
structures, streets, driveways and other appropriate information, and all
related documentation as determined by the Director completed by a registered
land surveyor in the State of Arizona, consistent with the approved plan as
described in §
153.118 for the land split map, and copies of all required supplementary
materials. The final map shall also be submitted in an electronic file in a
format acceptable to Colorado City; and
      (3)   Application fee.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014; Am. Ord.
2021-06, passed - -)
§ 153.133 APPLICATION PROCESS.
   (A)   Application submittal. An application for lot line adjustment shall be
submitted to the Director with required number of copies of the lot line
adjustment survey map and supporting documentation and the application fee. The
Director shall have 30 working days to approve or deny the application.
   (B)   Review process.
      (1)   If necessary to accurately review the application, the Director may
require additional information to be shown on the lot line adjustment map.
      (2)   If rejected, written notice shall be provided to the applicant via
first class mail, postmarked within 15 days after the expiration of the 30-day
review period along with reasons for the rejection.
      (3)   If denied, the written notice shall specify the reasons for denial.
   (C)   Appeal. Any applicant for lot line adjustment who is dissatisfied or
aggrieved by the decision of the Planning and Zoning Director may appeal that
decision by following the appeal process in §
153.005 above.
   (D)   Actions after final approval. If the application is approved, the
applicant shall submit the following:
      (1)   A final, recordable, reproducible map meeting the requirements of §
153.132(C)(2) above, consistent with the approved plan showing all lot corners,
dimensions, a complete legal description of each affected lot, and signature
block for the Planning and Zoning Director, and Town Engineer;
      (2)   The applicant shall provide a cashier's check, certified check, or
money order in the amount of the land split recording fee made payable to the
Mohave County Recorder;
      (3)   The applicant's surveyor shall set survey monuments at each parcel
corner (or line point) prior to recording the lot line adjustment map; and
      (4)   Upon approval by the Director, the Planning and Zoning Director
shall record the lot line adjustment map with the Mohave County Recorder's
Office.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014; Am. Ord.
2017-03, passed 11-13-2017)
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   General penalty. Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply
with, or intentionally violates any of these regulations, shall be guilty of a
Class 1 misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine
of not to exceed $1,000, or by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days or by both
such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be a
separate offense punishable as herein above described. The imposition of any
sentence shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of
these regulations and provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Civil enforcement. Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by
law or in equity to prevent any violation of these regulations, to prevent
unlawful construction, to recover damages, to restrain, correct or abate a
violation, and these remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described
above.
   (C)   Default. In the event that a subdivider defaults or fails or neglects
to satisfactorily install and/or construct the required improvements within the
time agreed upon for performance, the Colorado City Town Council may declare
the bond, or other assurance, forfeited, and the town may make or cause the
required improvements to be made, using the trust funds or proceeds of the
collection of the bond or other assurances, to defray the expense thereof. In
addition, the Town Planning and Zoning Director shall notify the Arizona State
Real Estate Commission of the default.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 5-29-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 12-15-2014)
CHAPTER 154: DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
Section
   
154.01   Title
   
154.02   Legislative intent and purpose
   
154.03   Definitions
   
154.04   Applicability
   
154.05   Authority for development impact fees
   
154.06   Administration of development impact fees
   
154.07   Land use assumptions
   
154.08   Infrastructure Improvements Plan
   
154.09   Adoption and modification procedures
   
154.10   Timing for the renewal and updating of the Infrastructure Improvements
Plan and Impact Fee Analysis
   
154.11   Collection of development impact fees
   
154.12   Development impact fee credits and credit agreement
   
154.13   Development agreements
   
154.14   Appeals
   
154.15   Refunds of development impact fees
   
154.16   Oversight of development impact fee program
 
   
Appendix A: Sample Fee Schedule Forms
§ 154.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the "Development Impact Fee Ordinance of the
Town of Colorado City" and may be cited as such.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-18-2015)
§ 154.02 LEGISLATIVE INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   This chapter is adopted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety and
general welfare of the residents of the town by:
   (A)   Requiring new development to pay its proportionate share of the costs
incurred by the town that are associated with providing necessary public
services to new development.
   (B)   Setting forth standards and procedures for creating and assessing
development impact fees consistent with the requirements of the A.R.S. § 9-
463.05. setting forth procedures for administering the development impact fee
program, including mandatory offsets, credits, and refunds of development
impact fees. All development impact fee assessments, offsets, credits, or
refunds must be administered in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   This chapter shall not affect Town of Colorado City's zoning authority
or its authority to adopt or amend its General Plan, provided that planning and
zoning activities by the town may require amendments to development impact fees
as provided in §
154.07.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-18-2015)
§ 154.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. A person or entity who applies to the town for a building permit
or utility connection.
   APPURTENANCE. Any fixed machinery or equipment, structure or other fixture,
including integrated hardware, software or other components, associated with a
capital facility that are necessary or convenient to the operation, use, or
maintenance of a capital facility, but excluding replacement of the same after
initial installation.
   BUILDING PERMIT. Any permit issued by the town that authorizes vertical
construction, increases square footage, authorizes changes to land use, or
provides for the addition of a residential or non-residential point of demand
to a utility system.
   CAPITAL FACILITY. An asset having a useful life of 3 or more years that is a
component of 1 or more categories of necessary public service provided by the
town. A capital facility may include any associated purchase of real property,
architectural and engineering services leading to the design and construction
of buildings and facilities, improvements to existing facilities, improvements
to or expansions of existing facilities, and associated financing and
professional services. Wherever used herein, INFRASTRUCTURE shall have the same
meaning as CAPITAL FACILITIES.
   CATEGORY OF NECESSARY PUBLIC SERVICE. A category of necessary public
services for which the town is authorized to assess development impact fees, as
further defined in §
154.08(A)(1).
    CREDIT. A reduction in an assessed development impact fee resulting from
developer contributions to, payments for, construction of, or dedications for
capital facilities included in an Infrastructure Improvements Plan pursuant to
§
154.12 (or as otherwise permitted by this chapter).
   CREDIT AGREEMENT. A written agreement between the town and the developer(s)
of subject development that allocates credits to the subject development
pursuant to §
154.12. A Credit Agreement may be included as part of a Development Agreement
pursuant to §
154.13.
   CREDIT ALLOCATION. A term used to describe when credits are distributed to a
particular development or parcel of land after execution of a Credit Agreement,
but are not yet issued.
   CREDIT ISSUANCE. A term used to describe when the amount of an assessed
development impact fee attributable to a particular development or parcel of
land is reduced by applying a credit allocation.
   DEVELOPER. An individual, group of individuals, partnership, corporation,
limited liability company, association, municipal corporation, state agency, or
other person or entity undertaking land development activity, and their
respective successors and assigns.
   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT. An agreement prepared in accordance with the
requirements of §
154.13, A.R.S. § 9-500.05, and any applicable requirements of the Town Code.
   DIRECT BENEFIT. A benefit to an ERU resulting from a capital facility that:
(a) addresses the need for a necessary public service created in whole or in
part by the ERU; and that (b) meets either of the following criteria: (i) the
capital facility is located in the immediate area of the ERU and is needed in
the immediate area of the ERU to maintain the level of service; or (ii) the
capital facility substitutes for, or eliminates the need for a capital facility
that would have otherwise have been needed in the immediate area of the ERU to
maintain the town's level of service.
   DWELLING UNIT. A house, apartment, mobile home or trailer, group of rooms,
or single room occupied as separate living quarters or, if vacant, intended for
occupancy as separate living quarters.
   EQUIPMENT. Machinery, tools, materials, and other supplies, not including
vehicles, that are needed by a capital facility to provide the level of service
specified by the Infrastructure Improvement Plan, but excluding replacement of
the same after initial development of the capital facility.
   EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU). A unit of development within a particular
category of development, defined in terms of a standardized measure of the
demand that a unit of development in that category of development generates for
necessary public services in relation to the demand generated by a detached
single-family dwelling unit. For all categories of necessary public services,
the ERU factor for a detached single-family dwelling unit is 1, while the ERU
factor for a unit of development within another category of development is
represented as a ratio of the demand for each category of necessary public
services typically generated by that unit as compared to the demand for such
services typically generated by a detached single-family dwelling unit. An ERU
shall also mean a “service unit” for purposes of A.R.S. § 9-463.05(T)(10).
   FINANCING OR DEBT. Any debt, bond, note, loan, interfund loan, fund
transfer, or other debt service obligation used to finance the development or
expansion of a capital facility.
   FIRE PROTECTION. A category of necessary public services that includes fire
stations, fire equipment, fire vehicles and all appurtenances for fire
stations. Fire protection does not include vehicles or equipment used to
provide administrative services, or helicopters or airplanes. Fire protection
does not include any facility that is used for training firefighters from more
than 1 station or substation.
   GENERAL PLAN. Refers to the overall land-use plan for the town establishing
areas of the town for different purposes, zones and activities.
   GROSS IMPACT FEE. The total development impact fee to be assessed against a
subject development on a per unit basis, prior to subtraction of any credits.
   IMPACT FEE ANALYSIS (FEE REPORT). A written report developed pursuant to §
154.09 that identifies the methodology for calculating the amount of each
development impact fee, explains the relationship between the development
impact fee to be assessed and the plan-based cost per ERU calculated in the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan, and which meets other requirements set forth
in A.R.S. § 9-463.05. (An Infrastructure Improvements Plan may also be referred
to as an Impact Fee Facilities Plan.)
   INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS PLAN. A document or series of documents that
meet the requirements set forth in A.R.S. § 9-463.05, including those adopted
pursuant to §
154.09 to cover necessary public services. (May also be referred to as Impact
Fee Facilities Plan.)
   LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS. Projections of changes in land uses, densities,
intensities and population for a service area over a period of at least 10
years as specified in §
154.07.
   LEVEL OF SERVICE. A quantitative and/or qualitative measure of a necessary
public service that is to be provided by the town to development in a
particular service area, defined in terms of the relationship between service
capacity and service demand, accessibility, response times, comfort or
convenience of use, or other similar measures or combinations of measures.
Level of service may be measured differently for different categories of
necessary public services, as identified in the applicable Infrastructure
Improvements Plan.
   NECESSARY PUBLIC SERVICES. Any of the following facilities that have a life
expectancy of 3 or more years and that are owned and operated by or on behalf
of the municipality:
      (1)   Water facilities, including the acquisition, supply, storage,
transportation, treatment, purification and distribution of water, and any
appurtenances for those facilities.
      (2)   Wastewater facilities, sewers, lift stations, reclamation plants,
wastewater treatment plants, including collection, interception,
transportation, treatment and disposal of wastewater, and any appurtenances for
those facilities.
      (3)   Storm water, drainage and flood control facilities, including
culverts, erosion control, stormwater detention/retention basins, tanks, pump
stations and channels necessary to provide for proper stormwater management,
including any appurtenances for those facilities.
      (4)   Street facilities located in the service area, including arterial
or collector streets or roads traffic signals, rights-of-way, and improvements
thereon, bridges, culverts, irrigation tiling, storm drains, and regional
transportation facilities.
      (5)   Fire and police facilities, including all appurtenances, equipment
and vehicles. Fire and police facilities do not include a facility or portion
of a facility that is used to replace services that were once provided
elsewhere in the municipality, vehicles and equipment used to provide
administrative services, helicopters or airplanes or a facility that is used
for training firefighters or officers from more than one station or substation.
      (6)   Neighborhood parks and recreational facilities on real property up
to 30 acres in area, or parks and recreational facilities larger than 30 acres
if the facilities provide a direct benefit to the development. Park and
recreational facilities do not include vehicles, equipment or that portion of
any facility that is used for amusement parks, aquariums, aquatic centers,
auditoriums, arenas, arts and cultural facilities, bandstand and orchestra
facilities, boathouses, clubhouses, community centers greater than 3,000 square
feet in floor area, environmental education centers, equestrian facilities,
golf course facilities, greenhouses, lakes, museums, theme parks, water
reclamation or riparian areas, wetlands, zoo facilities or similar recreational
facilities, and swimming pools.
   OFFSET. An amount which is subtracted from the overall costs of providing
necessary public services to account for those capital components of
infrastructure or associated debt that have been or will be paid for by a
development through taxes, fees (except for development impact fees), and other
revenue sources, as determined by the town pursuant to §
154.08.
   PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES. A category of necessary public services
including but not limited to parks, and related facilities and equipment
located on real property not larger than 30 acres in area, as well as park
facilities larger than 30 acres where such facilities provide a direct benefit.
Parks and recreational facilities do not include excluded park facilities,
although parks and recreational facilities may contain, provide access to, or
otherwise support an excluded park facility.
   PLAN-BASED COST PER ERU. The total future capital costs listed in the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan for a category of necessary public services
divided by the total new equivalent demand units projected in a particular
service area for that category of necessary public services over the same time
period.
   POLICE FACILITIES. A category of necessary public services, including
vehicles and equipment, that are used by law enforcement agencies to preserve
the public peace, prevent crime, detect and arrest criminal offenders, protect
the rights of persons and property, regulate and control motorized and
pedestrian traffic, train sworn personnel, and/or provide and maintain police
records, vehicles, equipment, and communications systems. Police facilities do
not include vehicles and equipment used to provide administrative services, or
helicopters or airplanes. Police facilities do not include any facility that is
used for training officers from more than one station or substation.
   QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL. Any 1 of the following:
      (1)   A professional engineer, surveyor, financial analyst or planner, or
other licensed professional providing services within the scope of that
person's education or experience related to Colorado City planning, zoning, or
impact development fees and holding a license issued by an agency or political
subdivision of the State of Arizona;
      (2)   A financial analyst, planner, or other non-licensed professional
that is providing services within the scope of the person's education or
experience related to Colorado City planning, zoning, or impact development
fees; or
      (3)   Any other person operating under the supervision of 1 or more of
the above.
   SERVICE AREA. Any specified area within the boundaries of the town within
which: (a) the town will provide a category of necessary public services to
development at a planned level of service; and (b) within which: (i) a
substantial nexus exists between the capital facilities to be provided and the
development to be served; or (ii) in the case of a park facility larger than 30
acres, a direct benefit exists between the park facilities and the development
to be served, each as prescribed in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan. Some
or all of the capital facilities providing service to a service area may be
physically located outside of that service area provided that the required
substantial nexus or direct benefit is demonstrated to exist.
   SUBJECT DEVELOPMENT. A land area linked by a unified plan of development,
which must be contiguous unless the land area is part of a development
agreement executed in accordance with §
154.12.
   SUBSTANTIAL NEXUS. A substantial nexus exists where the demand for necessary
public services that will be generated by an ERU can be reasonably quantified
in terms of the burden it will impose on the available capacity of existing
capital facilities, the need it will create for new or expanded capital
facilities, and/or the benefit to the development from those capital
facilities.
   USEFUL LIFE. The period of time in which an asset can reasonably be expected
to be used under normal conditions, whether or not the asset will continue to
be owned and operated by the town over the entirety of such period.
   VEHICLE. Any device, structure, or conveyance utilized for transportation in
the course of providing a particular category of necessary public services at a
specified level of service, excluding helicopters and other aircraft.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-18-2015)
§ 154.04 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, from and after the effective
date, this chapter shall apply to all new development within any service area,
except for the development of any town facility.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all of the territory
within the corporate limits of Colorado City and/or within the town's utility
service areas.
   (C)   The Town Manager or his or her designee is authorized to make
determinations regarding the application, administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   The impact fees authorized hereby are separate from and in addition to
user fees and other charges lawfully imposed by the Town of Hildale, such as
engineering and inspection fees, building permit fees, review fees and other
fees and costs that may not be included as itemized component parts of the
impact fee.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-18-2015)
§ 154.05 AUTHORITY FOR DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   Impact fee analysis and implementation. The town may assess and
collect a development impact fee for costs of necessary public services,
including all professional services required for the preparation or revision of
an Infrastructure Improvements Plan, impact fee analysis, development impact
fee, and required reports or audits conducted pursuant to this chapter.
Development impact fees shall be subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   The town shall develop and adopt an impact fee analysis that
analyzes and defines the development impact fees to be charged in each service
area for each capital facility category, based on the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan and the plan-based cost per ERU calculated pursuant to §
154.08(A)(12).
      (2)   Development impact fees shall be assessed against all new
commercial, residential, and industrial developments, provided that the town
may assess different amounts of development impact fees against specific
categories of development based on the actual burdens and costs that are
associated with providing necessary public services to that category of
development. No development impact fee shall exceed the plan-based cost per ERU
for any category of development.
      (3)   No development impact fees shall be charged, or credits issued, for
any capital facility that does not fall within 1 of the categories of necessary
public services for which development impact fees may be assessed as identified
in §
154.08(A)(1).
      (4)   Costs for necessary public services made necessary by new
development shall be based on the same level of service provided to existing
development in the same service area. Development impact fees may not be used
to provide a higher level of service to existing development or to meet
stricter safety, efficiency, environmental, or other regulatory standards to
the extent that these are applied to existing capital facilities that are
serving existing development.
      (5)   Development impact fees may not be used to pay the town's
administrative, maintenance, or other operating costs.
      (6)   Projected interest charges and financing costs can only be included
in development impact fees to the extent they represent principal and/or
interest on the portion of any financing or debt used to finance the
construction or expansion of a capital facility identified in the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan.
      (7)   Except for any fees included on interim fee schedules, all
development impact fees charged by the town must be included in a "fee
schedule" prepared pursuant to this chapter and included in the impact fee
analysis; example versions of all fee schedules are provided in Appendix A. All
development impact fees shall meet the requirements of A.R.S. § 9-463.05.
   (B)   Costs per ERU. The impact fee analysis shall summarize the costs of
capital facilities necessary to serve new development on a per ERU basis as
defined and calculated in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan, including all
required offsets, and shall recommend a development impact fee structure for
adoption by the town. The actual impact fees to be assessed shall be disclosed
and adopted in the form of impact fee schedules described in Appendix A to this
chapter.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-18-2015)
§ 154.06 ADMINISTRATION OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   Separate accounts. Development impact fees collected pursuant to this
chapter shall be placed in separate, interest-bearing ledger accounts for each
capital facility category within each service area.
   (B)   Limitations on use of fees. Development impact fees and any interest
thereon collected pursuant to this chapter shall be spent to provide capital
facilities associated with the same category of necessary public services in
the same service area for which they were collected, including costs of
financing or debt used by the town to finance such capital facilities and other
costs authorized by this chapter that are included in the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan.
   (C)   Time limit. Development impact fees collected shall be used within 10
years of the date upon which they were collected for all categories of
necessary public services except for water and wastewater facilities. For water
facilities or wastewater facilities collected after July 31, 2014, development
impact fees must be used within 15 years of the date upon which they were
collected.
   (D)   Annual report. In addition to the report identified in §
154.15, at the end of each fiscal year, the city shall prepare a report on each
fund or ledger account. The report shall show:
      (1)   The source and amount of all money collected, earned, and received
by the fund or ledger account; and
      (2)   Each expenditure from the fund or ledger account.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-18-2015)
§ 154.08 INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS PLAN.
   (A)   Infrastructure Improvements Plan contents. The Infrastructure
Improvements Plan shall be developed by qualified professionals and may be
based upon or incorporated within the town's Capital Improvements Plan. The
Infrastructure Improvements Plan shall:
      (1)   Specify the categories of necessary public services for which the
town will impose a development impact fee, which may include any or all of the
following:
         (a)   Water.
         (b)   Wastewater.
         (c)   Stormwater, drainage, and flood control.
         (d)   Street facilities.
         (e)   Fire protection.
         (f)   Police.
         (g)   Parks.
      (2)   Define and provide a map of 1 or more service areas within which
the town will provide each category of necessary public services for which
development impact fees will be charged. Each service area must be defined in a
manner that demonstrates a substantial nexus between the capital facilities to
be provided in the service area and the ERUs to be served by those capital
facilities.
      (3)   Identify and describe the land use assumptions upon which the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan is based in each service area.
      (4)   Analyze and identify the existing level of service provided by the
town to existing ERUs for each category of necessary public services in each
service area.
      (5)   Identify the level of service to be provided by the town for each
category of necessary public services in each service area based on the
relevant land use assumptions and any established town
standards or policies related to required levels of service. If the town
provides the same category of necessary public services in more than 1 service
area, the Infrastructure Improvements Plan shall include a comparison of the
levels of service to be provided in each service area.
      (6)   Identify any grandfathered facilities and the impact thereof on the
need for necessary public services in each affected service area.
      (7)   Estimate the total number of existing and future ERUs within each
service area based on the town's land use assumptions and projected new ERUs in
each service area.
      (8)   For each category of necessary public services, analyze and
identify the projected utilization of any available excess capacity in existing
capital facilities, and all new or expanded capital facilities that will be
required to provide and maintain the planned level of service in each service
area as a result of the new projected ERUs in that service area, for a period
not to exceed 10 years. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the town from
additionally including in its Infrastructure Improvements Plan projected
utilization of, or needs for, capital facilities for a period longer than 10
years, provided that the costs of such capital facilities are excluded from the
calculation of the plan-based cost per ERU.
      (9)   For each category of necessary public services, estimate the total
cost of any available excess capacity and/or new or expanded capital facilities
that will be required to serve new ERUs, including costs of land acquisition,
improvements, engineering and architectural services, studies leading to
design, design, construction, financing, and administrative costs, as well as
projected costs of inflation. Such total costs shall not include costs for
ongoing operation and maintenance of capital facilities, nor for replacement of
capital facilities to the extent that such replacement is necessary to serve
existing ERUs. If the Infrastructure Improvements Plan includes changes or
upgrades to existing capital facilities that will be needed to achieve or
maintain the planned level of service to existing ERUs, or to meet new
regulatory requirements for services provided to existing ERUs, such costs
shall be identified and distinguished in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan.
      (10)   Forecast the revenues from taxes, fees, assessments or other
sources that will be available to fund the new or expanded capital facilities
identified in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan. The Infrastructure
Improvements Plan shall additionally estimate the time required to finance,
construct and implement the new or expanded capital facilities.
   (B)   Multiple Plans. An Infrastructure Improvements Plan adopted pursuant
to this section may address 1 or more of the town's categories of necessary
public services in any or all of the town's service areas. Each capital
facility shall be subject to no more than 1 Infrastructure Improvements Plan at
any given time.
   (C)   Reserved capacity. The town may reserve capacity in an Infrastructure
Improvements Plan to serve 1 or more planned future developments, including
capacity reserved through a Development Agreement pursuant to §
154.13. All reservations of existing capacity must be disclosed in the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan at the time it is adopted.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-18-2015)
§ 154.09 ADOPTION AND MODIFICATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Adopting or amending the Infrastructure Improvements Plan. The
Infrastructure Improvements Plan shall be adopted or amended subject to the
following procedures:
      (1)   Major amendments to the Infrastructure Improvements Plan.  Except
as provided in division (A)(2) of this section, the adoption or amendment of an
Infrastructure Improvement Plan shall occur at 1 or more public hearings
according to the following schedule, as provided in §
154.07:
         (a)   Sixty days before the first public hearing regarding a new or
updated Infrastructure Improvements Plan, the town shall provide public notice
of the hearing and post the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and the underlying
land use assumptions on its website.
         (b)   The town shall conduct a public hearing on the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan and underlying land use assumptions at least 30 days, but no
more than 60 days, before approving or disapproving the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan.
      (2)   Minor amendments to the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and impact
fee analysis. Notwithstanding the other requirements of this section, the town
may update the Infrastructure Improvements Plan without a public hearing if all
of the following apply:
         (a)   The changes in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan will not add
any new category of necessary public services to any service area.
         (b)   The changes in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan will not
increase the level of service to be provided in any service area.
         (c)   Based on an analysis of the impact fee analysis and the town's
adopted development impact fee schedules, the changes in the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan would not, individually or cumulatively with other amendments
undertaken pursuant to this section, have caused a development impact fee in
any service area to have been increased by more than 5% above the development
impact fee that is provided in the current development impact fee schedule.
         (d)   At least 30 days prior to the date that any amendment pursuant
to this section is adopted, the town shall post a notice of proposed amendments
on the town's website.
         (e)   The development fee schedule schedules in the Impact Fee
Analysis adopted pursuant to this section shall become effective 90 days after
adoption.
   (B)   Amendments to the Impact Fee Analysis. Any adoption or amendment of an
Impact Fee Analysis and fee schedule shall occur at 1 or more public hearings
according to the following schedule:
      (1)   The first public hearing on the Impact Fee Analysis must be held at
least 30 days after the adoption or approval of an Infrastructure Improvements
Plan as provided in division (A) of this section. The town must give at least
30 days' notice prior to the hearing, provided that this notice may be given on
the same day as the approval or disapproval of the Infrastructure Improvements
Plan.
      (2)   The town shall make the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and
underlying land use assumptions available to the public on the League of Cities
and town's website 30 days prior to the public hearing described in division
(B)(1) of this section.
      (3)   The Impact Fee Analysis may be adopted by the town no sooner than
30 days, and no later than 60 days, after the hearing described in division (B)
(1) of this section.
      (4)   The development fee schedules in the Impact Fee Analysis adopted
pursuant to this section shall become effective 75 days after adoption of the
Impact Fee Analysis by the town.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-18-2015; Am. Ord. 2017-03, passed 11-13-2017)
§ 154.10 TIMING FOR THE RENEWAL AND UPDATING OF THE INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS
PLAN AND IMPACT FEE ANALYSIS.
   (A)   Renewing the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and Impact Fee Analysis.
Except as provided in division (B) of this section, not later than every 5
years the town shall update the applicable Infrastructure Improvements Plan and
Fee Analysis related to each category of necessary public services pursuant to
§
154.09. Such 5-year period shall be calculated from the date of the adoption of
the Infrastructure Improvements Plan or the date of the adoption of the Impact
Fee Analysis, whichever occurs later.
   (B)   Determination of no changes. Notwithstanding division (A) of this
section, if the town determines that no changes to an Infrastructure
Improvements Plan, underlying land use assumptions, or Impact Fee Analysis are
needed, the town may elect to continue the existing Infrastructure Improvements
Plan and Impact Fee Analysis without amendment by providing notice as follows:
      (1)   Notice of the determination shall be published at least 180 days
prior to the end of the 5-year period described in division (A) of this
section.
      (2)   The notice shall identify the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and
Impact Fee Analysis that shall continue in force without amendment.
      (3)   The notice shall provide a map and description of the service area
(s) covered by such Infrastructure Improvements Plan and Impact Fee Analysis.
      (4)   The notice shall identify an address to which any resident of the
town may submit, within 60 days, a written request that the town update the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan, underlying land use assumptions, and/or
Impact Fee Analysis and the reasons and basis for the request.
   (C)   Response to comments. The town shall consider and respond within 30
days to any timely requests submitted pursuant to division (B)(4) of this
section.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-18-2015)
§ 154.11 COLLECTION OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   Collection. Development impact fees, together with administrative
charges assessed pursuant to division (A)(6) of this section, shall be
calculated and collected prior to issuance of permission to commence
development; specifically:
      (1)   Unless otherwise specified pursuant to a Development Agreement
adopted pursuant to §
154.12, development impact fees shall be paid prior to issuance of a building
permit according to the current development impact fee schedule for the
applicable service area(s).
      (2)   If a building permit is not required for the development, but
utility connections are required, development impact fees due shall be paid at
the time the utility service connection is purchased. If only a wastewater
connection is required, the development impact fees shall be paid prior to
approval of a connection to the sewer system.
      (3)   If the development is located in a service area with a stormwater,
drainage, and flood control development impact fee, and neither a building
permit, or utility service connection is required, the storm drainage
development impact fee due shall be paid at the time a notice is issued to the
developer.
      (4)   No building permit, utility connection, or certificate of occupancy
shall be issued if a development impact fee is not paid as directed in the
previous divisions.
      (5)   If the development is for a change in the type of building use, an
increase in square footage, a change to land use, or an addition to a
residential or non-residential point of demand to the utility systems, the
development impact fee shall be assessed on the additional service units
resulting from the expansion or change, and following the development impact
fee schedule applicable to any new use type. Water development impact fees
shall be based on the meter size required for the development.
      (6)   To the extent that any modification does not meet the requirements
of this division, the development impact fee due shall be the difference
between the development impact fee that was or would have been due on the
existing development and the development impact fee that is due on the
development as modified.
      (7)   If the development is not substantially completed, development
impact fees paid for such development can be refunded.
      (8)   If a new or renewed application for the same development is being
sought by someone other than the original applicant, the new applicant shall
pay the full development impact fees specified in the fee schedule in effect at
the time that the application is made. If the original applicant has assigned
its rights under the application to a new applicant, the new applicant shall
pay the difference between any development impact fees paid and those in the
fee schedule at the time of the new application. Exceptions: development impact
fees shall not be owed under either of the following conditions:
         (a)   Development impact fees have been paid for the development and
the permit(s) which triggered the collection of the development impact fees
have not expired or been voided.
         (b)   The approval(s) that trigger the collection of development
impact fees involve modifications to existing residential or non-residential
development that do not: (a) add new EDUs; (b) increase the impact of existing
EDUs on existing or future capital facilities; or (c) change the land-use type
of the existing development to a different category of development for which a
higher development impact fee would have been due. To the extent that any
modification does not meet the requirements of this division, the development
impact fee due shall be the difference between the development impact fee that
was or would have been due on the existing development and the development
impact fee that is due on the development as modified.
   (B)   Temporary exemptions from development impact fee schedules. New master
planned developments with multiple new homes shall be temporarily exempt from
increases in development impact fees that result from the adoption of new or
modified development impact fee schedules as follows: for 24 months after the
first building permit is issued. During the effective period of the applicable
development impact fee schedule, any building permit issued for the same
development shall not be subject to any new or modified development impact fee
schedule.
   (C)   Other development. Any category of development not covered under
division (B) of this section shall pay development impact fees according to the
fee schedule that is current at the time of collection as specified in division
(A) of this section.
   (D)   Changes to site plans and subdivision plats. Notwithstanding the other
requirements of this section, if changes are made to a development's final site
plan or subdivision plat that will increase the number of service units after
the issuance of a grandfathered development impact fee schedule, the town may
assess any new or modified development impact fees against the additional
service units. If the town reduces the amount of an applicable development
impact fee during the period that a grandfathered development impact fee
schedule is in force, the town shall assess the lower development impact fee.
   (E)   Option to pursue special fee determination. Where a development is of
a type that does not closely fit within a particular category of development
appearing on an adopted development impact fee schedule, or where a development
has unique characteristics or unusual circumstances such that the actual
burdens and costs associated with providing necessary public services to that
development will differ substantially from that associated with other
developments in a specified category of development, the town may require the
applicant to provide an alternative development impact fee analysis.
   (F)   The town shall review the alternative impact fee analysis and shall
make a determination as to the adjusted development impact fee to be charged.
Such decision shall be appealable pursuant to §
154.14. The town may require the applicant to pay an administrative fee to
cover the actual costs of reviewing the special fee determination application.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-18-2015)
§ 154.12 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE CREDITS AND CREDIT AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   Eligibility of capital facility. A developer shall receive a credit
against or proportionate reimbursement of an impact fee if:
      (1)   One of the following is true:
         (a)   The capital facility or land for system improvement, or the
financial contribution toward a capital facility that will be provided by the
developer and for which a credit will be issued, must be identified in an
adopted Infrastructure Improvements Plan and Impact Fee Analysis as a capital
facility for which a development impact fee was assessed; or
         (b)   The applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the town
that, given the class and type of improvement, the subject capital facility
should have been included in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan in lieu of a
different capital facility that was included in the Infrastructure Improvements
Plan and for which a development impact fee was assessed. If the subject
capital facility is determined to be eligible for a credit in this manner, the
town shall amend the Infrastructure Improvements Plan to: (i) include the
subject replacement facility; and (ii) delete the capital facility that will be
replaced.
      (2)   Credits shall not be available for any infrastructure provided by a
developer if the cost of such infrastructure will be repaid to the developer by
the town through another agreement or mechanism. To the extent that the
developer will be paid or reimbursed by the town for any contribution, payment,
construction, or dedication from any town funding source including an agreement
to reimburse the developer with future collected development impact fees
pursuant to §
154.13, any credits claimed by the developer shall be: (a) deducted from any
amounts to be paid or reimbursed by the town; or (b) reduced by the amount of
such payment or reimbursement.
   (B)   Calculation of credits. Credits will be based on that portion of the
costs for an eligible capital facility identified in the adopted Infrastructure
Improvements Plan for which a development fee was assessed pursuant to the
Impact Fee Analysis. If the gross impact fee for a particular category of
necessary public service is adopted at an amount lower than the plan-based cost
per ERU, the amount of any credit shall be reduced in proportion to the
difference between the plan-based cost per ERU and the gross impact fee
adopted. A credit shall not exceed the actual costs the applicant incurred in
providing the eligible capital facility.
   (C)   Allocation of credits. Before any credit can be issued to a subject
development (or portion thereof), the credit must be allocated to that
development as follows:
      (1)   The developer and the town must execute a credit agreement
including all of the following:
         (a)   The total amount of the credits resulting from provision of an
eligible capital facility.
         (b)   The estimated number of ERUs to be served within the subject
development.
         (c)   The method by which the credit values will be distributed within
the subject development.
      (2)   It is the responsibility of the developer to request allocation of
development impact fee credits through an application for a credit agreement
(which may be part of a development agreement entered into pursuant to §
154.13).
      (3)   If a building permit is issued or a utility connection is
purchased, and a development impact fee is paid prior to execution of a credit
agreement for the subject development, no credits may be allocated
retroactively to that permit or connection. Credits may be allocated to any
remaining permits for the subject development in accordance with this chapter.
      (4)   If the entity that provides an eligible capital facility sells or
relinquishes a development (or portion thereof) that it owns or controls prior
to execution of a Credit Agreement or Development Agreement, credits resulting
from the eligible capital facility will only be allocated to the development if
the entity legally assigns such rights and responsibilities to its successor(s)
in interest for the subject development.
      (5)   If multiple entities jointly provide an eligible capital facility,
both entities must enter into a single credit agreement with the town, and any
request for the allocation of credit within the subject development(s) must be
made jointly by the entities that provided the eligible capital facility.
      (6)   Credits may only be reallocated from or within a subject
development with the town's approval of an amendment to an executed credit
agreement, subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   The entity that executed the original agreement with the town,
or its legal successor in interest and the entity that currently controls the
subject development are parties to the request for reallocation.
         (b)   The reallocation proposal does not change the value of any
credits already issued for the subject development.
      (7)   A credit agreement may authorize the allocation of credits to a
non-contiguous parcel only if all of the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The entity that executed the original agreement with the town or
its legal successor in interest, the entity that currently controls the subject
development, and the entity that controls the non-contiguous parcel are parties
to the request for reallocation.
         (b)   The reallocation proposal does not change the value of any
credits already issued for the subject development.
         (c)   The non-contiguous parcel is in the same service area as that
served by the eligible capital facility.
         (d)   The non-contiguous parcel receives a necessary public service
from the eligible capital facility.
         (e)   The credit agreement specifically states the value of the
credits to be allocated to each parcel and/or ERU, or establishes a mechanism
for future determination of the credit values.
         (f)   The credit agreement does not involve the transfer of credits to
or from any property subject to a development agreement.
   (D)   Credit agreement. Credits shall only be issued pursuant to a credit
agreement executed in accordance with division (D) of this section. The Town
Manager or authorized designee is authorized by this chapter to enter into a
credit agreement with the controlling entity of a subject development, subject
to the following:
      (1)   The developer requesting the credit agreement shall provide all
information requested by the town to allow it to determine the value of the
credit to be applied.
      (2)   An application for a credit agreement shall be submitted to the
town by the developer within 1 year of the date on which ownership or control
of the capital facility passes to the town.
      (3)   The developer shall submit a draft credit agreement to the Town
Manager or authorized designee(s) for review in the form provided to the
applicant by the town. The draft credit agreement shall include, at a minimum,
all of the following information and supporting documentation:
         (a)   A legal description and map depicting the location of the
subject development for which credit is being applied. The map shall depict the
location of the capital facilities that have been or will be provided.
         (b)   An estimate of the total ERUs that will be developed within the
subject development depicted on the map and described in the legal description.
         (c)   A list of the capital facilities, associated physical
attributes, and the related costs as stated in the Infrastructure Improvements
Plan.
         (d)   Documentation showing the date(s) of acceptance by the town, if
the capital facilities have already been provided.
         (e)   The total amount of credit to be applied within the subject
development and the calculations leading to the total amount of credit.
         (f)   The credit amount to be applied to each ERU within the subject
development for each category of necessary public services.
      (4)   Upon execution of the credit agreement by the town and the
applicant, credits shall be deemed allocated to the subject development.
      (5)   Any amendment to a previously approved credit agreement must be
initiated within 2 years of the town's final acceptance of the eligible capital
facility for which the amendment is requested.
      (6)   Any credit agreement approved as part of a development agreement
shall be amended in accordance with the terms of the development agreement and
§
154.13.
   (E)   Issuance of credits. Credits allocated pursuant to division (D) of
this section may be issued and applied toward the gross impact fees due from a
development, subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   Credits issued for an eligible capital facility may only be applied
to the development impact fee due for the applicable category of necessary
public services, and may not be applied to any fee due for another category of
necessary public services.
      (2)   Credits shall only be issued when the eligible capital facility
from which the credits were derived has been accepted by the town or when
adequate security for the completion of the eligible capital facility has been
provided in accordance with all terms of an executed development agreement.
      (3)   Where credits have been issued pursuant to division (E)(2) of this
section, an impact fee due at the time a building permit is issued shall be
reduced by the credit amount stated in or calculated from the executed credit
agreement. Where credits have not yet been issued, the gross impact fee shall
be paid in full, and a refund of the credit amount shall be due when the
developer demonstrates compliance with division (E)(2) of this section in a
written request to the town.
      (4)   Credits, once issued, may not be rescinded or reallocated to
another permit or parcel, except that credits may be released for reuse on the
same subject development if a building permit or application for which the
credits were issued has expired or been voided and is otherwise eligible for a
refund under §
154.15(A)(2)(a).
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-18-2015)
§ 154.13 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS.
   Development agreements containing provisions regarding development impact
fees, development impact fee credits, and/or disbursement of revenues from
development impact fee accounts shall comply with the following:
   (A)   Development Agreement required. A Development Agreement is required to
authorize any of the following:
      (1)   To issue credits prior to the town's acceptance of an eligible
capital facility.
      (2)   To allocate credits to a parcel that is not contiguous with the
subject development and that does not meet the requirements of §
154.12(D).
      (3)   To reimburse the developer of an eligible capital facility using
funds from development impact fee accounts.
      (4)   To allocate different credit amounts per ERU to different parcels
within a subject development.
      (5)   For a single family residential dwelling unit, to allow development
impact fees to be paid at a later time than the issuance of a building permit
as provided in this section.
   (B)   General requirements. All development agreements shall be prepared and
executed by resolution or in accordance with ordinance, A.R.S. § 9-500.05 and
any applicable requirements of the Town Code. Development agreements relating
to property located outside the incorporated area do not become operative
unless annexation proceedings are completed within the time period specified in
the development agreement. Development agreements shall be consistent with the
town General Plan. Development agreements shall be recorded with the county
recorder within 10 days of entering into the agreement and the effective date
cannot be less than 30 days after final approval. Except where specifically
modified by this section, all provisions of §
154.12 shall apply to any credit agreement that is authorized as part of a
development agreement.
   (C)   Early credit issuance. A development agreement may authorize the
issuance of credits prior to acceptance of an eligible capital facility by the
town when the development agreement specifically states the form and value of
the security (i.e. bond, letter of credit, and the like) to be provided to the
town prior to issuance of any credits. The town shall determine the acceptable
form and value of the security to be provided.
   (D)   Non-contiguous credit allocation. A development agreement may
authorize the allocation of credits to a non-contiguous parcel only if all of
the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The non-contiguous parcel is in the same service area as that
served by the eligible capital facility.
      (2)   The non-contiguous parcel receives a necessary public service from
the eligible capital facility.
      (3)   The development agreement specifically states the value of the
credits to be allocated to each parcel and/or ERU, or establishes a mechanism
for future determination of the credit values.
   (E)   Uneven credit allocation. The development agreement must specify how
credits will be allocated amongst different parcels on a per-ERU basis, if the
credits are not to be allocated evenly. If the development agreement is silent
on this topic, all credits will be allocated evenly amongst all parcels on a
per-ERU basis.
   (F)   Use of reimbursements. Funds reimbursed to developers from impact fee
accounts for construction of an eligible capital facility must be utilized in
accordance with applicable law for the use of town funds in construction or
acquisition of capital facilities.
   (G)   Waiver of fees. If the town agrees to waive any development impact
fees assessed on development in a development agreement, the town shall
reimburse the appropriate development impact fee account for the amount that
was waived.
   (H)   No obligation. Nothing in this section obligates the town to enter
into any development agreement or to authorize any type of credit agreement
permitted by this section.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-18-2015)
§ 154.14 APPEALS.
   A development impact fee determination by town staff may be appealed in
accordance with the following procedures:
   (A)   Limited scope. An appeal shall be limited to disputes regarding the
calculation of the development impact fees for a specific development and/or
permit and calculation of ERU's for the development.
   (B)   Form of appeal. An appeal shall be initiated on such written form as
the town may prescribe by following the appeal process in §
153.005 above.
   (C)   Fees during pendency. Building permits may be issued during the
pendency of an appeal if the applicant: (1) pays the full impact fee calculated
by the town at the time the appeal is filed; or (2) provides the town with
financial assurances in the form acceptable to the Town Manager or authorized
designee equal to the full amount of the impact fee. Upon final disposition of
an appeal, the fee shall be adjusted in accordance with the decision rendered,
and a refund paid if warranted. If the appeal is denied by the town, and the
applicant has provided the town with financial assurances as set forth in
clause (2) above, the applicant shall deliver the full amount of the impact fee
to the town within 10 days of the town final decision on the appeal. If the
applicant fails to deliver the full amount of the impact fees when required by
this section, the town may draw upon such financial assurance instrument(s) as
necessary to recover the full amount of the impact fees due from the applicant.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-18-2015; Am. Ord. 2017-03, passed 11-13-2017)
§ 154.15 REFUNDS OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   Refunds. A refund (or partial refund) will be paid to a developer or
property owner who submits a written request to the town and demonstrates that:
      (1)   The developer has not proceeded with the development, the
development impact fees collected have not been expended, encumbered, or
pledged for the repayment of financing or debt, and no impact has resulted; or
      (2)   After collecting the fee to construct a capital facility the town
fails to complete construction of the capital facility within the time period
identified in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan, as it may be amended, and
the corresponding service is otherwise unavailable to the subject real property
from that capital facility or any other infrastructure and no impact has
resulted.
         (a)   For a category of necessary public services other than water or
wastewater facilities, any part of a development impact fee is not spent within
10 years of the town's receipt of the development impact fee.
         (b)   Any part of a development impact fee for water or wastewater
facilities is not spent within 15 years of the town's receipt of the
development impact fee.
      (3)   If the actual construction costs for the capital facility are less
than the construction costs projected in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan
by a factor of 10% or more, the refund shall be the difference between the
amounts of the development impact fee charged for and attributable to such
construction cost and the amount the development impact fee would have been
calculated to be if the actual construction cost had been included in the
Impact Fee Analysis. The refund contemplated by this subsection shall relate
only to the costs specific to the construction of the applicable capital
facility and shall not include any related design, administrative, or other
costs not directly incurred for construction of the capital facility that are
included in the development impact fee.
   (B)   Earned interest. A refund of a development impact fee shall include
any interest actually earned on the refunded portion of the development impact
fee by the town from the date of collection to the date of refund.
   (C)   Refund to government. If a development impact fee was paid by a
governmental entity, any refund shall be paid to that governmental entity.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-18-2015)
§ 154.16 OVERSIGHT OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE PROGRAM.
   (A)   Annual report. Within 90 days of the end of each fiscal year, the town
shall file with the Town Clerk an unaudited annual report accounting for the
collection and use of the fees for each service area and shall post the report
on its website in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-463.05(N) and (O), as amended.
   (B)   Biennial audit. In addition to the Annual Report described in division
(A) of this section, the town shall provide for a biennial, certified audit of
the town's land use assumptions, Infrastructure Improvements Plan and
development impact fees.
      (1)   An audit pursuant to this section shall be conducted by 1 or more
qualified professionals who are not employees or officials of the town and who
did not prepare the Infrastructure Improvements Plan.
      (2)   The audit shall review the collection and expenditures of
development fees for each project in the plan and provide written comments
describing the amount of development impact fees assessed, collected, and spent
on capital facilities.
      (3)   The audit shall describe the level of service in each service area,
and evaluate any inequities in implementing the Infrastructure Improvements
Plan or imposing the development impact fee.
      (4)   The town shall post the findings of the audit on the website of the
town, and shall conduct a public hearing on the audit within 60 days of the
release of the audit to the public.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-18-2015; Am. Ord. 2017-03, passed 11-13-2017)
APPENDIX A: SAMPLE FEE SCHEDULE FORMS
Table A-1: Roadway Facilities Development Impact Fee Schedule
                 Gross Fee per Unit
Category of      Service Area Service Area Service Area Service Area ERU Factor
Development Unit “A”      “B”      “C”      “D”      (ERUs per
                                                                     Unit)
                       Gross Fee per Unit
                                                                           ERU
Category of            Service Area Service Area Service Area Service Area Factor
Development   Unit     “A”      “B”      “C”      “D”      (ERUs
                                                                           per
                                                                           Unit)
Single-Family Dwelling                                                     1.0
Residential
Multi-Family  Dwelling
Residential
Mobile Home/  Space
RV Park
Retail        1,000
              sq. ft.
Lodging,
Hotel/Motel,  Room
Resort
Office        1,000
              sq. ft.
Institutional 1,000
              sq. ft.
Other         1,000
Commercial    sq. ft.
Warehouse     1,000
              sq. ft.
Other         1,000
Industrial    sq. ft.
 
   Table A-2: Parks Development Impact Fee Schedule
                 Gross Fee per Unit
Category of Unit Service Area “AService Area “BERU Factor (ERUs per
Development                                        Unit)
                              Gross Fee per Unit
Category of     Unit          Service Area Service Area “BERU Factor (ERUs
Development                   “A”                       per Unit)
Single-Family   Dwelling                                    1.0
Residential
Multi-Family    Dwelling
Residential
Mobile Home/RV  Space
Park
Retail          1,000 sq. ft.
Lodging, Hotel/ Room
Motel, Resort
Office          1,000 sq. ft.
Institutional   1,000 sq. ft.
Other           1,000 sq. ft.
Commercial
Warehouse       1,000 sq. ft.
Other           1,000 sq. ft.
Industrial
 
   Table A-3: Water Service Impact Fee Schedule (Single Service Area)
 
                            ERU Factor for
                            Single-Family  ERU Factor for
Meter Size                  Unit or        Multifamily Units    ERU Factor for
(inches)       Meter Type   Individually   Sharing Common       All Other Users
                            Metered        Meters (any meter
                            Multifamily    size)
                            Unit
5/8 ;times; 3/ Displacement 1              [      ] per MF1Unit
4              or multi-jet
[Insert        [Insert Town
corresponding  meter types]
meter sizes]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
 
   Table A-4: Fire Development Impact Fee Schedule
                 Gross Fee per Unit
Category of Unit Service Area Service Area “BService Are “CERU Factor (ERUs
Development      “A”                                       per Unit)
                            Gross Fee per Unit
Category of                 Service Area Service Area Service Are ERU Factor
Development   Unit          “A”      “B”      “C”     (ERUs per
                                                                  Unit)
Single-Family Dwelling                                            1.0
Residential
Multi-Family  Dwelling
Residential
Mobile Home/  Space
RV Park
Retail        1,000 sq. ft.
Lodging,
Hotel/ Motel, Room
Resort
Office        1,000 sq. ft.
Institutional 1,000 sq. ft.
Other         1,000 sq. ft.
Commercial
Warehouse     1,000 sq. ft.
Other         1,000 sq. ft.
Industrial
 
   Table A-5: Police Development Impact Fee Schedule
                 Gross Fee per Unit
Category of Unit Service Area Service Area “BService Are “CERU Factor (ERUs
Development      “A”                                       per Unit)
                            Gross Fee per Unit
Category of                 Service Area Service Area Service Are ERU Factor
Development   Unit          “A”      “B”      “C”     (ERUs per
                                                                  Unit)
Single-Family Dwelling                                            1.0
Residential
Multi-Family  Dwelling
Residential
Mobile Home/  Space
RV Park
Retail        1,000 sq. ft.
Lodging,
Hotel/ Motel, Room
Resort
Office        1,000 sq. ft.
Institutional 1,000 sq. ft.
Other         1,000 sq. ft.
Commercial
Warehouse     1,000 sq. ft.
Other         1,000 sq. ft.
Industrial
 
   Table A-6: Storm Drainage Development Impact Fee Schedule
 
                                         Gross Fee per Unit
Land Use Unit                            Service Area Service Area ERU Factor
                                         “A”      “B”      (ERUs per Unit)
Single-
Family   Dwelling                                                  1.00
Detached
All
other    [     ] acre of gross site area                      1.00
uses
Outside Funding Credit                                             $       per ERU
 
   Table A-7: Equivalent Dwelling Unit Table for Development Impact Fee
Calculation
                         ERU Factor for Category of Necessary Service
Use Type Conversion Unit Parks Libraries Fire Protection Police
                                 ERU Factor for Category of Necessary Service
Use Type         Conversion Unit Parks Libraries Fire Protection Police
Single-Family    ERU                                           
Residential
Multi-Family     ERU                                           
Residential
Mobile Home/RV   ERU                                           
Park
Retail           ERU                                           
Lodging, Hotel/  ERU                                           
Motel, Resort
Office           1,000 sq. ft.                                 
Institutional    1,000 sq. ft.                                 
Other Commercial 1,000 sq. ft.                                 
Warehouse        1,000 sq. ft.                                 
Other Industrial 1,000 sq. ft.                                 
Nursery          Acre            Requires an independent impact analysis
Golf course      Acre            Requires an independent impact analysis
University       Student         Requires an independent impact analysis
Agriculture      Acre            Requires an independent impact analysis
Bus depot        1,000 sq. ft.   Requires an independent impact analysis
Indoor arena     Acre            Requires an independent impact analysis
Outdoor arena    Acre            Requires an independent impact analysis
 
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-18-2015)
CHAPTER 155: COLORADO CITY MUNICIPAL AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONING
Section
   
155.01   Findings
   
155.02   Short title
   
155.03   Definitions
   
155.04   Airport height restriction zones
   
155.05   Airport zone height limitations
   
155.06   Compatible land use regulations
   
155.07   Nonconforming uses
   
155.08   Permits
   
155.09   Enforcement
   
155.10   Appeals
   
155.11   Judicial review
   
155.12   Conflicting provisions
   
155.13   Land use compatibility tables
 
   
155.99   Penalty
§ 155.01 FINDINGS.
   (A)   It is hereby found that an obstruction has the potential for
endangering the lives and property of users of the Colorado City Municipal
Airport and property or occupants of land in its vicinity; that an obstruction
may affect existing and future instrument approach minimums at the Colorado
City Municipal Airport; and that an obstruction may reduce the size of areas
available for the landing, takeoff and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to
destroy or impair the utility of the Colorado City Municipal Airport and the
public investment therein.
   (B)   Accordingly, it is declared:
      (1)   That the Colorado City Municipal Airport fulfills an essential
community purpose;
      (2)   That the creation or establishment of an obstruction has the
potential of being a public nuisance and may injure the region served by the
Colorado City Municipal Airport;
      (3)   That it is necessary in the interest of the public health, public
safety and general welfare that the creation or establishment of obstructions
that are a hazard to air navigation be prevented;
      (4)   That the creation or establishment of a use which is inconsistent
with the nature of the Colorado City Municipal Airport may injure the region
served by the airport and the utility of the airport;
      (5)   That it is necessary in the interest of the public health, public
safety and general welfare that the creation or establishment of uses which are
inconsistent with air navigation and development of the airport and its use be
prevented;
      (6)   That the encroachment of noise sensitive or otherwise incompatible
land uses within certain areas as set forth herein below may endanger the
health, safety and welfare of the owners, occupants or users of the land; and
      (7)   That the prevention of these uses or obstructions should be
accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police
power of the municipality.
   (C)   It is further declared that the prevention of inconsistent uses, the
elimination, removal, alteration or mitigation of hazards to air navigation, or
the marking and lighting of construction are public purposes for which a
political subdivision may raise and expend public funds and acquire land or
interests in land.
   (D)   It is hereby ordained by the Town of Colorado City as follows.
(Ord. 2009-01, passed 4-13-2009; Am. Ord. 2020-01, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 155.02 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Colorado City Municipal
Airport Overlay Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 2009-01, passed 4-13-2009; Am. Ord. 2020-01, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 155.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIRPORT.  Colorado City Municipal Airport.
   AIRPORT ELEVATION. The highest point of an airport’s usable landing area
measured in feet above mean sea level.
   APPROACH SURFACE. A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway
centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface
and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in
§
155.04. In plan the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the
perimeter of the approach zone.
   APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL AND CONICAL ZONES. These zones are set
forth in §
155.05 below.
   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.  A quasi-judicial board consisting of not less than 5
nor more than 7 members appointed by the Colorado City Town Council to hear and
decide appeals from the Hearing Officer.
   CONICAL SURFACE. A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery
of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to 1 for a horizontal distance of
4,000 feet.
   HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION. An obstruction determined to have a substantial
adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace.
   HEARING OFFICER. A quasi-judicial arbiter of issues involving the
interpretation or application of airport zoning and land use ordinances.
   HEIGHT. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this chapter and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea
level elevation unless otherwise specified.
   HELIPORT PRIMARY SURFACE. The primary surface coincides in size and shape
with the designated takeoff and landing area of a heliport. This surface is a
horizontal plane at the elevation of the established heliport elevation.
   HORIZONTAL SURFACE.  A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established
airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter
of the horizontal zone.
   LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY. A runway that is constructed for and intended to
be used by propeller driven aircraft of greater than 12,500 pounds maximum
gross weight and jet powered aircraft.
   NAVD 88. North American Vertical Datum 1988. All elevations in this chapter
are referenced to the 1988 North American Vertical Datum.
   NONCONFORMING USE. Any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth, or
use of and which is inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or an
amendment thereto.
   NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. A runway having an existing instrument
approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal
guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in
nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned. It
also means a runway for which a nonprecision approach system is planned and is
so indicated on an approved airport layout plan or any other planning document.
   OBSTRUCTION. Any structure, growth or other object, including a mobile
object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in §
155.05.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association,
joint stock association or governmental entity; includes a trustee, a receiver,
an assignee or a similar representative of any of them.
   PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. A runway having an existing instrument approach
procedure utilizing an instrument landing system (ILS), a precision approach
radar (PAR) or a global positioning system (GPS). It also means a runway for
which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved
airport layout plan or any other planning document.
   PRIMARY SURFACE.  A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the
runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200
feet beyond each end of that runway; for military runways or when the runway
has no specially prepared hard surface or planned hard surface, the primary
surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface is
set forth in §
155.04. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the
elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.
   RUNWAY. A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of
aircraft along its length.
   STRUCTURE. An object, including mobile object, constructed or installed by
man, including but without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks,
earth formation and overhead transmission lines.
   TRANSITIONAL SURFACES. These surfaces extend outward at 90-degree angles to
the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of 7 feet
horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and
approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces.
Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach surfaces,
which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a
distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach
surface and at 90-degree angles to the extended runway centerline.
   TREE. Any object of natural growth.
   UTILITY RUNWAY. A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by
propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less.
   VISUAL RUNWAY.  A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using
visual approach procedures.
(Ord. 2009-01, passed 4-13-2009; Am. Ord. 2017-03, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord.
2020-01, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 155.04 AIRPORT HEIGHT RESTRICTION ZONES.
   (A)   In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby
created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying
beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces and
conical surfaces as they apply to the Colorado City Municipal Airport. Such
zones are shown on the Colorado City Municipal Airport Federal Aviation
Regulation (FAR) Part 77 Airspace Drawing. Three original, official, and
identical copies of the FAR Part 77 Airspace Drawing reflecting the boundaries
of the airport height restriction overlay zoning districts of the Town of
Colorado City, Arizona are hereby adopted, and the Commissioner and Colorado
City Town Clerk are hereby authorized to sign and attest each map as the
official Colorado City Municipal Airport FAR Part 77 Airspace Drawing of the
Town of Colorado City, Arizona, and such maps shall be filed and maintained as
follows:
      (1)   One copy shall be filed for permanent record in the office of the
Colorado City Town Clerk and shall be designated as Exhibit 1. This copy shall
not be changed in any manner.
      (2)   One copy shall be filed in the Planning and Zoning Department and
shall be designated as Exhibit 2. This copy shall be maintained by the Planning
and Zoning Department by posting thereon all subsequent changes and amendments.
      (3)   One copy shall be filed in the office of the Airport Manager and
shall be designated as Exhibit 3. This copy shall be maintained by the Airport
Manager by posting thereon all subsequent changes and amendments.
   (B)   Each portion of an area located in more than one of the following
zones shall be evaluated independently according to the zone in which it is
located. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
      (1)   Precision instrument runway approach zone (larger than utility
runway).  The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the
primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward
uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet.
Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
      (2)   Nonprecision instrument runway approach zone (larger than utility
runway). The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the
primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward
uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance 10,000 feet from
the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of
the runway.
      (3)   Nonprecision instrument runway approach zone (utility aircraft).
The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary
surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a
width of 2,000 feet at a horizontal distance 5,000 feet from the primary
surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
      (4)   Visual runway approach zone (larger than utility runway). The inner
edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and
is 500 feet wide. The approach surface expands uniformly to a width of 1,500
feet at a horizontal distance 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its
centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
      (5)   Visual runway approach zone (utility aircraft). The inner edge of
this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 250
feet wide. The approach surface expands uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a
horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. The centerline of
the approach zone is a continuation of the centerline of the runway.
      (6)   Transitional zone. The transitional zones are the areas beneath the
transitional surfaces.
      (7)   Horizontal zone. The horizontal zone is established by swinging
arcs of 5,000 or 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary
surface of the primary runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines
tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and
transitional zones. The horizontal zone was constructed with 10,000 feet radii.
      (8)   Conical zone. The conical zone is established as the area that
commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward there
from a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
(Ord. 2009-01, passed 4-13-2009; Am. Ord. 2020-01, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 155.05 AIRPORT ZONE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure shall be erected,
altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone
created by this chapter to a height in excess of the applicable height limit
herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby
established and defined for each of the zones as follows:
   (A)   Precision instrument runway approach zone. Slopes 50 feet outward for
each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the
primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the
extended runway centerline. Then slopes 40 feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the first 10,000 feet and
extending to a horizontal distance of 40,000 feet along the extended runway
centerline.
   (B)   Nonprecision instrument runway approach zone (larger than utility
runway). Slopes 34 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of
and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal
distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.
   (C)   Nonprecision instrument runway approach zone (utility aircraft).
Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the
same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of
5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.
   (D)   Visual runway approach zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot
upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface
and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway
centerline.
   (E)   Transitional zone. Slopes 7 feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and
the approach surface, and extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport
elevation. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits
sloping 7 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at
the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where they
intersect the conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach
zone projects beyond the conical zone, there are established height limits
sloping 7 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at
the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending a horizontal distance
of 5,000 feet measured at 90-degree angles to the extended runway centerline.
   (F)   Horizontal zone. Established at 150 feet above the airport elevation.
   (G)   Conical zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at
the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the airport
elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation.
(Ord. 2009-01, passed 4-13-2009; Am. Ord. 2020-01, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 155.06 COMPATIBLE LAND USE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Airport compatible land use overlay zoning districts. For the purpose
of regulating the development of noise sensitive land uses to promote
compatibility between the airport and the surrounding land uses, to protect the
airport from incompatible development and to promote the health, safety and
general welfare of property users, the controlled area of Colorado City
Municipal Airport is divided into Airport Compatible Land Use Overlay Zoning
Districts. The Airport Compatible Land Use Overlay Zoning Districts established
herein shall be known as:
 
Off Airport Land Use Zone Number Zoning District Name
D                                Airport Influence Zone (AIZ)
C                                Traffic Pattern Zone (TPZ)
B                                Approach Zone (AZ)
A                                Runway Protection Zone (RPZ)
 
   (B)   Off Airport Land Use Drawing.  The boundaries of the Airport
Compatible Land Use Overlay Zoning Districts set out herein are delineated upon
the Colorado City Municipal Airport Off Airport Land Use Drawing of the Town of
Colorado City, Arizona. Said Off Airport Land Use Drawing is adopted by
reference and made a part of this chapter as fully as if the same were set
forth herein in detail.
   (C)   Three original, official, and identical copies of the Off Airport Land
Use Drawing reflecting the boundaries of the Airport Compatible Land Use
Overlay Zoning Districts of the Town of Colorado City, Arizona are hereby
adopted, and the Commissioner and the Colorado City Town Clerk are hereby
authorized to sign and attest each map as the official Off Airport Land Use
Drawing of the Town of Colorado City, Arizona, and such maps shall be filed and
maintained as follows:
      (1)   One copy shall be filed for permanent record in the office of the
Colorado City Town Clerk and shall be designated as Exhibit 1. This copy shall
not be changed in any manner.
      (2)   One copy shall be filed in the Planning and Zoning Department and
shall be designated as Exhibit 2. This copy shall be maintained by the Planning
Department by posting thereon all subsequent changes and amendments.
      (3)   One copy shall be filed in the office of the Airport Manager and
shall be designated as Exhibit 3. This copy shall be maintained by the Airport
Manager by posting thereon all subsequent changes and amendments.
   (D)   Airport compatible land use overlay zoning district boundary lines.
Land use overlay zoning district boundary lines shown on the official Off
Airport Land Use Drawing shall be located and delineated along contour lines
established for the Colorado City Municipal Airport. Where uncertainty exists
as to the boundaries of the Airport Compatible Land Use Overlay Zoning
Districts as shown on the official map, the following rules shall apply:
      (1)   Boundaries shall be scaled from the nearest runway end shown on the
map.
      (2)   Boundaries shall be scaled from the nearest physical feature shown
on the map.
      (3)   Boundaries may be scaled from the nearest platted lot line as shown
on the map.
      (4)   Distances not specifically indicated on the original Off Airport
Land Use Drawing shall be determined by a scaled measurement on the map.
   (E)   Where physical features on the ground differ from the information
shown on the official Off Airport Land Use Drawing or when there arises a
question as to how or where a parcel of property is zoned and such questions
cannot be resolved by the application of division (D), the property shall be
considered to be classified as the most restrictive Airport Compatible Land Use
Overlay Zoning District.
   (F)   Where a parcel of land lies within more than 1 Airport Compatible Land
Use Overlay Zoning District, the zone within which each portion of the property
is located shall apply individually to each portion of the development.
   (G)   Use of land and buildings. Within the Airport Compatible Land Use
Overlay Zoning Districts as defined herein, no land shall hereafter be used and
no structure or other object shall hereafter be erected, altered, converted or
modified other than for those compatible land uses permitted by underlying
comprehensive zoning districts, as specified in the Town of Colorado City Land
Use Code. Additional land uses are prohibited in the Airport Compatible Land
Use Overlay Zoning Districts, regardless of underlying zoning, as set forth in
the Land Use Compatibility Table in §
155.13.
   (H)   Where any use of prohibited land and buildings set forth in division
(G) conflicts with any use of land and buildings set forth in the Town of
Colorado Land Use Code, as an allowed use on the Zoning District Map, this
chapter shall apply.
   (I)   Division (G) does not apply to property within the official boundaries
of the airport.
   (J)   Where specified on the Airport Compatible Land Use Table, the property
owner shall dedicate, in advance of receiving a building permit, an aviation
clear zone easement to the Town of Colorado City, Arizona. The purpose of this
easement shall be to establish a maximum height restriction on the use of
property and to hold the public harmless for any damages caused by noise,
vibration, fumes, dust, fuel, fuel particles, or other effects that may be
caused by the operation of aircraft landing at, taking off from, or operating
on, or at, public airport facilities.
   (K)   All structures and uses within the Approach Zone (AZ) or Runway
protection Zone (RPZ) shall be limited to the following:
      (1)   No glare producing materials shall be used on the exterior of any
structure, including any metal building, which are hazardous to aviation; and
      (2)   There shall be no display of signs which produce a flashing or
blinking effect, nor shall any lighting project upward in a manner that would
interfere with aircraft.
   (L)   Additional land use regulations. Within the Town of Colorado City,
Arizona the more restrictive of the Town of Colorado City Land Use Code or
division (G) above, shall apply to the development of all property covered by
the Off Airport Land Use Drawing.
   (M)   On property within the Off Airport Land Use Drawing jurisdiction, but
outside the incorporated limits of the Town of Colorado City, Arizona, division
(G) above shall apply to the development of all property covered by the Off
Airport Land Use Drawing, and to formulate land use recommendations or
responses from other jurisdictions.
   (N)   When a provision of this section conflicts with any airport height
hazard restrictions, the most restrictive provision shall apply.
   (O)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter or other chapter
of the Town of Colorado City Land Use Code, no use may be made of land, water,
or structures within any zone established by this chapter in such a manner as
to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio
communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to
distinguish between airport lights and others, or result in glare in the eyes
of pilots using the airport; impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport;
create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with
the landing, taking off or flight operations of aircraft utilizing the airport.
   (P)   When a subdivision plat is required for any property within an Airport
Compatible Land Use Overlay Zoning District or within an area shown on the FAR
Part 77 Airspace Drawing for the Colorado City Municipal Airport, the property
owner shall dedicate an aviation hazard easement to the Town of Colorado City
over and across that property. This easement shall establish a height
restriction on the use of the property and hold the public harmless from any
damages caused by noise, vibration, fumes, dust, fuel, fuel particles, or other
effects that may be caused by the operation of aircraft taking off, landing, or
operating on or near the Colorado City Municipal Airport.
(Ord. 2009-01, passed 4-13-2009; Am. Ord. 2020-01, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 155.07 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this
chapter shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other
change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations
as of the effective date of this chapter, or otherwise interfere with the
continuance of nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any
change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the
construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of
this chapter, and is diligently prosecuted. Any structure previously regulated
by airport zoning must comply with the previously existing regulations.
Nonconforming land uses existing as of the effective date of this chapter may
be modified such that:
      (1)   Only existing structures may be enlarged or expanded;
      (2)   That they do not result in any greater violation of height
restrictions; and
      (3)   A variance in accordance with §
155.08(H) is obtained.
   (B)   Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this
section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree may be
required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such
markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Town of Colorado City to
indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the
presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be
installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the town.
(Ord. 2009-01, passed 4-13-2009; Am. Ord. 2020-01, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 155.08 PERMITS.
   (A)   Future uses. Except as specifically provided in division (D) below, no
material change shall be made in the use of land, no structure shall be erected
or otherwise established, and no tree shall be planted in any zone hereby
created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted.
   (B)   Application. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose
for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to
be determined whether the regulating use, structure, or tree would conform to
the regulations herein prescribed. Each application shall be accompanied by an
application fee as established by resolution of the Town Council. Each
application shall also include the following information:
      (1)   Property boundary lines as they relate to the zone boundaries shown
on the Off Airport Land Use Map;
      (2)   Location, elevation, use and height of all existing and proposed
buildings, structures, utility lines, roads or trees where trees are taller
than 35 feet;
      (3)   Maximum elevations of proposed structures. Elevations shall be
based upon the survey of an Arizona registered professional engineer or
licensed land surveyor, accurate to plus or minus 1 foot shown as mean sea
level elevation;
      (4)   An FAA Form 7460-1, Notice of Proposed Construction or Alteration.
   (C)   No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter
shall be granted unless a variance has been approved in accordance with
division (H) below.
   (D)   In the area lying within the limits of the approach zone, transition
zone, horizontal zone, and conical zone, no permit shall be required by this
chapter for any tree or structure less than 200 feet above ground level which
is also lower than an imaginary surface extending outward and upward at a slope
of 100 feet horizontal for each 1 foot vertical beginning at the closest point
of the closest runway.
   (E)   Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be
construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction or alteration
of any structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any of the height limits
established by this chapter.
   (F)   Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the
establishment or creation of any obstruction or permit a nonconforming use,
structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on
the effective date of this chapter or any amendments thereto or than it is when
the application for a permit is made.
   (G)   Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the Town of
Colorado City determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been
abandoned or more than 80% torn down, physically deteriorated or decayed, no
permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the
applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.
   (H)   Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any
structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use property, not in accordance
with the regulations prescribed in this chapter, may apply to the Hearing
Officer for a variance from such regulations by following the appeal and
variance process in Town Code Chapter 153. The application for variance shall
be accompanied by a determination from, the Federal Aviation Administration as
to the effect of a proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and
the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed
where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the
regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and relief granted, will not be
contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation,
will do substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the appeal and
variance procedure outlined in Town Code
Chapter 153.
   (I)   Additionally, no application for variance to the requirements of this
chapter may be considered by the Hearing Officer unless a copy of the
application has been furnished to the Town of Colorado City for advice as to
the aeronautical effects of the variance. If the Town of Colorado City does not
respond to the application within 15 days after receipt, the Hearing Officer
may act on its own to grant or deny said application.
   (J)   Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may,
if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this chapter
and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the
owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate, and maintain,
at the owner’s expense, such markings and lights as condition may require in
accordance with FAA provisions.
(Ord. 2009-01, passed 4-13-2009; Am. Ord. 2017-03, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord.
2020-01, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 155.09 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Town of Colorado City to administer and enforce
the regulations prescribed herein. In areas outside of the Town of Colorado
City incorporated area, the Mohave County Planning and Zoning Department will
assist the Town of Colorado City to enforce applicable regulations.
Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the Town of Colorado
City or (outside of the incorporated area) to Mohave County upon a form
published for that purpose. Applications required by this chapter shall be
promptly considered and granted or denied.
(Ord. 2009-01, passed 4-13-2009; Am. Ord. 2017-03, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord.
2020-01, passed 4- 13-2020)
§ 155.10 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the
Town of Colorado City made in the administration of this chapter, may appeal to
the Hearing Officer by following the appeal and variance process in Town Code
Chapter 153.
   (B)   All appeals hereunder must be taken within 15 days of such decision,
by filing with the Town Clerk a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
thereof. The Town of Colorado City shall forthwith transmit to the Hearing
Officer all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed
from was taken.
(Ord. 2009-01, passed 4-13-2009; Am. Ord. 2017-03, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord.
2020-01, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 155.11 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the Board
of Adjustment, may at any time within 30 days after the Board has rendered its
decision, file a complaint for special action in the Superior Court to review
the legislative body or Board decision, as provided in A.R.S. § 9-462.06.
Filing the complaint does not stay proceedings on the decision sought to be
reviewed, but the court may, on application, grant a stay and on final hearing
may affirm or reverse, in whole or in part, or modify the decision reviewed.
(Ord. 2009-01, passed 4-13-2009; Am. Ord. 2020-01, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 155.12 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations
prescribed in this chapter and any other regulations applicable to the same
area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or
trees, and the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation
or requirements shall govern and prevail.
(Ord. 2009-01, passed 4-13-2009; Am. Ord. 2020-01, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 155.13 LAND USE COMPATIBILITY TABLE.
        Airport Influence Traffic Pattern Approach Zone  Runway Protection
Land Use Zone (AIZ)        Zone (TPZ)      (AZ)           Zone (RPZ)
Category
               Airport         Traffic Pattern Approach Zone  Runway
Land Use        Influence Zone  Zone (TPZ)      (AZ)           Protection Zone
Category        (AIZ)                                          (RPZ)
Residential
Single-Family,
Nursing Homes,
Mobile Homes,   +               - ( 3)          - (1, 3)       --
Multi-Family,                                   - (1, 3) 
Apartments,
Condominiums
Public
Schools,
Libraries,
Hospitals
Churches,       +               o (3)         - (3)          --
Auditoriums,    +               o (3)         - (3)          --
Concert Halls   ++              ++                            - (2, 5)
Transportation,
Parking,
Cemeteries
Commercial and Industrial
Offices, Retail
Trade
Service
Commercial,
Wholesale Trade
Warehousing,    ++              +               o (3)        --
Light           ++              ++              o (3)        --
Industrial      ++              ++              o (3)        --
General
Manufacturing,
Utilities
Extractive
Industry
Agricultural
Cropland
Livestock
Breeding
Parks,
Playgrounds,    ++              ++              ++             ++
Zoos, Golf      ++              ++              ++             - (2)  
Courses         ++              ++              ++             - (2)  
Riding Stables, ++              +               - (3)        --
Water           o               - (4)           --             --
Recreation      ++              ++              ++             ++
Outdoor
Spectator
Sports
Amphitheaters
Open Space
++ Acceptable + Normally Acceptable o Marginally Acceptable - Normally
Unacceptable - - Unacceptable
Note: Development projects which are wildlife attractant, including sewerage
ponds and landfills, within 10,000 feet of the airport are unacceptable. (Ref.:
FAA AC 150/5200-33)
Conditions:
1   If allowed, avigation easements and disclosure must be required as a
condition of development.
2   Any structures associated with uses allowed in the RPZ must be located
outside the RPZ.
3   If no reasonable alternative exists, use should be located as far from
extended centerline as possible.
4   If no reasonable alternative exists, use should be located as far form
extended runway centerline and traffic patterns as possible.
5   Transportation facilities in the RPZ (i.e. roads, railroads, waterways)
must be configured to comply with Part 77 requirements.
 
(Ord. 2009-01, passed 4-13-2009; Am. Ord. 2020-01, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 155.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished according to §
10.99. Each day or part thereof that an activity is carried on in violation of
this chapter shall be a separate violation.
(Ord. 2009-01, passed 4-13-2009; Am. Ord. 2020-01, passed 4-13-2020)
CHAPTER 156: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Section
   
156.01   Title
   
156.02   Purpose
   
156.03   Applicability
   
156.04   Application and approval process
   
156.05   Amendments
   
156.06   Developer’s responsibility
   
156.07   Qualified designers
   
156.08   Design standards
   
156.09   Streets; general
   
156.10   Design standards and maintenance
   
156.11   Street classification and dimensions
   
156.12   Dead end streets
   
156.13   Intersections
   
156.14   Design speed
   
156.15   Street lighting, signage, and traffic control
   
156.16   Typical street cross-sections
   
156.17   Street construction and surfacing
   
156.18   Watercourses and storm water drainage
   
156.19   Off-site improvements
   
156.20   [Reserved]
   
156.21   Addresses and road names
   
156.22   Encroachment on public ways and property
   
156.23   Public utilities standard specifications for design and construction
   
156.24   Public utility line placement
   
156.25   Utility system impacts
   
156.26   Mapping of utilities
   
156.27   Water system
   
156.28   Water system amendments to APWA standard specifications
   
156.29   Waste water system amendments to APWA standard specifications
   
156.30   Electric/power systems
   
156.31   Gas systems
   
156.32   Grading, cuts and fills
   
156.33   [Reserved]
   
156.34   [Reserved]
   
156.35   [Reserved]
   
156.36   [Reserved]
   
156.37   Driveways
§ 156.01 TITLE.
   These regulations shall hereafter be known, cited and referred to as the
“Development Standards.”
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017)
§ 156.02 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of the Development Standards is to provide the development
community with a consistent set of standards to guide the physical development
and the visual quality of the community to be reviewed and approved with the
site plan and preliminary plat, or development agreement process. These
criteria are intended to assist in orderly growth and promote the public
health, safety and general welfare of the community.
   (B)   Chapter One of the Town of Colorado City’s General Plan states that,
“Greatplaces are designed for human comfort, safety, and enjoyment. They
develop when people inspired by quality of purpose are moved to provide for the
needs of the people. Great places are not created quickly. They are conceived
as a pattern of roads, buildings, and open spaces. When that pattern is a close
match to a community’s values it increases that community’s quality of life.”
These development standards are guided by the General Plan of the Town of
Colorado City.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord. 2021-22, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 156.03 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   These Development Standards are intended to enhance and maintain the
quality of the community by providing guidance for property development and
design, including new single-unit residences, multi-unit residences,
commercial, and industrial areas. The Development Standards are composed of
development and design guidelines that provide the basis for development review
and are for the benefit of all.
   (B)   Improving these Development Standards is the desire and in the best
interest of everyone. The Town of Colorado City (hereafter referred to as
“town,” encourage everyone’s suggestions.
   (C)   All development shall comply with the code of ordinances of the town
and the state statutes of the State of Arizona. Any unauthorized development
shall be unlawful, against the public safety and welfare, and a public
nuisance, and the town may immediately commence all necessary actions or
proceedings for the abatement, enjoinment and removal thereof in the manner
provided by A.R.S. § 9-467 and may take other lawful steps and may apply to the
court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate,
enjoin and restrain any person, firm, partnership, or corporation from setting
up, developing, erecting, building, moving or maintaining any such building,
developing or selling any property contrary to the provisions of these
Development Standards.
   (D)   Violations of the provisions of this code are considered civil code
infractions subject to general penalties specified in Town Code §
10.99 General Penalty and City Code Chapter 4, Ordinance Violations and
Penalties, except that violations of this code shall not be considered a
separate offense for each day that the violation continues.
   (E)   If a provision/rule/regulation in these “Development Standards”
conflicts with another provision/rule/regulation in these “Development
Standards” or any other town code, the more restrictive provision/rule/
regulation shall apply unless approved by the town planning commission.
   (F)   The Development Standards in this document shall comply with the Fair
Housing Act contained in U.S. Code: Title 42 U.S.C. §§ 3601 et seq.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord. 2021-22, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 156.04 APPLICATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS.
   (A)   Approval required.
      (1)   Whenever any development of land is proposed, and before any permit
for the erection of a structure in the proposed development is granted, the
property owner (developer), or his or her authorized agent, shall apply for and
secure approval of the proposed development in accordance with the procedures
outlined herein.
      (2)   Building permits will only be issued after fire hydrants are
operable and a fire apparatus access road is available to the building site.
   (B)   Grading. Any development of property which includes grading that
changes the historic drainage on the subject property or adjacent property,
proposed utility service, preparation for building construction or other
infrastructure development or commercial activities such as recreational
facilities, campgrounds, RV parks, and the like must have prior development
review approval by the Planning and Zoning Department.
   (C)   Conform to general plan. Development must generally conform to the
Town General Plan, and meet applicable zoning requirements.
   (D)   Subdivision. If property is proposed to be subdivided, all development
shall follow the subdivision process outlined in Town Code
Chapter 153. These Development Standards apply to subdividing of land where
applicable.
   (E)   Site plan reviews shall be completed using the process in Town Code §
152.095 Site Plan Review.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord. 2021-22, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 156.05 AMENDMENTS.
   Amendments to permits or other forms of approval shall follow the process
outlined in §
152.086(J) Amendments.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord. 2021-22, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 156.06 DEVELOPER’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Adequate public infrastructure and utilities.
      (1)   It is the developer’s responsibility to design, furnish, install,
provide assurance for completion, and otherwise ensure that the property being
subdivided or developed is served by adequate public infrastructure and
utilities, as required by the development regulations and standards as adopted
by the town from time to time.
      (2)   Assurances for completion of improvements for the town shall meet
the requirements found in Town Code §§
153.080 through
153.086 and A.R.S. § 9-463.05.
   (B)   Enforcement. An occupancy holdback agreement or building permit
holdback agreement as part of a development agreement may be considered as an
assurance option for completion of improvements. (A.R.S. § 9-467).
   (C)   Quality. The developer shall be responsible for the quality of all
public infrastructure materials and workmanship as found in Town Code §
153.086, Inspection and Release.
   (D)   Land shall not be approved for final plat use unless and until
adequate public infrastructure and utilities have been provided and have been
adequately assured for by the developer, in accordance with the minimum
requirements for assurance stated in these regulations.
   (E)   Adjoining property infrastructure needs. Portions of any contiguous
property within the control of the developer shall not be excluded from within
the boundaries of a subdivision/development when needed or required for any
traffic, public utility, drainage, or flood control facility pertinent to the
subdivision/development.
   (F)   Remote campgrounds that do not have permanent buildings (except for
restroom facilities), shall provide an accessible drive that meets the
requirements of the latest edition of the International Fire Code for a fire
apparatus access road. Remote campgrounds are required to provide fire hydrants
if within 300 feet of a municipal water main line. Campgrounds shall provide
for sanitary toilet and handwashing facilities and shall meet the requirements
of the County Health Department.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord. 2021-22, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 156.07 QUALIFIED DESIGNERS.
   The design of those improvements of a development such as structural
matters, streets, drainage provisions, water supply and sewage disposal shall
be made by a qualified engineer registered in the State of Arizona.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord. 2021-22, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 156.08 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   The town hereby adopts the design standards found in the current or
latest Manual of Standard Plans, and the latest Manual of Standard
Specifications developed by and published by the American Public Works
Association (hereafter referred to as “APWA”).
   (B)   If there is a discrepancy between the APWA and the design standards in
this document, the design standards in this document shall apply.
   (C)   The design standards specified in this document and the APWA may be
revised by the Town Council with the recommendation of one or more of the
Public Works Director, the Utility Manager, the Town Engineer, or the P&Z
Administrator in response to specific, particular, or changing circumstances or
requirements or technological improvements justifying those changes.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord. 2021-22, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 156.09 STREETS; GENERAL.
   (A)   Adequate primary, secondary and emergency access, if necessary, shall
be provided from an existing dedicated public street to the land being
developed. Approval of the access shall be a condition of approval.
      (1)   Provisions shall be made for direct access to a public street for
each lot or parcel, and for direct public street access to adjacent properties
in conformance to town street standards.
      (2)   Commercial or industrial use will require parking, loading and
circulation driveways to be located off-street.
   (B)   When a tract/parcel/lot abuts an arterial or collector street, the
Planning Commission or Town Council, at their sole discretion, may require
abutting properties to have sole access onto a parallel or an intersecting
local street for the purpose to preserve arterial and collector street
capacity.
   (C)   The arrangement, character, extent, grade, width and location of all
roadways or streets shall conform to these regulations, public works standards,
specifications and details, and any town adopted transportation plan, capital
facilities plan, general plan, or specific area community plan affecting the
proposed streets.
   (D)   The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation or
appropriate projection of existing streets in adjacent surrounding areas, and
as may be indicated in the Town General Plan, and any applicable specific town
area plan, or town transportation plan. All center lines shall be continuations
of the center lines of existing streets in contiguous areas. In cases where
straight continuations are not physically possible, the center lines may be
continued in a curvilinear manner as needed.
   (E)   Local streets shall be designed to provide proper circulation of local
traffic. Adequate stopping and sight distance, degree of curve and surface
elevation shall conform to current AASHTO design standards. (AASHTO: American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.)
   (F)   The design of streets shall conform to all related design standards
and to the cross-section examples provided within this section.
   (G)   All streets shall be constructed to the Town’s adopted APWA Standard
Plans or APWA Standard Specifications.
   (H)   The town may require a sidewalk wherever a curb and gutter is
required. Curb and gutter sections may be either 24 inches in width or 30
inches in width. Minimum right-of-way width shall be adjusted to meet these
standards as necessary.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord. 2021-22, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 156.10 DESIGN STANDARDS AND MAINTENANCE.
   All streets developed or improved in conjunction with a development shall
either be:
   (A)    Built to town standards, dedicated by plat and accepted by the Town
Council as public streets maintained by the town;
   (B)   Built to town standards, dedicated by plat and approved by the Town
Council in conjunction with an approved special maintenance district,
completion bond, trust, improvement district, or other appropriate security, as
public streets maintained by the town; or
   (C)   Built to town standards and continuously maintained as private
streets.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord. 2021-22, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 156.11 STREET CLASSIFICATION AND DIMENSIONS.
   (A)   Each development shall provide for adequate traffic circulation that
incorporates the town’s street functional classification system as described by
the town’s general plan to handle the projected traffic volumes, design speed,
system continuity and overall safety.
   (B)   Pedestrians and bicycle traffic should be considered in the planning
and design of all developed streets. (See town’s 2011 Transportation Study).
   (C)   Developments are generally required to provide two improved accesses
depending on the forecasted traffic volumes and shall be of proper widths when
the area is fully developed.
   (D)   Local residential streets shall feature a typical right-of way width
of 66 feet (to be adjusted as necessary to accommodate required public
infrastructure improvements including sidewalks). Upon the recommendation of
staff and the Planning Commission, the Town Council may authorize a local
residential street with a narrower right-of-way width depending on topography,
traffic counts, traffic studies, the town’s general plan, future road plans,
and associated planning documents.
   (E)   Collector and arterial streets shall feature a typical right-of-way
width of 86 feet, wherever practical and possible. Exceptions must be approved
by the Town Engineer.
   (F)   New streets/development shall align with collector or major roads
designated on the Town’s General Plan Major Roads Map and shall meet the
setback requirements for the Major Roads Plan, or shall receive approval from
the Town Council. Alignment and setback shall preserve the general spacing and
overall connectivity of major roads with sufficient space to preserve collector
sized rights-of-way.
   (G)   A 15 foot wide public utilities and drainage easement shall be
provided on each side of the street right-of-way.
   (H)   Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of five feet.
   (I)   Curb return radii shall be a minimum of 25 feet.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord. 2021-22, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 156.12 DEAD END STREETS.
   (A)   The number of dead-end streets should be minimized to provide greater
traffic circulation and less traffic volume on collector streets.
   (B)   Dead end streets shall be designed at the closed end with a circular
turn-around for a cul-de-sac having a right-of-way diameter of at least 100
feet, and a pavement diameter of 90 feet. The cul-de-sac shall be designed to
meet adopted Fire Code requirements and specifications of the Fire Department.
   (C)   Where it is desirable to provide street access to adjoining
undeveloped properties, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the
boundary of the property. These dead-end streets shall be provided with a
temporary turn-around having an easement diameter of at least 100 feet that
includes the dedicated normal street right-of-way through the temporary cul-de-
sac circle. Temporary turn arounds shall be constructed with an all-weather
surface.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017)
§ 156.13 INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   Collector and Major Road intersections shall be as nearly at right
angles as possible. No street intersection shall vary from a 90-degree angle by
more than 15 degrees.
   (B)   Right-of-way and property line radii at street intersections shall be
approved by the Town Engineer.
   (C)   Offset intersections of less than 135 feet in length as measured from
centerline to centerline of the intersecting streets shall not be approved.
   (D)   For new construction, ADA accessible handicap ramps shall be
constructed at all street intersections for all intersecting sidewalks.
   (E)   Access to corner lots should be from the lesser-classified road, and
at the greatest distance possible from the intersection, with minimum distances
as shown below as measured from the point of curvature (PC) of the near corner
curb return:
 
Residential local     50 feet from intersection
Residential collector 75 feet from intersection
Major collector       150 feet from intersection
Minor arterial        185 feet from intersection
Major arterial        230 feet from intersection
 
   (F)   Exceptions can be approved by the Town Engineer upon submittal of
proper traffic engineering report and justification.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord. 2021-22, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 156.14 DESIGN SPEED.
   The use of design speeds other than those listed below must be approved by
the Town Engineer who may decide that the speed provided in this division be
changed to that which is reasonable and prudent under the conditions with due
regard to the actual and potential hazards that may be present.
Residential local                     25 mph
Residential collector                 40 mph
Major collector                       45 mph
Industrial street                     45 mph
Minor arterial                        50 mph
Major arterial                        50 to 60 mph
Rural residential and rural collector 45 mph
Rural lane                            25mph
Private road                          25 mph
 
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord. 2021-22, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 156.15 STREET LIGHTING, SIGNAGE, AND TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (A)   Street lighting, street signs, and appropriate traffic control devices
shall be installed by the Developer at their sole expense, and inspected and
accepted by the Public Works Department.
   (B)   Installation procedures and acceptable standards for streetlights
shall be governed by the APWA Standards; the Town Engineer; the local electric
utility provider, and to AWSI/IES RP-8 Standard Practice for Roadway and Street
Lighting and AASHTO standards. Street lighting (and all lighting) should follow
the principle of lighting the minimum area needed when it is needed.
      (1)   Pole or other type for mounting of streetlights shall be selected
by the developer, subject to the approval of the Town Engineer and the local
electric utility.
      (2)   Streetlights are required at all street intersections, and at
generally 300-foot maximum intervals on arterial streets. The actual number of
streetlights to be required, as well as the type and size of luminaries, and
the installation, location, height and size of streetlights, shall be
determined by the developer and approved by the Town Engineer.
   (C)   Street and traffic control signs such as stop signs, and the like
shall be installed to meet the requirements found in the APWA standards. APWA
standards refer to agency specifications, therefore, Arizona Department of
Transportation Signing & Marking standards are hereby adopted as referenced in
the figures below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1687.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1689.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1691.jpg]
 
   (D)   Street name signs shall be installed in accordance with Public Works
Department standards. Signs materials shall conform to the latest version of
AASHTO M 268 sign sheeting performance specifications. Signs shall be aluminum
0.10 thickness with reflective white lettering on reflective green (or blue for
a private road) background with no border. Signs shall include the street name
and the street number, and shall be 12 inches high by 30 inches or 36 inches
wide. The street name lettering shall be 6 inches high and the street numbering
shall be 3 inches high. All lettering and numbering shall be centered on the
sign. See sample figure below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1693.jpg]
 
   (E)   Signs shall be mounted on minimum 1-3/4" x 12 gage zinc plated
breakaway square tube perforated post extensions and a driven foundation
section, meeting the Arizona Department of Transportation Signing & Marking
standards as referenced in the figures below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1701.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1703.jpg]
 
(Ord . 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017 ; Am. Ord. 2021-22, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 156.16 TYPICAL STREET CROSS-SECTIONS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1705.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1707.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1709.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1711.jpg]
 
§ 156.17 STREET CONSTRUCTION AND SURFACING.
   (A)   All streets shall be constructed and surfaced per the standards of
this section and the adopted APWA Plans and Specifications. (If requirements of
this section conflict with the town’s adopted APWA Plans and Specification, the
town’s engineer will determine which standard to use.)
   (B)   Minimum improvements for any proposed rural street or private access
road shall conform to the detail in Figure 4 above on six inches of aggregate
compacted road base and compacted subgrade.
      (1)   Chip seal bituminous asphalt application shall be minimum 0.030
gallons of liquid grade asphalt (MC-3000) per square yard for base layer seal
coat and 0.15 gallons per square yard for fog coat layer after removing excess
chips. Liquid grade asphalt (MC-3000) shall meet the requirements of §
32.01.13.64 of the “APWA Manual of Standard Specifications.”
      (2)   Cover material shall be uncoated aggregate (rock chips) graded to
meet the requirements of § 32.01.13.64 of the “APWA Manual of Standard
Specifications.”, applied at a rate of at least 25 pounds per square yard,
spread in conjunction with the base layer seal coat.
      (3)   The chip seal shall be placed only when the roadway surface is dry
and there is no imminent threat of rain. The ambient temperature must be at
least 60°F. and rising.
   (C)   Minimum improvements for any proposed rural residential, rural
collector or any street within a development where multiple lots are being
designated but not formally subdivided shall conform to the detail in Figure 3
above, on six inches of aggregate compacted road base and compacted subgrade as
shown from 32.11.23 of the “APWA Manual of Standard Specifications.”
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1713.jpg]
 
   (D)   Rural street standards may be used only in areas developed with
minimum lot sizes of 80,000 square feet and six or less lots per block.
   (E)   Roadside drainage swales shown in the cross-section above shall have a
minimum depth as determined by an approved drainage study and plan and a
maximum depth of five feet.
      (1)   The design of the drainage swales shall be based on containing
storm water flows from a minimum ten-year return storm event.
      (2)   Due to the highly erodible nature of the soils in the region, swale
side slopes and bottoms shall be stabilized soil or planted and established
with suitable soil-retaining vegetation, as approved by the Town Engineer.
      (3)   Stabilization means include, but are not limited to, cement-treated
base, geogrid reinforcement, rip rap, acrylic polymer treatment (Soil Cement,
Soil Tac, or similar), hydroseeding (must maintain to establish a good stand),
or other approved stabilization method. (Refer to § 33.25.00 and related
sections of the “APWA Manual of Standard Specifications”).
   (F)   All other street improvements shall conform to the details in Figures
1 and 2 above, which shall have a minimum structural section of two inches of
bituminous concrete asphalt on six inches of aggregate compacted road base, or
as specified in a geotechnical investigation and report. Alternate base
materials may be proposed for approval by the Town Engineer.
      (1)   The proposed hot-mix asphalt pavement mix design shall be provided
to the Town for approval and shall meet the minimum requirements of §§ 32.12.03
and 32.12.05 APWA Manual of Standard Specifications,” for Performance Graded
asphalt.
      (2)   Prior to placement of any asphalt concrete the town shall be
provided with a certified copy of the asphalt binder supplier’s test report
which shall indicate the name of the refinery and supplier, type and grade of
asphalt binder delivered, date and point of delivery, quantity delivered,
delivery ticket number, purchase order number, and results of the tests
specified per § 32.11.16.13 of the “APWA Manual of Standard Specifications.”
      (3)   At the time of delivery to the job site, the town shall be provided
with a legible delivery ticket which shall indicate the name of the asphalt
concrete supplier, the date, job name, name of contractor, supplier mix
designation, delivery ticket number, and weight of material delivered, per §
32.11.16.13 of the “APWA Manual of Standard Specifications.”
   (G)   Major and collector streets shall have a 24-inch wide or a 30-inch
wide Portland Cement concrete curb and gutter section with a six-inch high
vertical curb.
   (H)   Local residential streets shall have a 24-inch wide or a 30-inch wide
rolled Portland Cement curb and gutter section, as detailed in “Section 205 of
the APWA Manual of Standard Plans.”
   (I)   Portland Cement concrete mix design shall be per Section 32.16.13 of
the “APWA Manual of Standard Specifications.”
      (1)   Prior to placement of any Portland Cement concrete the Town shall
be provided with a certified copy of the cement supplier’s certification and
the pozzolan supplier’s certification (if pozzolans are employed in the
concrete mix design) per § 03.30.04 of the “APWA Manual of Standard
Specifications.”
      (2)   At the time of delivery to the job site, the town shall be provided
with a legible delivery ticket which shall indicate the name of the Portland
Cement concrete supplier, the date, job name, supplier mix designation,
delivery ticket number, and volume of material delivered.
   (J)   In certain types of developments (e.g. mobile home park), the Town
Engineer may require a 24-inch wide rolled curb and gutter section along the
edges of the roadway for a rural residential street, rural collector street,
rural lane, or rural private road when and where deemed necessary.
   (K)   The developer shall improve all streets and other public ways to the
near edge of any intersecting Town street or state highway pavement or roadway
surfacing.
   (L)   Driveway access and surfacing outside of street right-of-way must meet
the requirements of the latest edition of the International Fire Code. This
includes driveway access for remote campgrounds that do not have permanent
buildings except restroom facilities.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord. 2021-22, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 156.18 WATERCOURSES AND STORM WATER DRAINAGE.
   (A)   If the development is traversed by or is contiguous to lakes, streams,
washes, ditches or other bodies of water or drainage structures, the developer
shall provide an easement or right-of-way for storm drainage substantially
conforming to the line or path of any natural watercourse, channel, stream or
creek, or provide an acceptable realignment of the watercourse.
      (1)   Easements may be required to provide for access to the watercourse
at various locations along the corridor.
      (2)   No construction shall impede, constrict, or block the flow of water
in any natural or improved watercourse.
      (3)   Drainage channel easements shall extend beyond the banks a minimum
of 25 feet.
   (B)   Developers shall be required to comply with the rules and regulations
of the flood damage prevention regulations (
Chapter 151 in Town Code). Development site plans and preliminary and final
plat submittals shall include information as specified by these regulations and
shall depict information including but not limited to floodway and flood fringe
locations and minimum finished floor elevations within the floodplain.
   (C)   Drainage structures such as bridges or culverts shall be designed to
handle runoff from a 25-year return storm event for local streets and for a 50-
year return storm event for collector and arterial streets without overtopping
the street surface and shall be installed as deemed necessary by the Town
Engineer for drainage, access and public safety. The structures and culverts
are to be placed to grades and be of design and size approved or authorized by
the Town Engineer.
   (D)   Adequate drainage of the development streets shall be provided by
means of the structures or culverts, channels and by other approved methods, in
accordance with APWA Standards or approved by Town Engineer.
   (E)   No street cross-gutter pans shall be allowed across major or collector
streets, except where the cross-street gutter pan has been designed for the
design speed of the street and its installation has been approved by the Town
Engineer. The Town Engineer may prohibit the use of cross gutters on any street
where deemed undesirable.
   (F)   Each development over two acres should be designed with on-site storm-
water detention, maintained with landscaping and native plants, integrated into
the overall design and layout of the development.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord. 2021-22, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 156.19 OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Off-site improvements include:
      (1)   Acquisition of required street right-of-way for dedication to the
public to connect the proposed development to the nearest paved public street
right-of-way. Required right-of-way width shall be determined by the Town
Engineer as specified in the Town General Plan’s Major Roads Plan street
classification and these Development Standards.
      (2)   Paving of the required street to connect the proposed development
to the nearest paved public street/spine road, including development and
construction of any required curbs, gutters, drainage and grading, and
walkability safety according to town standards and specifications.
   (B)   Required water, sewer, gas, electric and telecommunications services
from their connection to required off-site sources to the proposed development,
including acquiring all required easements or rights-of-way, purchase of all
supporting equipment and materials, all construction costs, and related
appurtenances, as determined by the developer and approved by the Town
Engineer. Provisions shall be made for public or private utility crossings
necessary to provide service to the proposed development.
      (1)   Required drainage improvements and grading as determined by the
developer and approved by the Town Engineer. Improvements may include storm
drains, flood control facilities, rip-rap, gunnite construction or drainage
channel improvements.
      (2)   Any required street lighting, sidewalks, pavement markings,
crosswalks, traffic signs, traffic signals, improvements and upgrades to
adjoining properties, coordination with regulatory agencies, environmental
requirements, monuments and other ancillary or supporting improvements.
   (C)   As a condition of final approval, developers may be required to enter
into a development agreement with the town addressing:
      (1)   Required off-site improvements (determined by traffic or other
impact study), when they will be required, assurances of completion, pay a pro
rata share of the cost, or agree to install all off-site improvements
reasonably related to the proposed development or which support the development
of a subdivision.
      (2)   At the discretion of the Town Council, pro rata funds may be
deposited into an escrow account for future construction if it is deemed by the
Council that it is in the interest of the town to delay construction of said
improvements. In no case shall the delay be more than six years, and in the
case that the town elects to not construct the improvements within six years,
the funds will be returned to the developer with interest paid at the same rate
of interest that the town received on the funds.
      (3)   Depending on the scope of the proposed improvements and the town’s
adopted water and wastewater infrastructure improvement plans, there may be
development impact fees required to connect to water and wastewater service.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord. 2021-22, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 156.20 [RESERVED]
§ 156.21 ADDRESSES AND ROAD NAMES.
   Addressing and road names shall be assigned per the town Addressing and
Street Naming Regulations as adopted by resolution of the Town Council.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord. 2021-22, passed 12-13-2021; Am. Ord.
2022-22, passed 12-12-2022)
§ 156.22 ENCROACHMENT ON PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY.
   (A)   An encroachment permit from the town is required before any person
performs the following within any public right-of-way:
      (1)   Any excavation, tunneling, undermining or otherwise affecting the
surface or base of any street or sidewalk.
      (2)   Any removal of pavement, sidewalk, other material, or improvement.
      (3)   Placing or depositing within the public right-of-way, any earth of
other material obstructing or tending to interfere with the use of the public
way.
      (4)   Installing infrastructure within a public right-of-way, including
sidewalks, curb, gutters, piped, vaults, cable, and conduits.
   (B)   Permit applications shall be made upon a form approved by the town.
Permits shall be subject to revocation and the town may refuse to issue a
permit for failure of the permittee or applicant to abide by the terms and
conditions of the permit.
      (1)   (a)   Permit applications shall be accompanied application fee,
plans, and specifications. As-built drawings and final certification that the
work meets the requirements of the Town Code are required upon completion of
the project.
         (b)   Drawings shall be made in electronic format compatible with the
town existing GIS system, of all installations and the types of equipment and
systems installed or constructed in the rights of way, properly identified and
described as to the types of equipment and facility by appropriate symbols and
marks.
      (2)   A traffic control plan conforming to the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices (MUTCD) published by the federal highway administration shall
be submitted with the application.
         (a)   Work shall be conducted in such a manner that a minimum amount
of interference of street traffic will result.
         (b)   Inconvenience to residents and businesses fronting on public
streets shall be minimized.
         (c)   Suitable, adequate and sufficient barricades shall be available
and used where necessary to prevent accidents involving property or persons.
From sunset to sunrise, all barricades and excavations must be clearly outlined
by acceptable warning lights, lanterns, flares and other devices.
         (d)   The town shall be notified five days in advance of any work
proposing road closure or detour and specific permission shall be granted
before the closure occurs.
   (C)   Permits need not be requested prior to excavation in case of emergency
endangering life or property, providing the town is notified as soon as
practicable and a permit is applied for upon the next regular working day
following the emergency.
   (D)   The applicant shall be responsible for any damage done, both public
and private, as a result of the proposed construction, including but not
limited to streets, sidewalks landscaping and utilities.
      (1)   Work shall not interfere with any existing utility without the
written consent of the town and without advance notice to the owner of the
utility.
         (a)   If it becomes necessary to relocate an existing utility, it
shall be done by its owner unless the owner otherwise directs.
         (b)   No utility, whether owned by the town or private enterprise,
shall be moved to accommodate the applicant unless the cost of such work be
borne by the applicant or an expressly written agreement is made whereby the
utility owner and the excavator make other arrangements relating to such cost.
         (c)   The applicant shall support and protect all pipes, conduits,
poles, wires, or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by the
excavation work, and shall do everything necessary to support, sustain and
protect them under, over, along or across the work.
         (d)   In case any of the pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus
should be damaged (and for this purpose pipe coating or other encasement or
devices are considered as part of a substructure), they shall be repaired by
the agency or person owning them, but the expense of such repairs shall be
reimbursed to the owner by the applicant.
         (e)   It is the intent of this subsection that the applicant shall
assume all liability for damage to substructures, and any resulting damage or
injury to anyone because of such substructure damage and such assumption of
liability shall be deemed a contractual obligation which the permittee accepts
upon acceptance of an encroachment permit. The town need not be made a party to
any action because of this subsection.
         (f)   The applicant shall inform itself as to the existence and
location of all underground utilities and protect the same against damage.
      (2)   In order to avoid unnecessary damage to paved surfaces, track
equipment shall use pavement pads when operating on or crossing paved surfaces.
   (E)   All street surfacing, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, driveways or other
hard surfaces damaged or removed, shall be permanently restored and to a
condition at least as good as its previous condition within five days after
completion of the backfill unless an extension of time is requested by the
applicant and approved in writing by the town.
   (F)   Infrastructure installation and work performed shall meet the
requirements of the Town Code.
      (1)   Asphalt, chip-seal, and concrete cuts shall be neat line saw-cut at
least 12" back from the trench edge. Asphalt and chip-seal pavement cuts shall
be such that no longitudinal joint lies within the wheel track as determined by
the town.
      (2)   Asphalt and chip-seal patches shall be sealed with a material
acceptable to Town Public Works Department. All permanent patches shall be hot
mix asphalt (C-3/4 mix) or high performance cold mix (UPM or equal), meeting
APWA standard specifications. A tack coat shall be applied to all edges of the
existing pavement prior to placing the patch.
      (3)   Asphalt thickness shall be equal to the adjacent surface in
thickness but in no case less than two inches. The complete surface shall not
deviate more than one-half inch between old and new work.
      (4)   Excavation through gravel surfaced area, such as gravel roads and
shoulders and unpaved driveways, shall have the gravel restored to a minimum of
one inch more than the thickness of the existing gravel.
   (G)   Trench excavation, backfilling and compaction shall conform to APWA
standard specifications, § 32.05.10.
      (1)   All excavations shall be properly barricaded.
      (2)   Excavation below the specified grade line shall be refilled with
ABC material compacted to a uniform density of not less than 95% of the maximum
density.
      (3)   All backfill will be placed in layers not over six inches loose
measure in thickness. Compaction will be obtained by mechanical rollers,
mechanical tampers or similar means. Material for backfilling will have optimum
moisture to ensure compaction. A compaction report that proves 95% or better
compaction per each foot of fill is required.
      (4)   Trench bracing, sheathing, or shoring necessary to perform and
protect the excavation is required for safety and conformance to governing
laws.
      (5)   Substantial steel plates with adequate trench bracing shall be used
to bridge across trenches at street crossings where trench backfill and
temporary patches have not been completed during regular work hours. Safe and
convenient passage for pedestrians shall be provided. Access to hospitals, fire
stations and fire hydrants must be maintained at all times.
   (H)   (1)   In order to ensure proper backfill and restoration of surface,
the permittee shall provide a completion assurance bond or cash deposit in the
amount equal to 10% of the cost of the project and in no case less than $2,000,
payable to the town/city. Asphalt roadway bonds shall be retained for a period
not less than one year.
      (2)   If a permittee fails to restore public property, structures or
right of way to the town specifications within a reasonable time, specified by
the town, the town may after notice, or without notice if an imminent danger
exists, repair the property itself and the provider shall compensate the town
for all costs it incurs in connection with the same. The town shall submit to
such a provider an itemized statement of the cost incurred and the provider
shall, within 30 days after receipt of the statement, pay to the town the
invoiced amount.
   (I)   Applicant shall provide a minimum $1,000,000 certificate of general
commercial liability insurance naming the town as an additionally insured in
order to secure and hold the town and its officers harmless and defend the
town, its officers, agents and employees, from any and all claims, liabilities,
expenses or lawsuits resulting from injuries, including death, damages or
losses which may arise out of or in any way connected with acts or omissions of
permittee’s work in or use of the right-of-way.
   (J)   Public infrastructure dedicated to the town shall be warranted by the
applicant against defective materials or workmanship for a period of one year
from the final acceptance of the improvements by the town, usual wear and tear
excepted.
   (K)   Any franchise, easement or other authorization granted by the town
shall be in writing and any franchise, easement or other authorization not in
writing shall be void.
      (1)   A franchise shall not convey title, equitable or legal, in the
rights of way. A franchise is only the right and consent to install, repair,
maintain, remove and replace facilities on, over and under the rights of way
for the limited purposes and for the limited period stated in the franchise.
      (2)   The town shall exercise its power to manage the rights of way; to
ensure that those rights of way are used for public purposes; and to receive
fair and reasonable compensation for the use of rights of way by providers
pursuant to common law, state constitution, and statutory authority.
      (3)   If the town shall elect to alter or change the grade or location of
any right of way, or if it is required as part of any public project, a
communications system provider shall, at its expense and within 45 days after
written notice from the town, except as otherwise required by state law, remove
and relocate its system at its own expense, and in each instance comply with
the standards and specifications of the town.
      (4)   A communications system provider shall promptly locate and relocate
facilities to permit installation of additional utilities and infrastructure
with costs borne in accordance with normal industry procedures and applicable
law.
      (5)   The town may, at any time, in case of fire, disaster or other
emergency, as determined by the town in its reasonable discretion, cut or move
any parts of any system within the rights of way, in which event the town shall
not be liable therefor to a communications system provider. The town shall
notify a provider in writing prior to, if practicable, but in any event as soon
as possible and in no case later than the next business day following any
action taken under this section.
      (6)   A communications system provider shall, upon prior reasonable
written notice by the town or any person holding a permit to move any
structure, and within the time that is reasonable under the circumstances,
temporarily move any part of its system to permit the moving of said structure.
A communications system provider may impose a reasonable charge on any person
other than the town for any such movement of its systems.
      (7)   A communications system provider shall be liable for the costs
incurred by the town to replace or repair and restore to its prior condition in
a manner as may be reasonably specified by the town, any town property,
structure or any other rights of way of the town involved in the construction,
maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the system that may become disturbed
or damaged as a result of any work thereon by or on behalf of a communications
system provider.
      (8)   All structures, lines and equipment installed by a communications
system provider within the town shall be located and installed in accordance
with town ordinances governing street excavation and use of public rights of
way, and shall be located so as not to obstruct or interfere with the proper
use of rights of way and other public ways and places, and to cause a minimum
of interference with the rights of property owners who abut any of the said
rights of way alleys and other public ways and places, and not to interfere
with existing public utility installations.
      (9)   All cables, wires and other equipment shall be installed, where
possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines of the incumbent local
exchange carrier, and shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other
facilities whenever possible.
      (10)   A permittee may trim any trees upon and overhanging the streets,
alleys, sidewalks, or public easements of the town so as to prevent the
branches of such trees coming in contact with the wires and cables of the
provider, provided that severe cutting back of tops of trees to stubs larger
than three inches within the tree’s crown to such an extent so as to remove the
normal canopy and result in disfigurement of the tree shall be unlawful unless
approved by the town. The provider is responsible for harm caused to the trees
by improper pruning or trimming. Prior to undertaking any tree trimming,
provider shall notify town and/or other property owner of grantee’s intent.
      (11)   In all areas of the town where cables, wires and other like
facilities of all other public utilities are placed or required to be placed
underground, each communications system provider shall construct and install
its system underground.
         (a)   With respect to any portion of the communications system
constructed and installed aboveground, the communications system provider
shall, at its sole expense, reconstruct and reinstall such system underground
pursuant to any project under which like facilities of similar systems are
placed underground or wherever the owner of a pole on which the provider is
located moves its equipment underground.
         (b)   Electronic equipment may be placed aboveground in appropriate
structures where existing technology reasonably requires, but shall be of such
size and design and shall be so located as not to be unsightly or unsafe.
         (c)   Each communications system provider shall, as a condition of
access to the rights of way, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the town, its
officers, boards, commissions, elected officials, agents, attorneys,
representatives, servants and employees, from and against any liability for
damages, costs, expenses, claims, suits, actions, judgments and liabilities,
including, but not limited to, expenses for legal fees, whether suit be brought
or not, disbursements and liabilities incurred or assumed by town in connection
with or in any way connected with acts or omissions of communications system
provider’s work in or use of the right-of-way, including any and all claims
which the communications system provider may now or hereafter have or claim to
have against the city, its servants, agents, attorneys, representatives,
employees or officials, due to or arising out of damage to any of the
provider’s property or equipment in the rights of way, including, without
limitation, resulting or consequential loss of income, injury to reputation, or
any other resulting or consequential damages of any kind, caused by or
resulting from acts or omissions of the town or any of its servants, agents,
attorneys, representatives, employees or officials except to the extent that
such indemnity is prohibited by law.
         (d)   If a franchise expires, is validly revoked, or the facilities
installed pursuant to the franchise are abandoned, the town may:
            1.   Require the provider to stop providing the franchised
services; and
            2.   Require the provider to remove all or portions of the system
that are not in the rights of way by virtue of another, valid franchise, within
a reasonable time specified by the town; and
            3.   Require the provider to convey title to facilities that are
not removed (abandoned) and that are not in the rights of way by virtue of
another, valid franchise, in a form satisfactory to the town and free and clear
of all liens and encumbrances to the town.
         (e)   In the event that the use of any portion of the franchised
system is discontinued for a continuous period of 12 months, and 30 days after
no response to written notice from the town to the last known address of
provider, the provider shall be deemed to have abandoned such system.
         (f)   A provider shall comply with all applicable laws in removing
facilities and restore any affected rights of way to as good condition as that
prevailing prior to such removal without materially interfering with any
electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles or attachments.
            1.   Applicable liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of
this code and of the franchise shall continue to apply as if the franchise was
in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance
by a provider with the terms and conditions of this section.
            2.   If a provider fails to remove or restore the town may do so
and charge the provider for all costs incurred in doing so.
         (g)   Subject to the town rights for conveyance of title listed above
in this section, a provider may abandon any underground system in place so long
as it does not materially interfere with the use of the rights of way or with
the use thereof by any public utility, cable operator or other person.
         (h)   Communications service and infrastructure providers that are not
subject to municipal telecommunications license tax or sales tax, and who are
required to obtain a franchise shall pay a franchise fee, which fee shall be
specified in the franchise.
            1.   The fee shall be designed, as far as is possible, in
connection with the provisions of communications sources to be equivalent to
the tax that would be owed if the applicant were subject to the municipal
telecommunications license or sales tax, and will generally be based upon gross
revenues.
            2.   Where a communications or infrastructure service provider
places facilities in the town, but does not provide services within the town;
or obtains a franchise that only authorizes placement of facilities from point
to point, the city may require that the fee be based on per foot or similar
basis.
            3.   The provider is responsible for paying and obtaining the
information necessary to calculate the gross revenues fee owed to the town,
unless:
               a.   The provider agrees to conditions that ensure that no
person may use the system without first entering into an agreement with the
town that obligates that person to pay fees to the town; and
               b.   Provider agrees that it will not permit its system to be
used by a person that does not agree to pay fees to the town.
         (i)   Future costs: subject to the limitations under state law, a
telecommunications service provider shall pay to the town or to third parties,
at the direction of the town, an amount equal to the reasonable costs and
reasonable expenses that the city incurs for the services of third parties
(including, but not limited to, attorneys and other consultants) in connection
with any renewal or provider initiated renegotiation, or amendment of this
chapter or a franchise; provided, however, that the parties shall agree upon a
reasonable financial cap at the outset of negotiations.
         (j)   The fee payment is not a payment in lieu of any tax, fee or
other assessment, except as specifically provided in this chapter or as
required by applicable law. By way of example, and not limitation, fees to
obtain space on the town owned poles are not waived and remain applicable.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord. 2021-22, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 156.23 PUBLIC UTILITIES STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   The design and construction of water, wastewater, electric and gas
utilities shall be in accordance with the APWA (American Public Works
Association), except as hereinafter amended.
   (B)   The terms ELECTRIC and POWER shall be considered interchangeable for
the purposes of this specification. The term COMMUNICATION applies to any
utility that delivers telephone, audio, video, or data content or that provides
for the transmission of the same.
   (C)   The applicant for utility service, or their contractor, shall
coordinate their design and construction activities with all other third-party
utility companies or public works agencies that own improvements within the
limits of the town and shall be responsible for meeting all of their
requirements, regulations and specifications.
   (D)   The applicant for utility service, or their contractor, shall be
licensed to perform the utility installation in the State in which the
installation is located.
   (E)   The applicant, or their contractor, shall provide to the town
performance and payment bonds for the value of the proposed installation.
   (F)   The applicant, or their contractor, shall provide general liability
and vehicle liability insurance in the amount of $1,500,000.00 for each
occurrence and $3,000,000.00 yearly aggregate. The town shall be a named
insured. Documents evidencing the above bonds and insurance shall be submitted
to the town with the original application for utility service.
   (G)   All utilities, including proposed electric, telecommunications and/or
cable television lines adjacent to or within new residential, commercial, or
other development shall be installed underground within the public right-of-way
or easement (See typical street cross-section, Figure 1 and Figure 2 above.)
The developer shall be responsible for the all on-site costs and applicable
off-site costs.
   (H)   When, as a result of development, it is necessary to relocate, renew
or expand existing facilities within or adjacent to the platted or developed
area, the developer shall make the necessary arrangements with the serving
utility for these installations to be placed underground. Underground utilities
shall be extended to the boundaries of the plat to provide service connections
to abutting undeveloped land.
   (I)   All new underground primary and secondary power cable shall be encased
in conduit. Also, all new underground fiber communication cable (both trunk and
service lines) shall be encased in conduit.
   (J)   Sheep’s foot type compaction wheels shall be allowed in conjunction
with hydraulically operated excavation equipment in trenches, when approved by
the town. When using this compaction technique, thickness of compacted lifts
shall be as approved by the town.
   (K)   All underground plastic pipe or direct burial cable shall be
surrounded with a minimum of six inches of sandy type soil, which shall be free
of any rocks or debris.
   (L)   Prior to performing work in a highway or street, an encroachment/
digging permits shall be required from the local or state jurisdiction over the
highway or street. All rules and regulations of said jurisdiction shall be
abided by.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord. 2021-22, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 156.24 PUBLIC UTILITY LINE PLACEMENT.
   (A)   Location of various utilities shall be as dictated by the town and as
described in this section. Extension of existing utilities within the same
street shall match the location of existing utilities in other blocks of that
same street as much as possible.
      (1)   Sewer mains shall generally be located on the low side of the
street, with manholes located five feet from the street centerline. Sewer mains
shall not be placed such that manholes interfere with survey monuments. In
areas of new construction, the sewer mains shall be the first utility to be
constructed.
      (2)   Unless otherwise directed by the town, in areas of new
construction, the following utilities shall be located, each in a separate
trench, on the north and west sides of the street the following distances
inside of the right-of-way line:
         (a)   Communications - one foot;
         (b)   Power (also municipal use intranet fiber) - eight feet;
         (c)   Water - 20 feet for 86 feet or wider right-of-way, and 15 feet
for 66 feet right-of-way.
   (B)   Unless otherwise directed by the town, in areas of new construction,
gas pipelines shall be located on the south and east sides of the street at a
distance 14 feet (or alternately 24 feet) inside of the right-of-way line.
      (1)   Municipal use intranet fiber communication lines may be placed in
the same trench with metallic communication lines or in the same trench with
gas pipelines. In the case of joint trenching with other utilities, the fiber
lines shall be placed 6"-12" below other communication cables or 6"-12" above
gas pipelines.
      (2)   When the specified locations cannot be achieved, the town may
consider alternate locations. However, in all cases, the following minimum
separations between utilities shall be maintained:
         (a)   Water - ten foot horizontal separation from gravity sewer mains
and 18 inches higher at crossings. Additional restrictions apply for pump
discharge sewer mains and other special cases.
         (b)   Gas - three foot horizontal separation from any potential source
of ignition, such as power or metallic communication cable.
         (c)   Power - five foot horizontal separation from water or sewer
mains, one foot horizontal separation and six inch vertical separation from
communication cables, which shall be higher than the power cables.
   (C)   Half or partial easements may only be approved where written
commitment of dedication of additional easements necessary to complete the full
easement are on record.
   (D)   All easements shall be in accordance with those approved by the town
and the utility providers concerned. The following standard easements centered
on the utility line are required:
      (1)   Sewer - 25 feet.
      (2)   Power - 25 feet.
      (3)   Water - 10 feet.
      (4)   Gas - 10 feet.
      (5)   Communications - 10 feet.
   (E)   The following minimum and maximum depths shall be measured from the
finished grade to the top of the utility pipeline or conduit:
      (1)   Water - 36" to 48".
      (2)   Gas - 36" to 48".
      (3)   Power - (Primary) 42" to 60".
      (4)   Power - (Secondary) 32" to 48".
      (5)   Communications - 18" to 30".
   (F)   Color coding for all utility pipelines, cables and conduits shall be
as follows:
      (1)   Power-red, or black w/ red stripe.
      (2)   Water-blue or ductile iron.
      (3)   Sewer-green, white or ductile iron.
      (4)   Gas-yellow.
      (5)   Reuse water-purple.
      (6)   Communication-orange conduit or std. cable.
   (G)   Marking tape shall be installed in the trench along all utility
pipelines, cables and conduits.
      (1)   The marking tape color shall follow the same color code as required
above for the conduits.
      (2)   In addition, the marking tape shall have stenciled along the tape
the type of utility (power, water, and the like) at intervals not to exceed
five feet.
      (3)   On sewer lines the tape shall be placed 18 inches above the top of
the pipe.
      (4)   On all other utilities it shall be placed 18 inches below the
finished surface.
   (H)   Tracer wire.
      (1)   Tracer wire shall be installed on all water, gas, and reuse water
pipelines and on plastic conduits for non-metallic cables (such as fiber). The
tracer wire shall be insulated, solid copper cable, not less than 14 gauge. It
shall be installed by being pulled tight along the bottom of the pipe or
conduit. It shall extend up to all hydrants, valves and pull-boxes. It shall be
pig-tailed, not looped.
      (2)   Tracer wire ends shall be spliced together with wire nuts, or
equal. Prior to installation of the nut, a minimum amount of wire shall be
bared and twisted together with pliers to assure good contact. The entire
spliced assembly shall then be protected with grease caps of a type approved by
the town. The completed pig-tail shall extend out of the valve or pull-box 4"-
6".
      (3)   The Contractor shall be responsible for the satisfactory
performance of the tracing wire for its intended use, which shall be
demonstrated prior to installation of surface improvements.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord. 2021-22, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 156.25 UTILITY SYSTEM IMPACTS.
   (A)   The developer shall be responsible for the cost of all impacts to the
utility systems, which include not only the expansion of the distribution
systems to the new area, but also the development of increased capacities
required.
   (B)   If proposed new development includes improvements that are already
included in an Infrastructure Improvements Plan with an associated impact fee,
a development agreement will need to be entered into to provide for
reimbursement to the developer for costs that may be subsequently paid for by
other developers, and to ensure that the developer receives proper credit for
associated impact fees assessed. (See Town Code
Chapter 154 Development Impact Fees for more detailed information.)
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord. 2021-22, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 156.26 MAPPING OF UTILITIES.
   (A)   Existing utilities.
      (1)   Where a new development is undertaken in an area where any
utilities already exist, the location, size and type of all such existing
utilities shall be shown on maps and submitted by the developer to the town.
These maps shall conform to the mapping standards given herein below. Each
utility shall be clearly labeled by type, size and material, either by note or
legend.
      (2)   All existing appurtenances related to these utilities, such as
manholes, cleanouts, valves, hydrants, junction boxes, sectionalizers, and
transformers shall also be shown on the maps and clearly labeled, either by
note or legend.
      (3)   The location of all existing utilities shall be established by
survey. These surveys shall be tied to public monument networks and right-of-
way markers. The dimensions of utilities and appurtenances from right-of-way
lines shall be shown on the maps. (Provide GPS coordinates for underground
utilities when available.)
   (B)   Proposed utility extensions.
      (1)   Maps detailing the location type, size and material of all proposed
wet, dry and other utility extensions, along with all required appurtenances,
shall be submitted by the developer to the town. The method of connection to
existing utilities shall be called out in notes or shown in details.
      (2)   The design of all utility extensions shall be performed in
accordance with all the provisions stated or referenced in this standard.
   (C)   As-built mapping. After construction of the proposed utility
extensions but before service is activated, the developer shall submit as-built
maps of all utility extensions. The location details required shall be as for
existing utilities described above. As-built maps shall be certified by a
registered professional engineer licensed in the state where the proposed
utility extensions are located.
   (D)   Wavier of utility mapping.
      (1)   If the developer enters into agreements with the utility providers
for the design of utility extensions and pays additional design fees, as
provided for herein above, then the requirements for furnishing utility mapping
shall be waved.
      (2)   In this case, the additional design fees shall include a portion
for utility mapping that would then be performed by the utility providers, or
their representatives.
   (E)   Electronic maps.
      (1)   All maps required herein shall be delivered in electronic format in
a format determined by the Planning and Zoning Director. The required format is
AutoCad Map®, current release or within three years.
      (2)   The map shall be based on local survey ground lengths and assumed
coordinates. Basis of bearings and elevation datum shall be fully described.
The distance measurement unit shall be international feet. No state plane or
ellipse map projections shall be used.
      (3)   Electronic maps shall be divided into layers. Utility trunk lines
and all related appurtenances shall be separated onto layers according to their
type, size and material. Each layer shall depict a single mapping entity, i.e.,
one type, size and material of utility trunk line, one type of utility
appurtenance, and the like.
      (4)   Map layers shall be depicted according to industry standard Blue
Stake colors as designated for utility color coding herein above. In addition,
all entities shall have unique line or symbol types in order to facilitate
rendering on paper maps as required herein below.
      (5)   Base map entities shall also be on their own layer. As a minimum,
the provided base map entities shall include road right-of-way lines, street
labels, public land survey grids, subdivision lot lines, lot number labels,
drainage channels and other bodies of water.
      (6)   Minimum two-foot contour lines shall be provided in areas where
utility extensions are proposed. The contours shall extend across and at least
100 feet beyond road right-of-way boundaries or other utility corridor or
easement boundaries.
      (7)   All survey points used to locate existing and as-built utilities
shall be preserved on their own layer according to utility type (water, sewer,
and the like).
      (8)   Line work and symbology of utility trunk lines and appurtenances
shall be located and connected to reflect their real location and relationship.
      (9)   Legends, symbols and line types shall be used to differentiate all
of the layers described above.
      (10)   Text shall be designed for 1" = 100' paper copies on 22"x34"
(24"x36") pages. No lettering shall be less than 0.10" at this scale. All text
shall be placed on separate layers grouped by utility type (water, sewer,
electrical, and the like).
      (11)   GIS versions of the above data will be accepted in addition to the
above format.
   (F)   Paper maps.
      (1)   Paper maps of utilities shall be provided in four sets for review.
Each set shall consist of individual sheets that group wet utilities and dry
utilities on their own sheets. Also each other utility shall be shown on its
own sheet.
      (2)   These maps shall be plotted at no smaller than 1"=100' scale. They
shall be presented on 22"x34" (24"x36") paper. Lettering shall not be less than
0.10" in height. All line types, symbology and lettering shall be clearly
discernable.
      (3)   All paper maps shall be derived from viewports of the identical
electronic version described above. They shall present not less than the same
information shown on the electronic version, including base map details.
      (4)   All paper maps shall be plotted using black ink. All certified As-
Build maps shall be furnished on Milar® film using black pigmented ink.
      (5)   In cases where more than one sheet is required to describe the
development, the map shall be tiled and an overall vicinity map showing this
tiling shall be added as a separate page. References to other tiled boundaries
shall be given on each page.
      (6)   In addition to all of the above, all paper maps shall show as a
minimum the following:
         (a)   North arrow;
         (b)   Scale;
         (c)   Legend;
         (d)   Subdivision or development name;
         (e)   Utility type label;
         (f)   Owner (developer) name, address, telephone;
         (g)   Engineer name, address, telephone; and
         (h)   Age number.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord. 2021-22, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 156.27 WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   Water mains connecting with existing municipal or private utility
distribution systems shall be installed to serve each lot. Each lot whether
subdivided or not shall have a separate water service meeting the requirements
of the utility department.
   (B)   Prior to final approval, the developer shall submit a letter from the
governing body of the water system certifying the ability of the system to
serve the proposed development and evidence that a satisfactory agreement has
been made for connections to the system.
   (C)   The design of adequate water supply shall consider additional water
improvements needed for new source, treatment, storage, transmission and
distribution (including fire hydrants).
   (D)   The developer shall provide improvement plans and profiles prepared by
a registered engineer for the system describing the water line system design,
line sizes and types and associated hardware and their locations, including
valves, thrust blocks, fire-hydrants, back-flow prevention valves, sewage line
cross-overs, meter locations, stubs and all other elements of the system design
and equipment.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017)
§ 156.28 WATER SYSTEM AMENDMENTS TO APWA STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   All new construction shall meet the minimum fire flow requirements of
the International Fire Code, latest edition.
   (B)   No copper pipe, fittings or meter setter yokes and no PVC pipe and
fittings shall be allowed for use in water service lines two inches or smaller.
   (C)   3/4 inch and one inch diameter water service lines shall be blue high-
density polyethylene (HDPE), 200 psi pressure rated, IPS-ID pipe meeting the
requirements of AWWA C901 and ASTM D2239. 1-1/2 inch and two inch diameter
water service lines shall be blue high-density polyethylene (HDPE), 200 psi
pressure rated, CTS-OD tubing meeting the requirement of AWWA C901 and ASTM
D2737. Fittings shall be compression type with stainless steel inserts.
   (D)   Water service lines shall be continuous to the water meter without a
meter yoke.
   (E)   A Corp Stop is required on the service line at the water main
connection with a polyethylene marker (HDPE pipe) placed by and extended two
feet above the Corp Stop.
   (F)   A vertical dual check valve is required on the service side of the
meter.
   (G)   No dual water meters and service laterals are allowed on one main line
connection.
   (H)   Minimum 18 inch and 21 inch diameter meter boxes shall be used for 5/
8" x 3/4" and 1" meters, respectively. Boxes for larger meters shall be as
approved by the town. All meter boxes shall have a white interior. Rings and
covers for meter boxes shall be cast iron equal to D & L Supply, Model L-2240
for 18 inch diameter meter boxes and Model L-2244 for 21 inch diameter.
   (I)   Fire hydrants shall be Kennedy Model K81D or approved equal.
   (J)   Unless otherwise approved by the town, locking joint restraint
devices, equal to MegaLug®, shall be used wherever poured-in-place concrete
thrust blocks are required, and shall be installed according to the
manufacturer’s instructions.
   (K)   Other town ordinances and regulations.
      (1)   The Colorado City Water Service Regulations shall apply, as
applicable, and take precedence over these standard specifications.
      (2)   The Colorado City ordinances for the control of back-flow and cross
connections shall apply, as applicable, and take precedence over these standard
specifications.
      (3)   Arizona State Regulations - Title 18, Chapter 4, Articles 2, 3 and
5 of the Arizona Administrative Code shall apply, as applicable, to the design
of municipal water systems.
      (4)   International Fire Code - the latest edition of the International
Fire Code, Appendices B (Fire Flow Requirements), C (Fire Hydrant Locations),
and D (Fire Apparatus Access Roads) shall apply, as applicable, to the design
of municipal water systems.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord. 2021-22, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 156.29 WASTE WATER SYSTEM AMENDMENTS TO APWA STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Main sanitary and storm sewer line testing and acceptance, shall
require video inspection.
   (B)   If APWA Standard Plan and Specifications conflict with this document,
this document shall take precedence.
   (C)   Arizona State Regulations - Title 18, Chapter 9, Article 3, Part E of
Arizona Administrative Code shall apply, as applicable, to the design of
municipal wastewater systems.
   (D)   When connection to a sanitary sewer system is not available (within
300 feet of property line), and with concurrence of the Town Engineer, a septic
disposal system or other disposal method may be permitted provided that the
system is approved by the County Environmental Health Services Department
certifying that field investigation has determined that ground slopes and soil
conditions will allow for satisfactory disposal by this method with the lot
arrangement and size as depicted on the site plan.
   (E)   Minimum lot size may need to be increased due to requirements of the
County Environmental Health Department or Arizona Department of Environmental
Quality, relating to water and sanitary sewage disposal systems.
   (F)   In addition, a sewer connection system (dry lines) shall be required
for future connection to a sanitary sewer system. [See Town Code, §
50.34(C).]
   (G)   Within one year after a public sewer becomes available within 300 feet
of any property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection
shall be made to the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage facilities
shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord. 2021-22, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 156.30 ELECTRIC/POWER SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Specifications in this document, when in conflict with APWA Plans and
Specifications, shall take precedence.
   (B)   Underground Power Construction Standards shall comply with APWA, Utah
Chapter’s Standard Specifications and Standard Plans.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017)
§ 156.31 GAS SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Federal regulations - Part 192, Minimum Federal Safety Standards, of
the Pipeline Safety Regulations, Office of Pipeline Safety, United States
Department of Transportation, shall apply to the design and construction of all
Hildale/Colorado City gas distribution system extensions.
   (B)   Arizona State regulations - Title 14, Chapter 5, Article 2, Pipeline
Safety, of the Arizona Administrative Code, shall apply to the design and
construction of all town gas distribution system extensions.
   (C)   A gas distribution system (dry lines) may be required for future
connection to a gas distribution system.
   (D)   Construction drawings for gas distribution system extensions shall be
submitted with the application for service. These drawings shall be prepared in
conformance with APWA Plans and Specifications. In addition, these drawings
shall show:
      (1)   Size, location and type of all existing and proposed gas mains,
valves, service lateral and all necessary appurtenances.
      (2)   Profile drawings showing pipeline relative to finished grade.
      (3)   Typical and special trench details showing bedding, backfill,
compaction and shoring requirements.
      (4)   All gas distribution mains shall be two inches diameter or larger,
as required by the town.
      (5)   The gas distribution system mains shall be looped at all
intersections. Three valves, complete with valve boxes, shall be provided at
cross fittings, and two valves with valve boxes at tee fittings.
      (6)   All gas pipe material shall be plastic pipe and fittings meeting
the requirements of ASTM D2513 (1995c Edition and no future editions), having a
temperature/HDB rating of CD, CE, CF, or CG. The pipe shall be either UAC 2000
as manufactured by USPOLY Corporation (formerly Uponor Aldyl Company/PW Eagle
Corporation) or Driscoplex 6500 as manufactured by Performance Pipe, a division
of Chevron Phillips Chemical Company LP.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017; Am. Ord. 2021-22, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 156.32 GRADING, CUTS AND FILLS.
   (A)   Retaining walls shall be used in areas where the vertical height of
cuts or fills exceeds ten-feet from the finished grade of the adjacent road. A
Building Department permit is required for any retaining wall over 48 inches in
height as per the adopted International Building Code (IBC).
      (1)   For purposes of this standard, the height of the cut shall be
measured to the point where the cut achieves a stable embankment and the height
of the fill shall be measured to the point where the fill ends using a two foot
horizontal to one foot vertical fill design.
      (2)   Retaining walls shall be terraced to achieve an eight-foot maximum
height. Where feasible, a road segment otherwise requiring a long retaining
wall shall be designed to provide for the use of shorter wall segments
(generally not exceeding 200 feet).
      (3)   When a retaining wall is used, the vertical height of the cut shall
not exceed ten feet measured from the top of the wall to the point where the
cut transitions to natural grade and the vertical height of a fill shall be
measured from the top of the retaining wall to the finished grade of the
adjacent road. Retaining walls shall be tiered if necessary to achieve the
maximum vertical cut or fill of ten feet.
   (B)   Building construction on slopes exceeding 25% warrant especial close
review for all grading, retaining wall, cut/fill and roadway grade standards.
No building shall be allowed on grades exceeding 30%.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017)
§ 156.33 [RESERVED]
§ 156.34 [RESERVED]
§ 156.35 [RESERVED]
§ 156.36 [RESERVED]
§ 156.37 DRIVEWAYS.
   (A)   Driveways exceeding 200 feet in length and/or 10% grade must be
approved by the Fire Marshal in accordance with the established fire codes.
   (B)   A turnout 30 feet long by ten feet wide minimum shall be provided for
any driveway in excess of 200 feet in length, to be located near the mid-point
of the driveway, and not less often than 300 feet apart.
   (C)   Driveways serving single residential dwellings shall have an improved
surface of at least gravel or aggregate road base of a minimum 12 feet wide.
Driveways serving two or more residential dwellings shall have an improved
surface of at least 16 feet wide.
   (D)   Driveways must be capable of supporting the imposed load of fire
apparatus weighing at least 75,000 pounds per the latest edition of the
International Fire Code, Appendix D (Fire Apparatus Access Roads). Where a fire
hydrant is located on a fire apparatus access road or driveway, the minimum
width shall be 26 feet, exclusive of shoulders, and shall not exceed 10 percent
grade unless approved by the fire chief.
   (E)     Dead end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet shall
meet the requirements of the Fire Code and shall be provided with a 120 foot
hammerhead, 60 foot “Y” or a cul-de-sac having a right-of-way diameter of at
least 100 feet, and a pavement diameter of 90 feet. (See detail below )
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10cd488a10a583cf3ea9396985cd3a43c9d43b26/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1717.jpg]
 
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 11-13-2017)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES
      
II.   ANNEXATIONS
TABLE I: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
5        3-28-1988   Grants to Twin City Water Works, a water development,
                     treatment, storage and distribution franchise
                     Grants to Garkane Power Association, Inc., a Utah
6        3-28-1988   Corporation authorized to do business in Arizona, an
                     electric light and power franchise
2008-03  10-4-2008   Grants an electric utility franchise to Garkane Energy
                     Cooperative, Inc.
 
TABLE II: ANNEXATIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
12       6-12-1989   Annexes all of Section 1, Section 12, Section 14 and the
                     west half of Section 13
99-01    3-15-1999   Annexes territory beginning at the north quarter of
                     Section 13, running north
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Arizona Revised Statutes
References to 1986 Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ARIZONA REVISED STATUTES
A.R.S. Reference Code Section
A.R.S. Reference                Code Section
1-214                           Ch. 34
1-215                           Ch. 34
1-211 – 1-215                 10.05
1-243                           10.12
1-502                           112.03
2- 5061(A)49                    Ch. 34
3-561                           Ch. 34
3-562                           Ch. 34
3-563                           Ch. 34
9-231                           30.001
9-232                           30.003,
                                30.020
9-232.01                        30.005
9-233                           30.050
9-234                           30.055
9-235                           30.004
9-236                           30.021,
                                30.023
9-237                           31.01
                                31.02,
9-238                           31.21 –
                                31.23
9-239                           31.04,
                                31.05
                                10.19,
9-240                           153.116,
                                153.130
9-240(28)(b)                    10.99
9-240(B)(3)                     70.01
9-240(B)(4)                     70.01
9-240B                          130.02
9-240B(20)                      91.68
9-240B(21)                      91.68
9-240B(22)                      91.68
9-301                           30.001
9-302                           30.007
9-303                           31.01,
                                31.20
9-461                           152.001
9-461.02                        152.072
9-462                           152.001
9-462.01                        153.130
9-462.05                        152.074
9-462.05.A                      152.074
                                150.50,
9-462.06                        152.073,
                                153.005,
                                155.11
9-463                           153.116,
                                153.130
                                153.003,
9-463.01                        153.006,
                                153.040,
                                153.116
9-463.01(D) – (F)             153.036
9-463.02                        153.006
                                154.03,
9-463.05                        154.05,
                                156.06
9-463.05(N) and (O)             154.16
9-463.05(T)(10)                 154.02,
                                154.05
9-467                           156.03,
                                156.06
9-494                           92.03
9-499                           91.45
9-499.08                        Ch. 34
9-499.08(D)                     Ch. 34
                                152.006,
9-500.05                        154.03,
                                154.13
9-50039                         112.02,
                                112.05
9-813                           30.078
9-821.01                        30.035 –
                                30.038
Title 9, Ch. 4, Art. 6          153.004
Title 9, Ch. 7, Art. 2          30.077
12-116.01                       10.99
12-116.02                       10.99
12-1134                         152.007
12-2406                         91.50
13-707                          10.99
13-802                          10.99
13-804                          10.99
13-3401                         93.02
Title 13, Ch. 4                 130.33
16-1019                         152.058
19-142B                         30.075
20-762                          Ch. 34
22-402                          31.25
22-402 et seq.                  Ch. 33
Title 28, Chapter 3             71.01
Title 28, Chapter 15            Ch. 34
Title 28, Chapter 16            Ch. 34
Title 28, Chapter 16, Article 4 Ch. 34
28-624                          32.22
28-627                          70.01
28-643                          70.01
28-775                          32.22
28-873                          32.22
28-884                          72.06
28-1598                         10.99
28-5739                         Ch. 34
Title 32, Ch. 9, Art. 2         33.05
33-1902                         112.03
36-601.01                       93.02,
                                130.38
36-2801                         Ch. 34
36-2801 et seq.                 93.06
36-2801(12)                     93.02
36-2804(B)(1)(c)                152.045
38-231                          30.006
38-260                          30.007
38-545                          30.008,
                                30.039
Title 38, Ch. 3, Art. 3.1       30.052
Title 40, Ch. 2, Art. 6.2       151.26
41-1080                         112.03
41-2142                         Ch. 34
Title 42                        112.02
42-1005                         Ch. 34
42-1104                         Ch. 34
42-1106                         Ch. 34
42-1107                         Ch. 34
42-1108                         Ch. 34
42-1109                         Ch. 34
42-1111                         Ch. 34
42-1113                         Ch. 34
42-1114                         Ch. 34
42-1118                         Ch. 34
42-1119                         Ch. 34
42-1123                         Ch. 34
42-1125                         Ch. 34
42-1251 et seq.                 Ch. 34
42-1452                         Ch. 34
42-2051 et seq.                 Ch. 34
42-2064                         Ch. 34
42-5014                         Ch. 34
42-5022                         Ch. 34
42-5061(A)(49)                  Ch. 34
42-5070                         112.02
42-5076                         112.02
42-5106                         Ch. 34
42-5252                         Ch. 34
42-5351                         Ch. 34
42-6003                         Ch. 34
42-6005                         Ch. 34
42-6005(D)                      Ch. 34
42-6056                         Ch. 34
42-12001                        112.02,
                                152.045
44-1302                         Ch. 34
Title 45, Ch. 6                 151.26
45-108                          153.038
45-604                          Ch. 34
Title 48, Ch. 21, Art. 1        151.26
48-3609                         151.01
48-3609(H)                      151.26
48-3610                         151.01
48-3613                         151.26,
                                151.30
48-4234                         Ch. 34
Title 49                        91.04
49-426                          Ch. 34
49-480                          Ch. 34
49-746                          91.04
940-240(B)(7)                   Ch. 32
940-240(B)(12)                  Ch. 32
                                
 
REFERENCES TO 1986 CODE
1986 Code Section Code Section
1986 Code Section Code Section
2-1-1             30.001
2-1-2             30.002
2-1-3             30.003
2-1-4             30.004
2-1-5             30.005
2-1-6             30.006
2-1-7             30.007
2-1-8             30.008
2-2-1             30.020
2-2-2             30.021
2-2-3             30.022
2-2-4             30.023
2-2-6             30.024
2-3-1             30.035
2-3-2             30.036
2-3-3             30.037
2-3-4             30.038
2-3-5             30.039
2-4-1             30.050
2-4-2             30.051
2-4-3             30.052
2-4-4             30.053
2-4-5             30.054
2-4-6             30.055
2-4-7             30.056
2-4-8             30.057
2-4-9             30.058
2-5-1             30.070
2-5-2             30.071
2-5-3             30.072
2-5-4             30.073
2-5-5             30.074
2-5-6             30.075
2-5-7             30.076
2-5-8             30.077
2-5-9             30.078
3-1-1             31.01
3-1-2             31.02
3-1-3             31.03
3-1-4             31.04
3-1-5             31.05
3-1-6             31.06
3-1-7             31.07
3-2-1             31.20
3-2-2             31.21
3-2-3             31.22
3-2-4             31.23
3-2-5             31.24
3-2-6             31.25
3-2-7             31.26
3-3-1             31.41
3-3-5             31.42
3-3-6             31.43
3-3-7             31.44
3-3-9             31.40
4-1-1             32.01
4-1-2             32.02
4-1-3             32.03
4-1-4             32.04
4-1-5             32.05
4-1-6             32.06
4-2-1             32.20
4-2-2             32.21
4-2-3             32.22
4-2-4             32.23
4-2-5             32.24
4-3               32.25
5-1               33.01
5-2-1             33.02
5-2-2             33.03
5-3-1             33.04
8-1-1             110.01
8-1-2             110.02
8-1-3             110.03
8-1-4             110.04
8-1-4             110.05
8-1-5             110.06
8-1-6             110.07
8-1-7             110.08
8-1-8             110.09
8-1-9             110.10
8-1-10            110.11
8-1-11            110.12
8-1-12            110.99
8-2-1             111.01
8-2-2             111.02
8-2-3             111.03
8-2-4             111.04
8-2-5             111.05
8-2-6             111.06
8-2-7             111.07
9-4-1             91.45
9-4-2             91.46
9-4-3             91.47
9-4-4             91.48
9-4-5             91.49
9-4-6             91.50
9-4-7             91.51
9-4-8             91.52
9-4-9             91.53
9-4-10            91.54
9-5-1             91.65
9-5-2             91.66
9-5-3             91.67
9-5-4             91.68
9-5-5             91.69
9-5-6             91.70
9-5-7             91.71
9-5-8             91.72
10-1-1            130.01
10-1-2            130.02
10-1-3            130.03
10-1-4            130.04
10-1-5            130.05
10-1-6            130.06
10-1-7            130.07
10-1-8            130.08
10-1-9            130.09
10-1-10           130.10
10-1-11           130.25
10-1-12           130.26
10-1-13           130.27
10-1-14           130.28
10-1-15           130.29
10-1-16           130.30
10-1-17           130.31
10-1-18           130.32
10-1-19           130.33
10-1-20           130.34
10-1-21           130.35
10-1-22           130.36
10-1-23           130.37
10-1-24           130.38
11-1-1            92.01
11-1-2            92.02
11-1-3            92.03
11-1-4            92.04
11-1-5            92.05
11-1-6            92.06
11-1-7            92.07
11-1-8            92.08
11-1-9            92.09
11-1-10           92.10
11-1-11           92.11
11-1-12           92.12
11-1-13           92.13
14-1-1            70.01
14-1-2            70.02
14-1-3            70.03
14-1-4            70.04
14-1-5            70.05
14-2-1            71.01
14-2-2            71.02
14-2-3            71.03
14-2-4            71.04
14-2-5            71.05
14-2-6            71.06
14-2-7            71.07
14-2-8            71.08
14-2-9            71.09
14-2-10           71.10
14-2-11           71.11
14-2-12           71.12
14-2-13           71.13
14-2-14           71.14
14-3-1            72.01
14-3-2            72.02
14-3-3            72.03
14-3-4            72.04
14-3-5            72.05
14-3-6            72.06
14-3-7            72.07
14-3-8            72.08
14-3-9            72.09
14-3-10           72.10
14-4-1            73.01
14-4-2            73.02
14-4-3            73.99
15-1              50.01
15-2-1            50.02
15-2-2            50.03
15-3-1            50.15
15-3-2            50.16
15-3-3            50.17
15-4-1            50.30
15-4-2            50.31
15-4-3            50.32
15-4-4            50.33
15-4-5            50.34
15-4-6            50.35
15-4-7            50.36
15-4-8            50.37
15-4-9            50.38
15-4-10           50.39
15-5-1            50.50
15-5-2            50.51
15-5-3            50.52
15-5-4            50.53
15-5-5            50.54
15-5-6            50.55
16-1-1            51.01
16-1-2            51.02
16-2-1            51.15
16-2-2            51.16
16-3-1            51.30
16-3-2            51.31
16-4-1            51.45
16-4-2            51.46
16-5-1            51.60
16-5-2            51.61
16-5-3            51.62
16-5-4            51.63
16-5-5            51.64
16-5-6            51.65
16-5-7            51.66
16-5-8            51.67
16-5-9            51.68
16-6-1            51.47
16-6-2            51.48
16-7              51.69
16-8              51.70
                  
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
89-16    - -         110.05,
                     111.03
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
2001-1   - -         51.80 –
                     51.89
5        3-28-1988   TSO Table I
6        3-28-1988   TSO Table I
12       6-12-1989   TSO Table II
16       3-16-1992   130.25
21       2-13-1995   71.15
99-01    3-15-1999   TSO Table II
99-03    11-15-1999  33.05
                     153.001 –
                     153.010,
                     153.020 –
                     153.025,
                     153.035,
                     153.037 –
                     153.043,
                     153.055 –
2007-2   5-29-2007   153.066,
                     153.080 –
                     153.087,
                     153.100 –
                     153.102,
                     153.115 –
                     153.118,
                     153.130 –
                     153.133,
                     153.999
                     90.001 –
                     90.007,
                     90.020 –
                     90.022,
                     90.035 –
                     90.038,
2007-3   7-16-2007   90.050 –
                     90.053,
                     90.065 –
                     90.083,
                     90.100 –
                     90.104,
                     90.115,
                     90.999
                     150.01 –
                     150.08,
                     150.20,
2007-4   7-16-2007   150.30 –
                     150.39,
                     150.50 –
                     150.52,
                     150.99
                     91.45 –
                     91.54,
2008-02  4-18-2008   91.65 –
                     91.72,
                     91.99
2008-03  10-4-2008   TSO Table I
2008-04  10-15-2008  Adopting Ordinance
                     155.01 -
2009-01  4-13-2009   155.13,
                     155.99
                     53.01,
                     53.10 -
                     53.12,
                     53.20 -
                     53.24,
2009-02  4-13-2009   53.30 -
                     53.38,
                     53.50 -
                     53.56,
                     53.70 -
                     53.73,
                     53.99
2009-03  6-15-2009   51.100 -
                     51.105
                     Ch. 34 -
                     12-350.3,
2009-04  9-14-2009   12-415,
                     12-416,
                     12-417,
                     12-450
                     151.01 -
                     151.05,
                     151.20 -
                     151.30,
2009-05  10-5-2009   151.40 -
                     151.49,
                     151.60 -
                     151.62,
                     151.99
2010-01  2-8-2010    51.15
2010-02  7-12-2010   31.41,
                     31.43
2011-01  5-11-2011   90.007,
                     90.038
                     Ch. 34 -
                     12-100,
                     12-415 -
2011-02  9-12-2011   12-417,
                     12-445,
                     12-595,
                     12-660, Reg.
                     12-350.3
                     52.04 -
2014–0111-14-2014  52.06,
                     52.08
                     153.001 -
                     153.004,
                     153.006 -
                     153.011,
                     153.020 -
                     153.025,
                     153.035 -
                     153.043,
                     153.055 -
2014-02  12-15-2014  153.066,
                     153.080 -
                     153.087,
                     153.100 -
                     153.102,
                     153.115 -
                     153.119,
                     153.130 -
                     153.133,
                     153.999
                     154.01 -
2015-01  2-18-2015   154.16,
                     Ch. 154, App. A
                     51.01,
                     51.02,
                     51.15,
                     51.16,
                     51.30,
                     51.31,
                     51.45 -
2015-02  3-16-2015   51.48,
                     51.60 -
                     51.70,
                     51.80 -
                     51.89,
                     51.100 -
                     51.105,
                     52.01 -
                     52.08
2015-04  5-11-2015   153.004,
                     153.005
2015-05  12-30-2015  Ch. 34
                     90.007,
                     90.036,
                     90.038,
                     90.066,
2016-01  6-13-2016   90.068,
                     90.069,
                     90.070,
                     90.076,
                     90.999
2017-01  10-16-2017  30.050
                     156.01 -
                     156.19,
2017-02  11-13-2017  156.21 -
                     156.32,
                     156.37
                     150.51,
                     151.28,
                     151.61,
                     155.03,
                     155.08,
                     155.09,
                     155.10,
                     155.11,
                     153.005,
2017-03  11-13-2017  153.007,
                     153.025,
                     153.039,
                     153.100,
                     153.117,
                     153.119,
                     153.131,
                     153.133,
                     154.09,
                     154.14,
                     1545.16
                     151.01 -
                     151.05,
                     151.20 -
                     151.30,
2018-01  1-17-2018   151.40 -
                     151.49,
                     151.60 -
                     151.62,
                     151.99
                     91.01 -
2018-02  1-17-2018   91.26,
                     91.99
                     155.01 -
2020-01  4-13-2020   155.13,
                     155.99
                     152.001 -
                     152.008,
                     152.025 -
                     152.033,
                     152.045 -
                     154.047,
                     152.055 -
                     152.059,
2020-02  4-13-2020   152.070 -
                     152.074,
                     152.085 -
                     152.096,
                     152.105 -
                     152.112,
                     152.120 -
                     152.125,
                     152.135 -
                     152.137
                     93.01 -
2021-03  - -         93.06,
                     93.99
                     152.027 -
2021-05  - -         152.029,
                     152.045
                     153.022,
                     153.035,
                     153.040,
                     153.057,
2021-06  - -         153.058,
                     153.061,
                     153.086,
                     153.118,
                     153.132
                     156.02 -
                     156.11,
                     156.13 -
                     156.15,
                     156.17 -
2021-22  12-13-2021  156.19,
                     156.21 -
                     156.26,
                     156.28,
                     156.29,
                     156.31
2022-10  6-13-2022   152.027,
                     152.033
2022-22  12-12-2022  156.21
                     112.01 -
2023-04  2-13-2023   112.13,
                     112.99
2023-08  4-10-2023   152.027
2023-15  7-17-2023   Ch. 34 - 12- 462,
                     12-610
2024-07  3-11-2024   152.027
2024-16  9-16-2024   152.027,
                     152.045
2025-11  7-14-2025   30.020,
                     30.021
2025-12  7-14-2025   30.050
                    
 
