Marana Town Code
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-24.png]
   This is the official codification of the ordinances of the town of Marana
(excluding the ordinances codified in the land development code and the various
codes incorporated by reference into the town code), reformatted and updated by
Ordinance 2005.22, with revisions through Ordinance 2025.025, adopted December
16, 2025, and effective December 16, 2025.
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite. 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588 * http://www.amlegal.com
TITLE 1
GENERAL
Title 1 was adopted by Ordinance 95.31
CHAPTER 1-1.   HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED
CHAPTER 1-2.   CONSTRUCTION OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER 1-3.   DEFINITIONS
CHAPTER 1-4.   REFERENCE TO CODE; CONFLICTING PROVISIONS; SCRIVENER’S ERRORS
CHAPTER 1-5.   SECTION HEADINGS
CHAPTER 1-6.   EFFECT OF REPEAL
CHAPTER 1-7.   SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF THE CODE
CHAPTER 1-8.   PENALTY
CHAPTER 1-9.   CODE COMPLIANCE
CHAPTER 1-1.
HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED
The ordinances embraced in the following titles and sections shall constitute
and be designated “the code of the town of Marana, Arizona,” and may be so
cited. This code may also be cited as the “Marana town code.”
CHAPTER 1-2.
CONSTRUCTION OF ORDINANCES
The rules and the definitions set forth in this title shall be observed in the
construction of this code and the ordinances of the town unless the
construction would be inconsistent with either the manifest intent of the
council, the context of this code or the ordinances of the town.
CHAPTER 1-3.
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1 General rule regarding definitions
All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common
and approved use of the language, but technical words and phrases and any
others that may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law
shall be construed and understood according to their peculiar and appropriate
meaning.
1-3-2 Definitions and interpretation
A.   In this code, unless the context or a more specific definition requires
otherwise, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
   1.   “Code” means the town code of the town of Marana, Arizona, including
those portions codified in this volume, those portions codified separately, and
those separate codes and provisions incorporated by reference.
   2.   “Council” means the town council of the town of Marana.
   3.   “County” means Pima County, Arizona.
   4.   “Day” is the period of time between midnight and the following
midnight.
   5.   ”Fire chief” means the fire chief of the fire department or a person
duly authorized to act on his or her behalf. For geographic areas not located
within the boundaries of a fire district and for any provision or regulation
that does not apply to a particular geographic area, “fire chief” means the
town’s chief building official or his or her designee.
   6.   “Fire department” means the fire district that has jurisdiction over
the geographic area in question.
   7.   “Mayor” means the mayor of the town of Marana.
   8.   “Month” means a calendar month.
   9.   “Oath” includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words
“swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
   10.   “Owner” includes any whole or part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, joint tenant or lessee.
   11.   “Person” means any natural person or any association, firm,
individual, partnership, joint stock company, joint venture, trust,
corporation, limited liability company, society, syndicate, business or other
legally recognized entity, private or public, whether for-profit or not-for-
profit.
   12.   “Personal property” includes every type of property except real
property.
   13.   “Preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after,
respectively.
   14.   “Property” includes real property and personal property.
   15.   “Real property” means lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   16.   “Section” means section, subsection, or provision.
   17.   “Shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive.
   18.   “Shall have been” includes past and present and future cases.
   19.   “Signature” includes a mark when the signer cannot write, the signer’s
name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his or her own name
near the signer’s name, but a signature by mark may be acknowledged or may
serve as a signature to a sworn statement only when witnessed by two people who
sign their own names to the document.
   20.   “State” means the state of Arizona.
   21.   “Town” means the town of Marana, Pima County, Arizona. “In the town”
or “within the town” mean and include all territory over which the town has
jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers
as authorized by statute.
   22.   “Week” means seven consecutive days.
   23.   “Writing” means any form of recorded message capable of comprehension
by ordinary visual means.
   24.   “Year” means a calendar year.
B.   In this code, unless the context requires otherwise, the following rules
of interpretation shall apply:
   1.   When an act is required to be done which may by law as well be done by
an agent as by the principal, the requirements shall be construed to include
all acts by an authorized agent.
   2.   Whenever this code refers to a department, board, commission,
committee, office, officer or employee, it shall mean a department, board,
commission, committee, office, officer or employee of the town of Marana unless
the context requires otherwise.
   3.   Words of the masculine gender include the feminine, words in the
singular include the plural and words in the plural include the singular.
   4.   Words purporting to give joint authority to a group of three or more
town officers or other persons shall be construed as giving the authority to a
majority of those officers or other persons unless the law giving the authority
expressly declares otherwise.
   5.   The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future
includes the present.
   6.   The time within which an act is to be done as provided in this code or
in any order issued pursuant to any ordinance, when expressed in days, shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the
last day is a Saturday, Sunday or holiday it shall be excluded, and when the
time within which an act is to be done is expressed in hours, the whole of
Saturday, Sunday or a holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded.
   7.   A reasonable time means the amount of time needed for prompt
performance.
   8.   Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or
authorized, it shall be made in writing in the English language.
Section 1-3-2 was rewritten by Ordinance 2005.22, which added “and
interpretation” to the title, split the provisions into definitions and rules
of interpretation, simplified the language, deleted definitions of words not
used in the code, and added definitions of “fire chief” and “fire department”
The definitions of fire chief and fire department were amended by Ordinance
2016.017
CHAPTER 1-4.
REFERENCE TO CODE; CONFLICTING PROVISIONS; SCRIVENER’S ERRORS
The title of
chapter 1-4 was amended by Ordinance 2008.16
1-4-1 Additional rules of construction
In addition to the rules of construction specified in
chapter 1-2 and
chapter 1-3, the rules set forth in this chapter shall be observed in the
construction of this code.
1-4-2 References to this code
All references to titles, chapters or sections are to the titles, chapters and
sections of this code unless otherwise specified.
1-4-3 Conflicting provisions - different titles
If the provisions of different titles of this code conflict with or contravene
each other, the provisions of each title shall prevail as to all matters and
questions growing out of the subject matter of that title.
1-4-4 Conflicting provisions - same title
If conflicting provisions are found in different sections of the same title,
the provisions of the section which is last in numerical order shall prevail
unless that construction is inconsistent with the meaning of that title.
1-4-5 Authority to correct scrivener’s errors
A.   The town attorney and town clerk are hereby each individually authorized
to correct scrivener's errors in the town code and in ordinances and
resolutions adopted by the council without the need for re-adoption of the town
code provision, ordinance or resolution.
B.   For purposes of this section, a scrivener's error includes one or more of
the following:
   1.   Misspelling.
   2.   Grammatical error.
   3.   Numbering error.
   4.   Cross-referencing error.
   5.   Inconsistency with the rules of style adopted for the reformatted town
code.
C.   A scrivener's error correction made under the authority granted by this
section shall be documented as follows:
   1.   A correction to the town code shall be noted with the explanatory and
historical notes in the right-hand margin of the town code.
   2.   A correction to an ordinance or resolution shall be accompanied by a
scrivener's note on or attached to the corrected ordinance or resolution.
Section 1-4-5 was added by Ordinance 2008.16
The numbering of subparagraphs C.1 and C.2 was corrected on July 13, 2022
CHAPTER 1-5.
SECTION HEADINGS
Headings of the several sections of this code are intended as a convenience to
indicate the contents of the section and do not constitute part of the law.
CHAPTER 1-6.
EFFECT OF REPEAL
When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be
itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former
ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly so provided. The repeal
of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the
repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time
of the repeal, for any offense committed under the ordinance repealed.
CHAPTER 1-7.
SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF THE CODE
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code shall be
severable, and if any provision of this code is held unconstitutional for any
reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality shall not
affect any of the remaining provisions of the code.
CHAPTER 1-8.
PENALTY
1-8-1 General violations
Except as otherwise provided in this code, any person found guilty of violating
any provision of this code shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Each day
that a violation continues shall be a separate offense.
1-8-2 Traffic violations
Any violation of or failure or refusal to do or perform any act required by
title 12 of this code or title 28, Arizona revised statutes constitutes a civil
traffic violation. Civil traffic violations are subject to the provisions of
title 28, title 6, chapters 20 and 21, Arizona revised statutes and amendments
to them.
CHAPTER 1-9.
CODE COMPLIANCE
Chapter 1-9 was added by Ordinance 2010.01
1-9-1 Definition
“Code compliance officer” means any employee designated and authorized by the
town manager to administer and enforce any provision of the town code, the land
development code or any other town ordinance, or any duly authorized agent or
designee of that employee, regardless of the employee’s position title.
1-9-2 Authority of code compliance officers
Code compliance officers are granted the authority expressly and impliedly
necessary for the administration and enforcement of those areas of the town
code, the land development code or any other town ordinance that the code
compliance officer is responsible for. This authority includes, but is not
limited to, authorization to issue uniform civil code complaints, as described
in
chapter 5-7 of this code, for any violations of the town code, the land
development code or any town ordinance that are classified as civil offenses.
Code compliance officers may not issue citations for violations that are
classified as criminal offenses.
TITLE 2
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Title 2 was adopted by Ordinance 96.13
CHAPTER 2-1.   COUNCIL
CHAPTER 2-2.   COUNCIL ELECTION
CHAPTER 2-3.   MAYOR AND VICE MAYOR
CHAPTER 2-4.   COUNCIL PROCEDURE
CHAPTER 2-5.   ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND CONTRACTS
CHAPTER 2-6.   SPECIAL AND STANDING BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
CHAPTER 2-7.   [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 2-8.   [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 2-9.   [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 2-10.   INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
CHAPTER 2-1.
COUNCIL
2-1-1 Elected officers
The elected officers of the town shall be a mayor and six council members. The
mayor and council members shall constitute the council and shall continue in
office until assumption of duties of office by their duly elected successors.
The mayor and council members shall serve four-year overlapping terms.
Section 2-1-1 was amended by Ordinance 99.11, providing for direct election of
the mayor.
2-1-2 Corporate powers
The corporate powers of the town shall be vested in the council and shall be
exercised only as directed or authorized by law. All powers of the council
shall be exercised by ordinance, resolution, order or motion.
2-1-3 Duties of office
Members of the council shall assume the duties of office immediately upon being
sworn in, which shall occur within 20 days following the date of the general
election.
Section 2-1-3 was amended by Ordinance 99.11.
2-1-4 Vacancies
A.   If there is a vacancy in a council member seat, the council shall fill the
vacancy by appointment as follows:
   1.   If the vacancy occurs less than 30 days before the nomination petition
deadline for the next regular election, the appointed council member shall
complete the remaining unexpired term of the vacant council seat.
   2.   If the vacancy occurs more than 30 days before the nomination petition
deadline for the next regular election, the appointed council member shall
serve until the next regular election and the town shall schedule a special
election for the council member seat at the next primary and general elections,
calling for the election of a council member to complete the remaining two
years of the vacant term. The appointed council member shall serve until the
newly elected council member takes office to complete the remaining two-year
term. If a candidate to fill the vacancy receives a majority of all votes cast
for the vacant seat at the primary election, A.R.S. § 9-821.01, subsection (D)
applies.
B.   The council shall fill the council member seat vacancy by the following
procedures:
   1.   The town clerk shall advertise, post, and give public notice of the
vacancy and availability of a seat on the town council.
   2.   Those interested in filling the vacancy shall submit to the town clerk
an application, resume, and other support materials as desired, and the town
clerk shall distribute all the materials to all remaining council members.
   3.   Thereafter, the council will fill the vacant seat by a majority vote.
The vote will not be by nomination and election, rather it will be conducted by
making a motion to appoint a certain individual to the vacant council seat to
fulfill the remaining term, and if the motion fails for lack of a second or
majority vote there may thereafter be a subsequent motion for a different or
the same individual. The council may continue making motions until a motion to
appoint an applicant to the vacant seat is successfully passed by a majority of
the council.
C.   If there is a vacancy in the mayor's position, the council shall appoint
one council member willing to serve as mayor, who shall resign his or her
council seat and become the mayor as provided below.
   1.   If the vacancy in the mayor's position occurs less than 30 days before
the nomination petition deadline for the next regular election, the appointed
mayor shall complete the remaining unexpired term of the vacant mayoral seat.
   2.   If the vacancy in the mayor's position occurs more than 30 days before
the nomination petition deadline for the next regular election, then the town
shall schedule a special election for mayor to occur at the next primary and
general elections of the town, calling for the election of a mayor to complete
the remaining two years of the term. The appointed mayor shall serve until the
newly elected mayor takes office to complete the remaining two year mayoral
term. If a candidate to fill the vacancy receives a majority of all votes cast
for the vacant seat at the primary election, A.R.S. § 9-821.01, subsection (D)
applies.
Section 2-1-4 was amended by Ordinance 99.11
Ordinance No 99.32 deleted former paragraph 3, which provided for interviews of
council candidates at a public meeting, renumbered former paragraph 4 as
paragraph 3, and replaced the words “At the same council meeting or any council
meeting thereafter” with “Thereafter” at the beginning of paragraph 3
Ordinance 2025.006 amended section 2-1-4 to provide for filling council
vacancies consistent with state law
2-1-5 Oath of office
Immediately prior to assumption of the duties of office, the mayor and each
council member shall take and subscribe to the oath of office.
Ordinance 99.32 deleted the words “in public” between “shall” and “take” in
section
2-1-5
2-1-6 Bond
A.   Unless bonded pursuant to a blanket bond as provided in paragraph B of
this section, prior to taking office, the mayor and every council member shall
execute and file an official bond, enforceable against the principal and their
sureties, conditioned on the due and faithful performance of their official
duties, payable to the state and to and for the use and benefit of the town or
any person who may be injured or aggrieved by the wrongful act or default of
the officer in the officer’s official capacity. A person so injured or
aggrieved may bring suit on the bond under provisions identical to those
contained in A.R.S. § 38-260. Bonds shall be in the amount provided by
resolution, and the premium for the bonds shall be paid by the town.
B.   In lieu of the requirements of paragraph A above, the town may obtain a
blanket bond pursuant to the provisions of A.R.S. § 9-302.
Ordinance 2013.016 split section
2-1-6 into subparagraphs and added the first clause to each subparagraph.
2-1-7 Financial disclosure statement
Each member of the council shall file a financial disclosure statement in a
form and with the information as provided by resolution of the council.
2-1-8 Compensation
The compensation of elective officers of the town shall be fixed from time to
time by resolution of the council.
Section 2-1-8 was rewritten by Ordinance 2002.23. The previous version provided
for no compensation except expense reimbursement. Resolution 2008-86 fixed the
monthly salaries at $1,875 for the Mayor and $1,767 for the Vice Mayor,
effective July 1, 2011, and $1,742 for Council members, effective July 1, 2009
CHAPTER 2-2.
COUNCIL ELECTION
2-2-1 Primary election; date; declaration of elected candidate
A.   The date of the primary election of the town shall be the first Tuesday in
August of even-numbered years.
B.   Any candidate who receives at the primary election a majority of all the
votes cast, as determined by the calculation set forth in A.R.S. § 9-821.01,
shall be declared elected to the office for which he or she is a candidate
effective as of the date of the general election, and no further election shall
be held as to that candidate, provided that if more candidates receive a
majority of the votes than there are offices to be filled, then those equal in
number to the offices to be filled receiving the highest number of votes shall
be declared elected.
Ordinance 2023.014 amended subparagraph B to expressly refer to A.R.S. § 9-
821.01, which determines how to calculate a majority of votes cast. Ordinance
2020.004 amended subparagraph A to conform to 2019 revisions to A.R.S. §§ 16-
201, 16-204, and 16-206. Ordinance 2013.019 split section 2-2-1 into
subparagraphs, added subparagraph A, and modified the section title, to conform
to the 2012 revisions to A.R.S. § 16-204
2-2-2 Non-political ballot
Nothing on the ballot in any election shall be indicative of the support or
political party affiliation of any candidate.
2-2-3 General election; date; candidates
A.   A general election of the town shall be held on the first Tuesday after
the first Monday in November of even-numbered years.
B.   If at any primary election there is any office for which no candidate is
elected, then as to that office the election shall be considered to be a
primary election for nomination of candidates for that office, and a general
election of the town shall be held to vote for candidates to fill that office.
Candidates to be placed on the ballot at the general election shall be those
not elected at the primary election, and shall be equal in number to twice the
number to be elected to any given office or less than that number if there are
less than that number named on the primary election ballot. Persons who receive
the highest number of votes for the respective offices at the primary election
shall be the only candidates at the general election, provided that if there is
any person who, under the provisions of this section, would have been entitled
to become a candidate for any office except for the fact that some other
candidate received an equal number of votes for it, then all those persons
receiving an equal number of votes shall likewise become candidates for that
office.
Ordinance 2013.019 split section
2-2-3 into subparagraphs, added subparagraph A, modified subparagraph B, and
modified the section title, to conform to the 2012 revisions to A.R.S. § 16-204
2-2-4 Election to office
The candidates equal in number to the persons to be elected who receive the
highest number of votes shall be declared elected.
2-2-5 Assumption of office
Upon election, the mayor and council members shall assume the duties of office
at the next regularly scheduled council meeting following the date of the
canvass of the general election or, if no general election is held, at the next
regularly scheduled council meeting following the date the general election
would have been held.
Ordinance 2013.019 added section
2-2-5 and renumbered the remaining sections in
chapter 2-2 to conform.
2-2-6 Candidate financial disclosure
Each candidate for the office of council member shall file a financial
disclosure statement on a form prescribed by the town clerk when the candidate
files a nomination paper. The statement shall contain such information as
required by state law and resolution of the council.
2-2-7 Initiative and referendum
A.   There is reserved to the qualified electors of the town the power of the
initiative and the referendum as prescribed by the state constitution. Any
initiative or referendum matter may be voted on at the next ensuing primary or
general election, or at a special election called by the council.
B.   Number of signatures
   1.   The total number of registered voters qualified to vote at the last
municipal election, whether regular or special, immediately preceding the date
upon which any initiative petition is filed shall be the basis upon which the
number of qualified electors of the town required to file an initiative
petition shall be computed.
   2.   The basis upon which the number of qualified electors of the town
required to file a referendum petition is calculated shall be as determined by
state law.
C.   Time of filing
   1.   Initiative petitions shall be filed at least 120 days prior to the
election at which they are to be voted upon.
   2.   Referendum petitions shall be filed within 30 days of the adoption of
the ordinance or resolution to be referred. If the town clerk is unable to
provide petitioners with a copy of the ordinance or resolution at the time of
application for an official number or on the same business day of the
application, the 30-day period shall be calculated from the date the ordinance
or resolution is available.
D.   The following procedures relating to sample ballots and publicity
pamphlets are hereby adopted for conducting elections at which an initiative or
referendum is to be voted upon:
   1.   A publicity pamphlet, containing the entire text of the official
ballot, shall be mailed by the town clerk to each household within the town in
which a registered voter resides, not less than eight days prior to the
election to which the sample ballot pertains.
   2.   The pamphlet shall contain the proposition as it will appear on the
ballot together with a summary of each proposition. Each summary shall be
followed by any arguments supporting the proposition followed by any arguments
opposing the proposition.
   3.   Arguments supporting and opposing propositions appearing on the ballot
shall be filed with the office of the town clerk by 5:00 p.m. not less than 90
days prior to the election at which the propositions are to be voted upon.
Arguments supporting or opposing propositions appearing on the ballot shall
meet the following requirements:
      a.   Arguments must relate to the propositions proposed by initiative or
referred by referendum which will appear on the ballot.
      b.   Arguments must identify the proposition to which they refer and
indicate whether the argument is in support of or in opposition to the
proposition.
      c.   Arguments may not exceed 300 words in length.
      d.   Arguments must be signed by the person submitting them. Arguments
submitted by organizations shall be signed on behalf of the organization by an
officer of the organization authorized to take the action. All persons signing
documents shall indicate their residence or post office address.
      e.   No person or organization shall submit more than one argument for
each proposition to be voted upon.
      f.   Each argument shall be accompanied by a deposit to offset
proportional costs of printing, in an amount established by a fee schedule
adopted by the council and amended from time to time. This requirement shall
not be waived on any account.
Section 2-2-7 was added by Ordinance 97.26, which also renumbered the remaining
sections of
chapter 2-2 to conform
Ordinance 99.32 deleted “Power Reserved; Time of Election” from the beginning
of paragraph A
Ordinance 2020.004 amended paragraph B
Ordinance 99.32 deleted “Sample Ballots and Publicity Pamphlets” from the
beginning of paragraph D
Ordinance 2011.25 inserted 90 days in place of 60 days in paragraph (D)(3). See
Ordinance 98.15 for prior history.
Ordinance 2009.11 amended subparagraph (D)(3)(f) by adding reference to the
comprehensive fee schedule and deleting the specific printing cost fee amount
2-2-8 Automatic recount
A.   When the canvass of returns in a special, primary or general town election
shows that the margin between the successful candidate receiving the least
number of votes and the unsuccessful candidate receiving the greatest number of
votes for council, or the margin between the number of votes cast for and
against initiated or referred measures, is less than or equal to one-half of 1%
of the number of votes cast for both such candidates or on such measures, a
recount of the vote upon those candidates or measures shall be required.
B.   When the canvass shows that a recount is required, the council shall
forthwith certify the facts requiring a recount to the Pima County superior
court.
C.   Upon the court announcing the results of the election recount and entering
an order setting forth its determination as required under A.R.S. § 16-665, the
town clerk shall forthwith deliver to the candidate entitled to them, as
certified by the court, the certificate of election.
Section 2-2-8 was amended by Ordinance 2025.006 to clarify when an automatic
recount is required under state law
2-2-9 Eligibility for office
A person shall not be a member of the town council unless, at the time of
election, the person is 18 years old or older, is a qualified elector residing
within the town at the time of election, and has resided in the town for one
year next preceding the election, or if an area has been annexed to the city or
town for a period of less than one year next preceding the election has resided
in the area for one year next preceding the election. If an annexed area is
subject to the provisions of this subsection, a person may meet the residency
requirements if he or she has resided within the existing limits of the town
for a one-year period.
CHAPTER 2-3.   MAYOR AND VICE MAYOR
Chapter 2-3 was amended by Ordinance 99.11
2-3-1 Vice mayor
A.   After their election and qualification, but in any event not later than
December 31 following the date of the general election, or, if no general
election is held, following the date the general election would have been held,
the council members shall choose a vice mayor from among their number by
majority vote. The vote will not be by nomination and election, rather it will
be conducted by making a motion to appoint a certain council member as vice
mayor, and if the motion fails for lack of a second or majority vote there may
thereafter be a subsequent motion for a different or the same individual. The
council will continue making motions until a motion to appoint a council member
as vice mayor is successfully passed by a majority of the council. The vice
mayor shall assume the duties of the mayor in the absence, disqualification or
resignation of the mayor.
B.   If there is a vacancy in the vice mayor’s seat, the council shall choose a
new vice mayor from among their number by majority vote, using the procedure
described in paragraph A of this section.
Ordinance 2009.10 amended the first sentence of section
2-3-1 by expanding the time for selection from 20 days to June 30. Ordinance
2013.019 revised it to December 31.
Ordinance 2025.006 amended section
2-3-1 by adding a division B.
2-3-2 Acting mayor
In the absence or disability of the mayor, the vice mayor shall act as the
mayor. In the absence of both the mayor and vice mayor, the council may
designate another of its members to serve as acting mayor who shall have all
the powers, duties and responsibilities of the mayor during the absence or
disability.
Ordinance 99.32 amended section
2-3-2 by adding the words “the mayor, the vice mayor shall act as the mayor. In
the absence of”
2-3-3 Term of the vice mayor; removal
The vice mayor shall be selected as set forth in section
2-3-1, and shall serve at the pleasure of the council, but in no event longer
than a two-year term unless he or she is re-appointed as set forth in section
2-3-1. The vice mayor may be removed prior to the expiration of his or her term
by an affirmative vote of the council, provided that no matter how many council
members are present at the meeting at which the vote to remove is taken, it
shall require an affirmative vote of at least four council members to
effectuate a removal. In the case of the removal of the vice mayor the council
shall select a replacement as provided in this chapter.
2-3-4 Powers and duties of the mayor
The powers and duties of the mayor shall include the following:
A.   The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the town.
B.   The mayor shall be the chairman of the council and preside over its
meetings. The mayor may make and second motions and shall have a voice and vote
in all its proceedings.
C.   The mayor shall execute and authenticate by his or her signature the
instruments as the council or any statutes, ordinances or this code shall
require.
D.   The mayor shall make those recommendations and suggestions to the council
as he or she may consider proper.
E.   The mayor may, by proclamation, declare a local emergency to exist due to
fire, conflagration, flood, earthquake, explosion, war, bombing or any other
natural or man made calamity or disaster or if there is the threat or
occurrence of riot, rout or affray or other acts of civil disobedience which
endanger life or property within the town. After declaration of an emergency,
the mayor shall govern by proclamation and impose all necessary regulations to
preserve the peace and order of the town, excluding the ordering of the closure
of businesses, but including the following:
   1.   Imposition of a curfew in all or any portion of the town.
   2.   Closing to public access any public building, street or other public
place.
   3.   Calling upon regular or auxiliary law enforcement agencies and
organizations within or without the political subdivision for assistance.
F.   The mayor shall perform the other duties required by state statute and
this code as well as those duties required as chief executive officer of the
town.
Ordinance 2022.019 amended section 2-3-4 by amending the last sentence of
subsection E., removing subsection E.2. and renumbering the following
subsections.
2-3-5 Failure to sign documents
If for five consecutive days the mayor fails or refuses to sign any ordinance,
resolution, contract, warrant, demand or other document or instrument requiring
his or her signature, then a majority of the members of the council may, at any
regular or special meeting, authorize the vice mayor or, in his or her absence
an acting mayor, to sign the ordinance, resolution, contract, warrant, demand
or other document or instrument which when so signed shall have the same force
and effect as if signed by the mayor.
CHAPTER 2-4.
COUNCIL PROCEDURE
2-4-1 Regular and special council meetings
A. All meetings of the council shall be public meetings and shall be conducted
in accordance with A.R.S. § 38-431 et seq. (the "open meeting law") and all
other federal, state and local laws. The council shall hold its regular
meetings on the first and third Tuesday of each month, except that when the day
fixed for any regular meeting of the council falls upon a day designated by law
as a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held on the next succeeding day which
is not a holiday, unless otherwise set by action of the council. Upon
consultation between the mayor and the town manager, any meeting which is
determined to be unnecessary may be cancelled. The town clerk shall issue a
notice of cancellation which shall be posted in the usual manner. Additional
meetings, including, without limitation, special meetings and study sessions,
shall be scheduled as needed upon request to the town clerk by the mayor, three
council members or the town manager. Additional meetings shall be noticed and
agendized in accordance with the provisions of this code and applicable state
statutes.
B. All meetings of the council shall be held at the Marana Town Hall, 11555
West Civic Center Drive, Marana, Arizona, unless otherwise designated.
C. Members of the council and the public shall be given at least 24 hours'
notice of all council meetings as set forth in the open meeting law, except in
the case of an actual emergency. Notice shall be posted on the town's website
and in such other locations as listed on the town's website and as are
reasonable and practicable. In the case of an actual emergency, a meeting may
be held upon such notice as is reasonable under the circumstances. Notice in
this paragraph is intended to mean a complete agenda of the meeting, including
the type of meeting, and the location, date and time of the meeting.
D. Written minutes shall be taken of each council meeting, and if recording
equipment is available, each council meeting shall also be recorded. These
provisions shall not apply to executive sessions, which are governed elsewhere
in this code.
Ordinance 2025.015 amended paragraph A to remove election day from automatic
rescheduling.
Ordinance 2012.09 amended section
2-4-1 to conform to open meeting law revisions and current council practice.
Ordinance 2011.08 amended paragraph A by establishing procedures to cancel and
reschedule meetings. Capitalizations in the last three sentences of paragraph A
were revised as scrivener’s errors by the town attorney by authority of section
1-4-5 to conform to the stylistic conventions set forth in Ordinance 2005.22
Ordinance 2005.22 revised the address
Ordinance 2005.22 deleted “tape” before “recorded”
2-4-2 Agenda preparation and distribution
A.   Agendas for town council meetings shall be prepared by the agenda
committee, which shall be made up of the mayor (or his or her designee), town
manager, town clerk, town attorney, and any other person designated by the
mayor or town manager. In the absence of the mayor, the vice mayor shall serve
in his or her stead. The agenda committee shall review, adjust and agree to the
items on each agenda. Although the agenda committee shall formulate each
agenda, the final determination of what will be placed on an agenda will be in
the sole discretion of the mayor, except as provided in the following
subsections.
B.   Notwithstanding the mayor’s discretion of what items to place on the
agenda, if three or more council members request an item to be placed on the
agenda, it must be placed upon the agenda for the second regular town council
meeting after the date of the request.
C.   Except in an emergency (as determined by the mayor or town manager), any
person desiring to place an item on the agenda shall prepare and deliver a
summary of the issue a reasonable time prior to the agenda committee meeting.
If the request is made by an employee or staff member, it shall be delivered to
the town manager, and if the request is made by a council member or member of
the public, it shall be delivered to any member of the agenda committee.
D.   All blue sheets, reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions,
contract documents, and other documents to be included in the “council packet”
shall be submitted to the town manager for review a reasonable time prior to
the agenda committee meeting, and the town manager will work with the
department preparing the materials to ensure that all final materials are
submitted to the town clerk or his or her designee prior to the final
preparation of the council packet. The final agenda will be prepared by the
town clerk, approved as to form by the town attorney, and signed by the mayor
or, in his or her absence, the vice mayor. Council packets will be delivered to
all council members at least 24 hours prior to the council meeting. These
deadlines may be waived for any particular item by the mayor or town manager
only if it is determined that it is impossible to meet the deadline.
E.   The agenda format as approved by resolution of the council will generally
be used for all regular town council meetings, although variations may be made
from time to time. For special meetings, study sessions, and other meetings,
such as joint meetings with other entities, retreats, subcommittee meetings,
and task force meetings, a relaxed format may be used which excludes many of
the unnecessary items, as long as the format used complies with the open
meeting law.
F.   Agenda items requiring action by the council which are generally routine
items, not believed to be controversial, not requiring council discussion, or
issues already discussed or heard at public hearing for which final adoption by
resolution or ordinance is needed may be contained in a consent agenda. A
single motion and affirmative vote “to approve the consent agenda” will approve
all items in the consent agenda, including any resolutions or ordinances
included in the consent agenda. Prior to a motion to pass the consent agenda,
and upon the request of any council member, any item on the consent agenda can
be removed from the consent agenda and considered immediately following the
consent agenda. If the consent agenda is not passed, the council may discuss
and vote upon each item listed on the consent agenda immediately after the vote
fails to pass the consent agenda.
G.   In formulating the agenda, items for which there is attendance of
speakers, presenters or members of the public, may be placed higher on the
agenda to allow those individuals to leave after the item is completed.
Section 2-4-2 was rewritten by Ordinance 99.32
The wording of paragraph B was simplified by Ordinance 2005.22
Paragraph E was revised by Ordinances 2012.09 and 2005.22. The currently used
agenda format was approved by Resolution 2012-66, adopted on August 7, 2012.
Ordinance 2005.22 inserted “after the vote fails to pass the consent agenda”
for “thereafter”
2-4-3 Duties at meetings
A.   The mayor shall be the presiding officer of the council and the committee
chairman shall be the presiding officer of the committee. If the mayor is
absent, the vice mayor shall be the presiding officer until the return of the
mayor. If both the mayor and vice mayor are absent, the town clerk shall call
the meeting to order and a temporary presiding officer shall be elected by a
majority of those council members present, and that person shall serve until
the return of the mayor or vice mayor. Upon the return of the mayor or vice
mayor, the temporary presiding officer shall relinquish the chair when the
business immediately before the council is completed. The word “mayor” as used
in this section shall mean the presiding officer of the meeting.
B.   The mayor shall call the meeting to order, and lead or designate the
leading of the pledge of allegiance and, if desired, an invocation/moment of
silence. The mayor shall preserve strict order and decorum at all regular and
special meetings of the council. The mayor may move, second and debate from the
chair, subject only to those limitations of debate imposed on all members. The
mayor shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a council
member.
C.   The town clerk shall take the roll call. The town clerk shall announce
each agenda item, reading into the record the item as listed on the agenda,
sufficiently to advise the council and public as to what business is about to
be considered by the council. The town clerk shall also read motions into the
record as set forth in this section and perform other duties as set forth in
this section or as directed by the mayor.
D.   The mayor may appoint a sergeant-at-arms at the council meetings, who
shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the mayor for the purpose
of maintaining order and decorum at the council meeting. Upon instructions of
the mayor, it shall be the duty of the sergeant-at-arms to remove any person
who violates the order and decorum of the meeting, as set forth below.
Ordinance 99.32 inserted the words “if desired” before “an invocation/moment of
silence” in paragraph B
2-4-4 Procedures for meetings
The following procedures will generally apply to all regular town council
meetings. For special meetings, study sessions and other meetings, such as
joint meetings with other entities, retreats, subcommittee meetings, and task
force meetings, relaxed procedures may be used which exclude any unnecessary
items, as long as all procedures comply with the open meeting law.
A.   Call to order: the mayor shall call the meeting to order.
B.   Pledge of allegiance: the mayor or his or her designee shall lead the
pledge.
C.   Invocation/moment of silence: if desired, the mayor or his/her designee
shall lead the invocation/moment of silence.
D.   Roll call: roll shall be called by the town clerk. Any absence which has
been explained to the mayor, town manager, or town clerk in advance shall
constitute an “excused absence”, and any absence which has not been explained
in advance shall be an “unexcused absence”. At the time of taking roll, the
mayor shall place into the record whether a council member’s absence is
“excused” or “unexcused”.
E.   Approval of agenda: the council shall vote to approve the agenda as
written, or shall modify the agenda by moving items or deleting items, and
shall approve the modified agenda. The council may, by majority vote, delete
agenda items or consider items out of sequence from the printed agenda, so long
as public notice is adhered to.
F.   Approval of minutes: the town clerk shall present minutes of previous
meetings to the council for approval. Council members who were not present at a
previous meeting may abstain from the vote approving those minutes, although
this is not required. The council may approve multiple minutes by one vote, and
if one or more council member expressed a desire to abstain from the vote on
one set of minutes, the motion may be to approve the minutes “except as noted
by council member(s) _______”. Minutes may be considered as part of the consent
agenda.
G.   Call to the public: persons wishing to address the council on any issue
within the jurisdiction of the council, except for items scheduled for a public
hearing at the same meeting, may do so during the call to the public. Each
speaker is limited to three minutes. The mayor or council may limit the total
time offered speakers. At the conclusion of call to the public, individual
members of the council may respond to criticism made by those who have
addressed the council, may ask staff to review the matter or may ask that the
matter be placed on a future agenda.
H.   Staff reports: a council member may ask a staff member about a particular
issue in his or her report, but discussion of any item mentioned in a staff
report may not be held unless that item is properly placed on the agenda.
I.   Order of business: the town clerk, if directed by the mayor, shall
announce each order of business, and the mayor shall then ask the council its
pleasure on the item. A motion need not be made in order for an item to be
discussed. Unless the council determines that no report is necessary, staff
shall have an opportunity to report on the issue and will respond to council
questions. The council may take action on any item listed on the agenda, and at
any time that agenda item is before the council a motion may be made as
provided in this chapter.
J.   Town manager’s and mayor’s reports: the town manager’s and the mayor’s
reports may be written or oral. Any council member may ask the town manager or
mayor about a particular item in his or her report, but discussion of any item
mentioned in the report may not be held unless that item is properly placed on
the agenda.
K.   Future agenda items: any council member may request that an item be placed
on a future agenda. If any other council member agrees, he or she will show his
or her support. Any item which is suggested and has support from at least two
other council members must be scheduled for the second regular town council
meeting following that meeting unless otherwise provided, and any suggested
item which does not receive support from at least two other council members may
be placed on a future agenda at the discretion of the mayor or the agenda
committee.
Ordinances 2012.09 and 99.32 revised the un-numbered introductory paragraph of
section
2-4-4
Ordinance 99.32 added the words “if desired” to paragraph C
Ordinance 99.32 deleted two sentences from the end of paragraph E restricting
an item from being considered again at the same meeting in some situations
Ordinance 99.32 added the words “of previous meetings” and “although this is
not required” and inserted “may” for “shall” in paragraph F. Ordinance 2005.22
added the last sentence.
Paragraph G was amended by Ordinances 2012.09, 2000.21, and 99.32
Ordinance 99.32 deleted the words “a general” before “discussion” in paragraph
H
Ordinance 99.32 deleted the words “a general” before “discussion” and made
other minor wording revisions in paragraph J
Ordinance 99.32 inserted “must be scheduled” in place of “will be scheduled”
and “suggested item” for “item which is suggested” in paragraph K
2-4-5 Executive sessions
A.   Executive sessions may be placed on an agenda under the same circumstances
as any other agenda item; however, approval of the town attorney of all
executive sessions shall be required to assure compliance with the open meeting
law. Executive sessions may only be placed on the agenda if the issue is
allowed to be considered in an executive session pursuant to A.R.S. § 38-
431.03.
B.   Under normal circumstances, executive sessions will be attended by the
mayor and council, town manager, town attorney and town clerk. The mayor may
direct or a majority of the council may vote to have other individuals attend
the executive session.
C.   Executive sessions are not to be recorded, but the town clerk or another
individual appointed by the mayor shall take written minutes of executive
sessions to document the nature and extent of the discussions. All minutes of
executive sessions shall be sealed and retained by the town clerk. Only those
individuals who were present at a particular executive session or others
specifically permitted by law may review the minutes of that session.
Ordinance 2005.22 deleted “tape” before “recorded” and inserted “the Town clerk
or another” for “an” in the second clause of paragraph C” Ordinance 99.32
inserted “or others specifically permitted by law” in paragraph C
Ordinance 99.32 inserted “will” for “shall” in the first sentence and added
“The mayor may direct or” at the beginning of the second sentence of paragraph
B
2-4-6 Public hearing procedure
A public hearing may be placed on the agenda under the same agenda item as the
discussion and action of the council. The normal procedure for public hearings
shall be as set forth below.
A.   Calling agenda item: The agenda item shall be called by the town clerk as
any other agenda item.
B.   Declaration of public hearing: the mayor shall declare that the council is
now in public hearing.
C.   Proponent presentation: the proponent may make an opening statement to
explain the item to the council and public. The mayor or council may limit the
time for this statement as necessary.
D.   Staff report: staff shall have an opportunity to report on the issue and
answer questions by the council.
E.   Written comments: written communications filed with the town or staff
shall be presented to the council or read into the record.
F.   Public comments: testimony from members of the public shall be permitted.
Members of the public shall be limited to five minutes per person, or less as
designated by the mayor or council. The total time allotted to the public on
any issue may be limited by the mayor or council, but in no event will the
public testimony be limited to less than one hour.
G.   Council discussion: discussion by council members may be held at this
time, or reserved until the council has come out of public hearing.
H.   Proponent closing statement: the proponent may be allowed a brief closing
statement to rebut the statements made by the public, to offer a compromise, or
to otherwise address the issue.
I.   Declaration of end of public hearing: Unless a majority of the council
members object, the mayor shall declare the termination of the public hearing.
J.   Council discussion and vote: the agenda item will then be discussed and
action taken as on any other agenda item.
Ordinance 2005.22 inserted “below” for “hereafter” in the introductory
paragraph
Ordinance 99.32 inserted “may” for “shall” in paragraph H
Ordinance 99.32 inserted “the termination of the public hearing” for “public
hearing as ended” in paragraph I
2-4-7 Discussion and voting procedure
A.   A quorum must be present in order for the council to consider or act upon
any business. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members of the
council, excluding vacancies. If a quorum is not present, the meeting shall be
called to order, and the only motion that can be made, considered and passed is
a motion for adjournment.
B.   Each council member has a responsibility for compliance with A.R.S. § 38-
501 et seq., concerning conflicts of interest. Any member of the council who
believes he or she has a conflict of interest, shall, immediately upon
determining that a conflict exists, declare the conflict of interest and
explain the basis for the conflict. That council member may then leave the room
and shall refrain from taking any part in the meeting, discussion,
consideration or determination of that issue. If that issue is not resolved at
that meeting, that council member shall not discuss the matter with any other
council member until the matter is finally resolved. The member who declared
the conflict may return to his or her seat when that agenda item is completed.
C.   Every council member desiring to speak shall address the mayor, and upon
recognition by the mayor, shall confine himself or herself to the question
under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language.
D.   A council member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking
unless it is to call him or her to order. If a council member, while speaking,
is called to order, he or she shall cease speaking until the question of order
is determined, and, if in order, he or she shall be permitted to proceed.
E.   While the council is in session, the council members must preserve order
and decorum. A member shall not, by conversation or otherwise, delay or
interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the council or disturb any member
while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the council or mayor, except as
otherwise provided in this title.
F.   If a person in the audience wishes to address the council on an issue on
the agenda which is not a public hearing, the mayor may permit the person to
speak or may present the request to the council. If a majority of the council
wishes to hear from the public on the issue, that person shall be permitted to
speak; however, any public address shall be limited to five minutes per person
and as otherwise restricted by the mayor or council. Written communications
delivered to the mayor before the agenda item was called will either be read
into the record or a copy delivered to each council member.
G.   Any person making personal, impertinent, or slanderous remarks, or who
becomes boisterous while addressing the council, or who interferes with the
order of business before the council, and who fails upon request of the mayor
to cease that activity, shall be barred from further audience before the
council for the remainder of that meeting unless permission to continue is
granted by a majority vote of the council.
H.   A motion shall be made by beginning the statement with words such as, “I
move that....” A motion must be stated clearly, and specifically state the
contents of the motion. There can be no discussion after a motion is made until
there is a second or the motion dies for lack of a second. If there is not a
second, the mayor shall announce that the motion failed for lack of a second,
and the discussion may continue, or the council may move on to the next agenda
item.
I.   After the motion is made and seconded, the town clerk should read back the
motion from the official record. The mayor may then call for discussion.
J.   At any time before the question is called on a pending motion, the council
member who made the motion may ask that his or her motion be amended. At the
time of the amendment, he or she shall clearly state the amendment, and the
amendment shall be read back by the town clerk. If the council member who
seconded the vote agrees, then the motion shall be considered amended
voluntarily.
K.   At any time before the question is called on a pending motion, a council
member may make a motion to amend the motion. At that time the discussion of
the underlying issue will stop. If there is no second to the motion to amend,
then discussion on the underlying issue will continue. If there is a second to
the motion to amend, then all discussion will be confined to the motion to
amend, and there shall be a vote on the motion to amend. If the motion to amend
is adopted by a majority of the council, discussion will continue on the motion
as amended. If the motion to amend fails, discussion will continue on the
original motion on the floor.
L.   At any time before the question is called on a pending motion, the council
member who made the motion may ask that his or her motion be withdrawn. The
motion will be withdrawn only if the council member who seconded the motion
agrees with withdrawal of the motion.
M.   Discussion shall end when the question is called or when the mayor
determines there is no further discussion desired by any council member. The
mayor shall direct the town clerk to read the motion, and the town clerk shall
read the motion as made or amended. The only persons who can object to the form
of the motion at this time are the council members who made and seconded the
motion. If there is a conflict as to whether the motion as read is the motion
as intended, the matter will revert to further discussion until the discrepancy
is corrected.
N.   The mayor shall ask council members to designate their individual votes by
announcing “aye” or “nay.” If, prior to the vote or after the vote, any council
member requests a roll call vote, the town clerk shall call roll, and each
council member shall state his or her vote aloud.
O.   After the vote, the town clerk shall announce whether the motion failed or
passed. If the vote was unanimous the town clerk shall so state, and if it was
not, the town clerk shall state the individual votes for the record, stating
the number of “aye” and “nay” votes. If any council member disagrees with the
vote as read back by the town clerk, he or she shall immediately request a
clarification or roll call vote. After the town clerk reads back the individual
votes, silence by any council member displays his or her agreement with the
vote as read.
P.   A motion passes if it receives more “aye” votes than the combined number
of “nay” votes plus the number of council members abstaining from voting on the
motion, except for abstentions based on conflict of interest. In the case of a
tie on any motion, the motion fails.
Ordinance 99.32 inserted “A quorum must” in place of “It will be necessary for
a quorum to” and added “excluding vacancies” in paragraph A
Ordinance 99.32 inserted “may then leave” for “shall then leave” in paragraph B
Ordinance 2005.22 rewrote the last sentence of paragraph F
Ordinance 99.32 inserted “may permit the person to speak or may” for “shall,”
“five minutes” for “three minutes,” and deleted “by the mayor” after “into the
record” in paragraph F
Ordinance 99.32 inserted “should” for “shall” and “may” for “shall” in
paragraph I
Ordinance 99.32 amended paragraphs J and K by deleting a sentence at the end of
each that stated: “No more than one amendment to an amendment shall be
permitted.”
Ordinance 99.32 inserted “their” for “his or her” in the first sentence of
paragraph N
Ordinance 99.32 amended paragraph P by adding the first sentence, and deleted
former paragraph Q defining “Emergency.” Ordinance 2005.22 rewrote paragraph P.
2-4-8 Motions to reconsider
A.   Reconsideration of any action taken (or not taken) by the town council may
be requested only by a council member who was on the prevailing side of the
vote. Such a council member may request that the issue of reconsideration be
placed on the agenda for discussion and possible action, although this request
must be made prior to the start of the next regular town council meeting
following the meeting at which the action was taken. If such a request is made,
reconsideration will be placed on the agenda for the second regular town
council meeting following the meeting at which the original action was taken.
The agenda will list reconsideration of the vote as one item, and the re-vote
on the issue as a separate item.
B.   When that agenda item is called, the council may discuss the
reconsideration, but a motion to reconsider may only be made by a council
member who voted with the prevailing side of the vote. A motion to reconsider
may be seconded by any council member. The discussion and vote of the motion to
reconsider shall be as for any other business before the council.
C.   If the motion to reconsider fails, the council will skip the discussion
and vote of the original issue. If the motion to reconsider passes, the council
will discuss and vote on the original issue as for any other business before
the council, and any council member may make motions on the original issue.
Ordinance 2005.22 rewrote paragraph B
Ordinance 2005.22 rewrote paragraph C
CHAPTER 2-5.
ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND CONTRACTS
2-5-1 Prior approval
Before presentation to the council, all ordinances, resolutions and contract
documents shall have been reviewed as to form by the town attorney and shall,
when there are substantive matters of administration involved, be referred to
the person who is charged with the administration of the matters. That person
shall have an opportunity to present his or her objections, if any, prior to
the passage of the ordinance, resolution or acceptance of the contract.
2-5-2 Introduction
Ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects requiring action by the
council shall be introduced and sponsored by a member of the council, except
that the town attorney or the town manager may present ordinances, resolutions
and other matters or subjects to the town council, and any member of the town
council may assume sponsorship of them by moving that the ordinance,
resolution, matter or subject be adopted.
Ordinance 99.32 amended section
2-5-2 by inserting “Town” in four places and deleting the words “otherwise,
they shall not be considered” at the end of the paragraph
2-5-3 Reading of proposed ordinance
Ordinances shall be read, prior to adoption, but may be read by title only,
provided that the council is in possession of printed copies of the ordinance.
A member of the council may request that the ordinance under consideration be
read in full, and in that case the ordinance shall be read in full.
2-5-4 Requirements for an ordinance
Each ordinance should have but one subject, the nature of which is clearly
expressed in the title. Whenever possible, each ordinance shall be introduced
as an amendment to this code or to an existing ordinance, and, in that case,
the title of the sections to be amended shall be included in the ordinance.
2-5-5 Effective date of ordinances, resolutions and franchises
A.   No ordinance, resolution or franchise which is subject to voter referendum
shall become operative until 30 days after its passage by the council, except
measures immediately necessary for the preservation of the peace, health or
safety of the town. Such an emergency measure shall only become immediately
operative if it states in a separate section the reason why it is necessary
that it should become immediately operative and only if it is approved by the
affirmative vote of three fourths of all the members elected to the council.
B.   In addition to the provisions of subsection A of this section, the town
clerk shall certify the minutes of any council meeting at which an ordinance,
resolution or franchise, except an emergency measure, is passed.
Section 2-5-5 was rewritten by Ordinance 99.32. Ordinance 2010.06 modified the
title to add “resolutions and franchises” and modified paragraph A to add
“which is subject to voter referendum”
2-5-6 Signatures required
Every ordinance passed by the council shall, before it becomes effective, be
signed by the mayor, attested by the town clerk, and acknowledged that it has
been approved as to form by the town attorney.
2-5-7 Publishing required
Only those orders, ordinances, resolutions, motions, regulations or proceedings
of the council shall be published as may be required by state statute or
expressly ordered by the council.
2-5-8 Posting required
Every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, forfeiture or other punishment
shall, after passage, be posted by the town clerk in three or more public
places within the town and an affidavit of the person who posted the ordinance
shall be filed in the office of the town clerk as proof of posting.
CHAPTER 2-6.
SPECIAL AND STANDING BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
2-6-1 Creation and dissolution
A.   The council may create and dissolve those special and standing boards,
commissions or committees as it deems necessary upon a majority vote of the
council, except as otherwise provided in this code or as required by statute.
B.   Unless already prescribed elsewhere in the applicable law, the motion or
resolution creating a board, commission or committee shall describe its powers
and purpose and establish the number and qualifications of its membership.
C.   The motion or resolution creating a special board, commission or committee
may provide for its dissolution after a period of time or upon completion of
its assigned task.
D.   The board, commission or committee shall exercise its powers and purpose
with respect to matters within or affecting the jurisdictional boundaries of
the town, unless the motion or resolution creating the board, commission or
committee provides otherwise.
2-6-2 Application, recommendation, appointment and removal
A.   Except for the initial appointment of a new board, commission or
committee, the council shall establish a regular schedule for appointment and
reappointment of board, commission or committee members.
B.   The town manager and/or designee shall be responsible for developing an
application process, application forms and management of the recruitment
process for vacancies that exist on boards, commissions or committees
established by the town council. The recruitment and application process
developed by the town manager or designee shall include a public announcement
and invitation for applications and establish a minimum timeframe for receipt
of applications. If the minimum number of applications needed is not received
by the established deadline the town manager or designee shall continue to
receive applications until enough have been received to fill the vacancy or
vacancies.
C.   The town manager and/or designee shall review the applications,
investigate the qualifications of the applicants, and forward all applications
to the town council.
D.   The town council shall receive the applications at a public meeting not
more than thirty days after the town manager’s (or designee’s) receipt of the
applications. The town clerk shall mail each citizen applicant notice of the
public meeting concerning the appointment.
E.   At the public meeting concerning the appointment, the town council may do
one or more of the following:
   1.   Interview one or more applicants either in public or in an executive
session scheduled for that purpose.
   2.   Make one or more appointments.
   3.   Order the solicitation of additional applications.
   4.   Take any other action it deems appropriate.
F.   Citizen members of boards, committees and commissions shall serve without
compensation, except for reimbursement of town-approved necessary and
reasonable expenses incurred in accomplishing the purposes of the board,
committee or commission.
G.   A member of any board, commission, or committee may be removed from office
with or without cause by a majority vote of the town council.
Ordinance 2009.18 substantially rewrote section
2-6-2. See Ordinance 96.13, 99.32, 2006.25 and 2008.15 for prior history.
2-6-3 Terms of office
A.   All terms of office for members of standing boards, commissions and
committees shall be for four years, except that the initial terms of office for
members of any new standing board, commission or committee shall be staggered
so that the terms of no more than a simple majority of members ends every two
years.
B.   The terms of office for members of any special boards, commissions and
committees shall be as determined by the town council based on the purpose of
the special board, commission or committee. The motion or resolution creating
the special board, commission or committee shall establish the terms of office
for its members.
Section 2-6-3 was added by Ordinance 2006.25 and revised by Ordinance 2008.15,
2009.18, and 2011.28
2-6-4 Modification by motion or resolution
The town council may by motion or resolution modify any of the procedures set
forth in this chapter where it deems appropriate for a particular vacancy,
board, commission or committee.
Section 2-6-4 was added by Ordinance 2006.25
2-6-5 Applicability of this chapter
Except as they may later be modified by motion or resolution pursuant to
section
2-6-4, the procedures set forth in this chapter shall apply to all new or
existing boards, commissions and committees.
Section 2-6-5 was added by Ordinance 2006.25
Ordinance 2006.25 deleted chapters 2-7 (“special committees”), 2-8 (“planning
and zoning commission”), and 2-9 (“board of adjustment”)
CHAPTER 2-7.
[RESERVED]
CHAPTER 2-8.
[RESERVED]
CHAPTER 2-9.
[RESERVED]
CHAPTER 2-10.
INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
2-10-1 Persons covered
All of the protections and benefits conferred by this chapter shall be enjoyed
by any present or former mayor and each and all of the present or former
members of the council, town officers, town magistrates, town employees, and
all members of all town boards, committees, subcommittees, advisory committees
and commissions which protected parties are referred to individually as a “town
officer” and collectively or jointly as “town officials.”
Section 2-10-1 was rewritten by Ordinance 99.32
2-10-2 Indemnification and protection of town officials
A.   Any town officer and all town officials shall be exonerated, indemnified
and held harmless by the town from and against any liability or loss in any
manner arising out of, or occasioned by, his or her service as a town officer
or official and based upon any claim by any third party that the town or any
town officer or official, by any action or failure to act, damaged the property
or infringed the rights of that third party, or of any other person on whose
behalf that third party brings a claim or legal action, provided the officer or
official acted, or failed to act, in good faith and in a manner he or she
reasonably believed to be in, or not opposed to, the best interests of the
town.
B.   The right to indemnification provided for in subsection A of this section
shall extend as well to any claim brought by, or on behalf of, the town to
recover damages alleged to have been occasioned to it or any of its property,
by any act or failure to act of any town officer or official, except that no
indemnification or exoneration shall be made in respect of any claim, issue or
matter as to which the town officer or official shall have been adjudged to be
liable to the town unless and only to the extent that the court in rendering
judgment determines upon application that, despite the adjudication of
liability but in view of all circumstances of the case, the officer or official
is fairly and reasonably entitled to indemnity for those expenses as the court
may deem proper. The court in which any such action or suit was brought may
determine upon application that, in view of all of the circumstances of the
case, indemnity for amounts paid in settlement is proper and may order
indemnity for the amount so paid in settlement.
C.   In any case where indemnification is required under the provisions of
subsections A or B of this section, the town treasurer shall pay, on behalf of
the town officer or official, any money judgment and shall perform the onerous
provisions of any court order which may be entered against him or her when the
judgment or order has become final and no longer appealable, or has not been
stayed pending appeal.
D.   In any case where any town officer or official is or may be entitled to be
exonerated, indemnified and held harmless pursuant to the provisions of
subsection A of this section, the town shall protect and defend the officer or
official from and against any litigation commenced against him or her, by
engaging and compensating competent legal counsel to conduct his or her
defense, and by paying all court costs and any fees of opposing legal counsel
taxed or imposed by the court having jurisdiction.
E.   In any case where any town officer or official is or may be entitled to be
exonerated, indemnified and held harmless pursuant to the provisions of
subsection B of this section, the town shall pay the expenses, including
attorneys’ fees and the cost of a bond or other security pending appeal,
incurred in defending the civil action, suit or proceeding by the officer or
official in advance of the final disposition of the action, suit or proceeding
upon receipt of an undertaking by or on behalf of the town officer or official
to repay that amount if it is ultimately determined that he or she is not
entitled to be indemnified by the town as authorized in subsection B of this
section.
F.   The coverage afforded by this section shall not apply in any case where
indemnification is not permissible pursuant to any state statute or any
determination that the indemnification would be contrary to public policy.
2-10-3 Insurance coverage
The town shall at all times procure insurance policies providing the maximum
coverage and limits procurable at reasonable rates to protect its interests and
to indemnify and protect all town officials and any town officer entitled to
indemnification and protection pursuant to this chapter. Acceptance of coverage
and undertaking of protection by any insurance carrier shall be deemed to
satisfy the requirements of this chapter on the part of the town. however, in
any case or instance where an insurance carrier does not in fact accept
coverage and defend any town officer or officials, or where the insurance
policy limits are insufficient to cover any judgment entered against any town
officer or officials, the town shall be bound by the provisions of this chapter
to protect and indemnify pursuant to the provisions of section
2-10-2.
2-10-4 Notice of claims
It shall be a precondition to the assertion of any claim for protection and
indemnity under this chapter that any town officer or officials, after having
been served with process commencing litigation against him, her or them, or
after having received written notice of a possible claim alleged to be covered
under the provisions of section 2-10-2 A or B, shall promptly give notice to
the town clerk that the action is pending or that a claim has been presented.
The town clerk shall in turn present the action or claim to the council. It
shall further be a precondition to coverage under this
chapter 2-10 that a town officer or official claiming the protection and
benefits conferred by this chapter shall at all times, and in every way,
cooperate fully with legal counsel appointed by the town to defend against any
threatened or pending litigation under the provisions of section 2-10-2 D.
Ordinance 99.32 amended section
2-10-4 by deleting “together with such Town officer’s or official’s request for
indemnity and protection hereunder” from the end of the first sentence. The
wording of this section was simplified by Ordinance 2005.22.
TITLE 3
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 3-1.   OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
CHAPTER 3-2.   ESTABLISHMENT, COMPENSATION, AND POWERS AND DUTIES OF TOWN
OFFICERS
CHAPTER 3-3.   PERSONNEL POLICIES
CHAPTER 3-4.   PROCUREMENT
CHAPTER 3-5.   CLAIMS AND SETTLEMENT
Title 3 was adopted by Ordinance 2000.07. Earlier versions were adopted by
Ordinance 96.14 and 98.22.
Ordinance 2014.018 changed the title of chapter 3 1. Section 3-1-1 was amended
by Ordinances 2005.22, 2006.14, 2014.018, and 2024.015. Ordinance 2005.22 added
"assistant town manager" and combined "town clerk" and "town marshal."
Ordinance 2006.14 added "deputy town manager" and deleted "town marshal."
Ordinance 2014.018 revised the wording of paragraph A and added subparagraphs
7, 8, and 9. Ordinance 2024.015 added paragraphs C and D.
CHAPTER 3-1.
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Ordinance 2014.018 changed the title of
chapter 3-1.
3-1-1 Town officers
   A.   There are hereby created, in addition to the mayor and town council
members, the following officers of the town. An officer is defined as an
employee who holds an office of trust, command and authority, and who is part
of a responsive management team that exists to carry out the goals and policies
of the town.
      1.   Town manager
      2.   Deputy town manager
      3.   Assistant town managers
      4.   Town clerk
      5.   Town engineer
      6.   Town attorney
      7.   Department heads
      8.   General managers
      9.   Such other officers as from time to time may be provided for by
ordinance or resolution
   B.   These officers shall be appointed from time to time as set forth in
this code.
   C.   In some cases the town council or town manager may assign the
responsibilities of a town officer position to another town employee or
employees rather than filling the town officer position with a full-time
equivalent (FTE) employee. In these instances, the employee(s) fulfilling the
responsibilities of the town officer position must meet the minimum
qualifications of the town officer position.
   D.   At the discretion of a town officer, the powers and duties of the town
officer may be undertaken and carried out by another employee or employees (by
whatever rank or title they may be called) who meet the minimum qualifications,
if any, to undertake and carry out the assigned powers and duties, and who
shall have the same authority as the town officer, under the general
supervision of the town officer.
Section 3-1-1 was amended by Ordinances 2005.22, 2006.14, and 2014.018.
Ordinance 2005.22 added “assistant town manager” and combined “town clerk” and
“town marshal.” Ordinance 2006.14 added “deputy town manager” and deleted “town
marshal.” Ordinance 2014.018 revised the wording of paragraph A and added
subparagraphs 7, 8, and 9.
3-1-2 Positions appointed by the town council, town manager, deputy town
manager, assistant town managers, general managers & department heads;
definition
A.   The position of town manager shall be appointed from time to time by the
town council, and shall be employed at the will of the town council. This
position shall have no term of office, shall be at-will, and shall report
directly to the town council. The town manager’s employment shall be governed
by the terms set forth in this title and in any employment agreement approved
by the council.
B.   The town magistrate shall be appointed by the town council in accordance
with section
5-2-1. The town magistrate’s employment shall be governed by the terms set
forth in this title and in any employment agreement approved by the council.
C.   The following positions shall report to the town manager, shall be
appointed from time to time by the town manager, shall have no term of office,
shall be at-will, and shall work at the pleasure of the town manager.
   1.   Deputy town manager
   2.   Assistant town managers
   3.   Town attorney
D.   All other officers shall report to the town manager, except that the town
manager may designate in writing that an officer shall report to the deputy
town manager, an assistant town manager, a general manager or a department
head. The town manager serves as the department head for the town manager’s
office. Each officer shall be appointed from time to time by the town manager,
shall have no term of office, shall be at-will, and shall work at the pleasure
of the town manager.
E.   All other positions in the town shall be hired by the general manager or
department head, with the approval of the town manager, deputy town manager or
assistant town manager to whom the general manager or department head reports,
and shall work at the pleasure of the town manager, the general manager or
department head, as provided in this code and the town personnel policies.
F.   For purposes of this chapter, “at-will” means employment that may be
terminated upon the will of the employer or employee at any time with or
without cause.
Section 3-1-3 was amended by Ordinances 2000.20, 2001.08, 2003.13, 2005.22,
2006.14, 2008.19, 2011.03, 2011.14, 2013.015, 2014.018, and 2023.036
3-1-3 Position status
All positions in the town are categorized as classified, unclassified, or
temporary positions. The extent to which certain personnel policies, rules or
provisions apply to particular positions will depend upon the categorization of
the position.
A.   Classified positions. All positions not specifically identified in the
salary schedule implemented by the town manager as unclassified or temporary
positions shall be classified positions. Different rules and policies, however,
may be established for different groups of classified positions.
   1.   Notwithstanding paragraph A above, an employee may be hired in a
classified position, but on a temporary basis. When this occurs, the employee
will be considered to be in a temporary position, and will be subject to the
policies, rules, and regulations governing temporary positions.
B.   Unclassified positions. All town officers shall be in unclassified
positions. Any other unclassified positions shall be identified as such in the
salary schedule implemented by the town manager. Employees in unclassified
positions are at-will employees. Employees in unclassified positions shall
receive all benefits afforded to classified employees, except those
specifically excluded by this code or by town personnel policies.
C.   Temporary positions. This category of employment is comprised of term-
limited temporary positions and short-term temporary positions. Employees in
temporary positions are at-will employees. Temporary positions shall be
identified as such in the salary schedule implemented by the town manager.
Additionally, an employee will be considered to be in a temporary position when
the employee is hired in a classified position, but on a temporary basis, as
set forth in this section.
   1.   Term-limited temporary positions. Term-limited temporary positions are
positions with work related to a specific grant, project, or other significant
or substantial non-routine body of work, for a term of six to 36 months. The
town manager or designee shall determine when a position may be designated as a
term-limited temporary position in accordance with this section. Employees in
term-limited temporary employees shall receive any general salary increases
that may be granted from time to time and shall receive all benefits afforded
to classified employees, except those specifically excluded by this code or by
town personnel policies.
   2.   Short-term temporary positions. Short-term temporary positions are
positions used to augment the workforce due to seasonal and other specific
temporary workload needs that require additional staffing. The town manager or
designee shall determine when a position may be designated as a short-term
temporary position in accordance with this section. Employees in short-term
temporary positions may not receive all general salary increases granted to
town employees from time to time and shall not receive benefits provided to
other employees of the town, unless specifically stated otherwise in this code
or in the town's personnel policies. Employees in short-term temporary
positions shall work for a time period that does not:
      a.   In a fiscal year, exceed more than 20 hours per week for more than
19 weeks; and
      b.   In a rolling 12-month period, exceed an average of more than 29
hours per week or 1040 hours.
Section 3-1-4 was amended by Ordinances 2008.19 and 2014.018
3-1-4 Non-employee positions
The following positions are not considered to be employment positions:
A.   All elected officials and members of boards, committees, and commissions
B.   Volunteer personnel and personnel appointed to service without pay
C.   Those engaged by the town on a contractual basis
Section 3-1-4 was amended by Ordinances 2008.19 and 2014.018
3-1-5 Compensation and benefits
Section 3-1-5 was amended by Ordinance 2014.018
The compensation and benefits of town employees shall be as fixed from time to
time by the town council through adoption of the annual budget.
3-1-6 Bond
The town council shall require each officer of the town to furnish bond for the
due discharge of his or her duties in an amount and with that security as it
may direct and approve as determined by resolution. The town shall pay the
costs of the bond. At the discretion of the town council, the bond may be in
the form of a blanket bond with coverage the council deems necessary.
3-1-7 Vacancies; holding more than one office
Any vacancy that shall occur in any town position shall be filled by
appointment of the appointing authority (town council, town manager, or
department head). One person may hold more than one position and the functions
of a town official may be validly performed and discharged by a deputy or
another town official, or an otherwise qualified individual not holding elected
office, but employed at the pleasure of the town council.
3-1-8 Additional powers and duties
In addition to any powers and duties prescribed in this code, each employee
shall have those further powers, perform those further duties and hold any
other office as may be provided by that employee’s direct supervisor.
CHAPTER 3-2.   ESTABLISHMENT, COMPENSATION, AND POWERS AND DUTIES OF TOWN
OFFICERS
The title of
chapter 3-2 was revised by Ordinance 2014.018
3-2-1 Town manager
A.   Office established. The position of town manager is hereby created and
established. The town manager shall be appointed by a majority of the town
council on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications
and his or her knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of the
office as set forth below. The town manager shall serve at the pleasure of the
town council.
B.   Ineligibility of town council member. No town council member shall be
appointed town manager during the term for which he or she has been elected to
the town council.
C.   Temporary absence. During the temporary absence or disability of the
appointed town manager, the deputy town manager shall perform the duties of
town manager. If the deputy town manager is absent, unable or unwilling to
perform the duties of town manager, the town council shall designate an
assistant town manager to perform the duties of town manager.
D.   Permanent absence. If a town manager is not employed by the town for any
period of time due to resignation, discharge, or for any other reason, all
duties designated in this code to the town manager shall be performed by the
deputy town manager or any individual selected by the town council.
E.   Removal from office. The town manager may be removed by the town council
by a majority of its members. The town manager must give 30 days written notice
of his or her intention to resign, provided that the town council, upon a
majority vote of its members, may waive this requirement.
F.   Compensation. The town manager shall receive such compensation as the town
council shall from time to time determine and fix by ordinance, resolution or
motion, and the compensation shall be a proper charge against those funds of
the town as the town council shall designate. The town manager shall be
reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him or her in the
performance of his or her duties, or incurred when traveling on business
pertaining to the town as approved by the town council by the adoption of its
budget. Reimbursement shall be made only when a verified itemized claim,
setting forth the sums expended for which reimbursement is requested, has been
presented.
G.   Powers and duties. Except as otherwise provided in this code, the town
manager shall be the chief administrative officer and head of the
administrative branch of the town government and shall be responsible to the
town council for the proper administration of all affairs of the town. In
addition to the general powers as the chief administrative officer and not as a
limitation on them, it shall be the town manager’s responsibility and authority
to perform the following:
   1.   The town manager shall execute, on behalf of the town council, general
administrative supervision and control of the affairs of the town;
   2.   The town manager shall attend all meetings of the town council with the
duty of reporting on or discussing any matter concerning the affairs of the
departments, boards, commissions, committees, services or activities under his
or her supervision, upon which the town council should be informed. Exceptions
to attending meetings of the town council may be granted upon written request
by the town manager and approval by the mayor;
   3.   Pursuant to the provisions of section
3-1-2, the town manager shall appoint and, when necessary, suspend or remove
the appointive officers and employees set forth in section
3-1-2. All appointments and removals shall be based upon merit and upon the
qualifications or disqualifications of the officer or employee without regard
to any political belief or affiliation, and in coordination with the
appropriate department head. The power of appointment, suspension or removal of
the town magistrate shall be expressly reserved to the town council;
   4.   The town manager shall coordinate the administrative functions and
operations of the various departments, boards, commissions, committees,
divisions and services of the town government, and on its behalf carry out
policies, rules, regulations and ordinances adopted by it, relating to the
administration of the affairs of the various departments, boards, commissions,
committees, divisions or services;
   5.   The town manager shall cause to be prepared and submitted to him or her
by each department, board, commission, committee, division or service of the
town government, itemized annual estimates of expenditures required by them for
capital outlay, salaries, wages and miscellaneous operating costs, tabulate the
same into a preliminary consolidated municipal budget and submit the same to
the town council annually on the date specified by it, with his or her
recommendations as to any increases, decreases, cancellations, transfers or
changes in any of the items included in the preliminary budget;
   6.   The town manager shall supervise the expenditures of all departments,
divisions or services of the town government;
   7.   The town manager shall analyze and supervise the functions, duties and
activities of the various departments, boards, commissions, committees and
services of the town government and all employees of the town;
   8.   The town manager shall develop and organize necessary improvement
projects and programs and aid and assist the town council and the various
departments, boards, commissions and committees in carrying them through to a
successful conclusion;
   9.   The town manager shall serve as public relations officer of the town
government, and follow through and endeavor to adjust all complaints filed
against any employee, department or service of the town to the end. The town
manager shall make every effort to satisfy all residents that their town
government is being operated on their behalf with the highest degree of
efficiency;
   10.   The town manager shall cooperate with all community organizations
whose aims and purposes are to advance the interests of the town and its
residents and provide them with all reasonable assistance obtainable through
the town government within the limitations of the law;
   11.   The town manager shall make and keep an up to date inventory of all
personal property owned by the town and recommend to the town council the
purchase of new machinery, equipment and supplies whenever, in his or her
judgment, the same can be obtained at the best advantage, taking into
consideration trade in value of machinery, equipment, etc., in use;
   12.   The town manager shall make, or cause to be made, studies and surveys
of the duties, responsibilities and work of the personnel in the various
departments and services of the town government and recommend to the town
council the appropriate level of budgetary positions and staffing through the
annual budget adoption process. The town manager shall implement a pay
structure or salary schedule for all positions in the town which is consistent
with approved budget capacity and authority and with the provisions of this
title;
   13.   The town manager shall, in cooperation with the police department, see
that all laws and ordinances of the town and the state are duly enforced;
   14.   The town manager shall devote his or her entire work effort to the
discharge of his or her official duties. Exceptions to this requirement may be
granted by the town council acting upon a written request from the town
manager;
   15.   The town manager shall perform any other duties as may be required of
him or her by the town council, not inconsistent with the laws of the state,
this code or the ordinances of the town.
H.   Limitations upon responsibility. The town manager shall not exercise any
policy-making or legislative functions whatsoever, or attempt to commit or bind
the town council or any council member to any action, plan or program requiring
official action of the town council. It is not intended by this chapter to
grant any authority to, or impose any duty upon, the town manager which is
vested in or imposed by general law or town ordinances in any town commission,
board, officer or employee except as specifically set forth in this code.
I.   Conduct. In the discharge of his or her duties, the town manager shall at
all times endeavor to exercise the highest degree of tact, patience, integrity
and courtesy in his or her contact with the public and with all town boards,
departments and employees and shall use his or her best efforts to establish
and maintain a harmonious relationship between all personnel employed in the
government of the town to the end that the highest possible standards of public
service shall be continuously maintained.
Section 3-2-1 was revised by Ordinances 2000.20, 2003.13, 2005.22, 2006.14, and
2014.018
Ordinance 2003.13 amended paragraph 3 by inadvertently deleting all but the
first sentence. Ordinance 2005.22 restored the second and third sentences but
removed “town attorney and” before “town magistrate” to conform to the
establishment of the town attorney as a town manager-appointed officer under
Ordinance 2003.13.
Ordinance 2005.22 amended paragraph 6 to delete reference to the town manager
as purchasing director, to conform to Ordinance 2002.22
3-2-2 Deputy town manager
A.   Office established. The position of deputy town manager is hereby created
and established. The deputy town manager shall be appointed by the town manager
and shall perform the duties of the office of the town manager when the town
manager is absent and as delegated under the general and specific direction of
the town manager from time to time.
B.   Compensation. The deputy town manager shall receive such compensation as
the town manager shall fix at the time of the deputy town manager’s
appointment, and the compensation shall be a proper charge against the funds of
the town. The deputy town manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily
incurred or paid by him or her in the performance of his or her duties, or
incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the town as approved by the
town council by the adoption of its budget. Reimbursement shall be made only
when a verified itemized claim, setting forth the sums expended for which
reimbursement is requested, has been presented.
C.   Powers and duties. The deputy town manager shall be responsible to the
town manager for the proper administration of all affairs delegated by the town
manager. During the town manager’s absence, the deputy town manager shall
perform the duties of the town manager. The town manager may delegate to the
deputy town manager any of the town manager’s authority, but in no event shall
the deputy town manager’s authority exceed the town manager’s powers and duties
set forth in section 3-2-1 H.
D.   Limitations upon responsibility. The deputy town manager shall not
exercise any policy-making or legislative functions whatsoever, or attempt to
commit or bind the town manager or town council or any council member to any
action, plan or program requiring official action of the town council. It is
not intended by this chapter to grant any authority to, or impose any duty
upon, the deputy town manager that is vested in or imposed by general law or
town ordinances in any town commission, board, officer or employee except as
specifically set forth in this code.
E.   Conduct. In the discharge of his or her duties, the deputy town manager
shall at all times endeavor to exercise the highest degree of tact, patience,
integrity and courtesy in his or her contact with the public and with all town
boards, departments and employees and shall use his or her best efforts to
establish and maintain a harmonious relationship among all personnel employed
in the government of the town to the end that the highest possible standards of
public service shall be continuously maintained.
Section 3-2-2 was added by Ordinance 2006.14
3-2-3 Assistant town manager
A.   Office established. The position of assistant town manager is hereby
created and established. One or more assistant town managers shall be appointed
by the town manager, consistent with budget authority approved by the town
council, and shall perform the duties of the office of the town manager as
delegated under the general and specific direction of the town manager. At the
town manager’s discretion, one or more assistant town manager positions may be
identified by their specifically delegated responsibilities and not as
assistant town manager.
B.   Compensation. Assistant town managers shall receive such compensation as
the town manager shall fix at the time of appointment of the assistant town
manager, and the compensation shall be a proper charge against the funds of the
town. An assistant town manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily
incurred or paid by him or her in the performance of his or her duties, or
incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the town as approved by the
town council by the adoption of its budget. Reimbursement shall be made only
when a verified itemized claim, setting forth the sums expended for which
reimbursement is requested, has been presented.
C.   Powers and duties. Assistant town managers shall support the town manager
and shall be responsible to the town manager for the proper administration of
all affairs delegated by the town manager. The town manager may delegate to an
assistant town manager any of the town manager’s authority, but in no event
shall an assistant town manager’s authority exceed the town manager’s powers
and duties set forth in section 3-2-1 H.
D.   Limitations upon responsibility. Assistant town managers shall not
exercise any policy-making or legislative functions whatsoever, or attempt to
commit or bind the town manager, deputy town manager, town council or any
council member to any action, plan or program requiring official action of the
town council. It is not intended by this chapter to grant any authority to, or
impose any duty upon, an assistant town manager that is vested in or imposed by
general law or town ordinances in any town commission, board, officer or
employee except as specifically set forth in this code.
E.   Conduct. In the discharge of his or her duties, an assistant town manager
shall at all times endeavor to exercise the highest degree of tact, patience,
integrity and courtesy in his or her contact with the public and with all town
boards, departments and employees and shall use his or her best efforts to
establish and maintain a harmonious relationship among all personnel employed
in the government of the town to the end that the highest possible standards of
public service shall be continuously maintained.
Section 3-2-3 was added by Ordinance 2000.20 and amended by Ordinance 2003.13,
2006.14, and 2011.03
3-2-4 Town clerk
Section 3-2-4 was amended by Ordinances 2000.20, 2003.13, 2006.14, 2011.03,
2014.020, and 2024.007
A.   Office established. The office of town clerk is hereby created and
established. The town clerk shall be appointed by the town manager and shall
perform the duties of the office of town clerk under the general and specific
direction of the town manager, deputy town manager or assistant town manager to
whom he or she reports.
B.   Absence of town clerk. In the absence of the town clerk, the town manager
or a person designated by the town manager shall be the acting town clerk. The
acting town clerk shall have the duties and responsibilities of the town clerk
as established by law, this code or other ordinance.
C.   Compensation. The town clerk shall receive such compensation as the town
manager shall fix at the time of appointment of the town clerk, and the
compensation shall be a proper charge against the funds of the town. The town
clerk shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him or
her in the performance of his or her duties, or incurred when traveling on
business pertaining to the town as approved by the town council by the adoption
of its budget. Reimbursement shall be made only when a verified itemized claim,
setting forth the sums expended for which reimbursement is requested, has been
presented.
D.   Powers and duties. The town clerk shall have those powers and duties set
forth by state law as well as town ordinance, resolution, order or directive.
In addition to the powers and duties set forth above, it shall be the town
clerk’s responsibility and authority to perform the following:
   1.   The town clerk shall keep a true and correct record of all business
transacted by the town council and any other records that either pertain to the
business of the town or that the town manager directs. The town clerk shall
number, plainly label, and file separately in a suitable cabinet, all
resolutions, notices, deeds, surveys, leases, paid and unpaid vouchers,
inventories, letters, orders and other documents of whatever nature;
   2.   The town clerk shall keep convenient for public inspection all public
reports and public documents under the control of the town clerk, as provided
by state statute;
   3.   The town clerk shall prepare and collect from town officers and
employees monthly reports prepared in the manner and to include the information
as directed by the town manager;
   4.   The town clerk shall prepare or cause to be prepared all minutes of
town council proceedings and ensure their correctness and accuracy;
   5.   The town clerk shall process, record, file, publish and, if required by
state statute, post all ordinances, resolutions, budgets and notices that may
be passed by the town council;
   6.   The town clerk shall also be the treasurer of the town pursuant to
A.R.S. § 9-238 and have the duties and responsibilities as prescribed by state
law; however, the town clerk shall delegate the duties of treasurer to the
town’s finance director to administer and manage the financial assets and
liabilities of the town and to otherwise perform the duties and
responsibilities of treasurer as prescribed by state law or town code;
   7.   The town clerk shall be the town election official and perform those
duties required by state statute and as directed by the town council;
   8.   The town clerk shall issue or cause to be issued all licenses that may
be prescribed by state statute, town ordinance or this code, unless the town
manager has designated another town employee as the license inspector for
certain types of licenses under the provisions of this code;
   9.   The town clerk shall perform those administrative responsibilities and
duties that are conferred upon the town clerk by the town manager in addition
to those specified in town ordinances and this code.
Section 3-2-5 was revised by Ordinance 2000.20, 2006.14, and 2011.03
3-2-5 Town engineer
A.   Office established. The office of town engineer is hereby created and
established. The town engineer shall be appointed by the town manager and shall
perform the duties of the office of town engineer under the general and
specific direction of the town manager, deputy town manager, assistant town
manager or general manager to whom he or she reports.
B.   Compensation. The town engineer shall receive such compensation as the
town manager shall fix at the time of appointment of the town engineer, and the
compensation shall be a proper charge against the funds of the town. The town
engineer shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him
or her in the performance of his or her duties, or incurred when traveling on
business pertaining to the town as approved by the town manager. Reimbursement
shall be made only when a verified itemized claim, setting forth the sums
expended for which reimbursement is requested, has been presented and approved
by the town manager.
C.   Powers and duties. The town engineer shall have those powers and duties
set forth by state law as well as town ordinance, resolution, order or
directive. Notwithstanding the above, the town engineer shall have charge of
the town streets and public works and shall perform those duties as may be
required by law and any other duties as the town manager may deem necessary.
Section 3-2-5 was revised by Ordinance 2000.20, 2006.14, and 2011.03
3-2-6 Town magistrate
A.   Office established. The office of town magistrate is hereby created and
established. The town magistrate shall be appointed by the town council.
B.   Absence of town magistrate. In the absence of the town magistrate he or
she shall be responsible for providing a judge pro tempore to act as the town
magistrate during the absence of the magistrate.
C.   Compensation. The town magistrate shall receive such compensation as the
town council shall fix at the time of appointment of the town magistrate, and
the compensation shall be a proper charge against the funds of the town.
D.   Powers and duties. The town magistrate shall be the presiding officer of
the municipal court and shall perform those functions necessary to the
maintenance of the municipal court as provided by state statute and by title 5
of this code.
Section 3-2-6 was revised by Ordinance 2000.20.
References to the municipal court were standardized by authorization of
Ordinance 2007.32, Section 2
3-2-7 Town attorney
A.   Office established. The position of town attorney is hereby created and
established. The town attorney shall be appointed by the town manager and shall
be chosen on the basis of his or her qualifications and knowledge of accepted
practice in respect to the duties of the office as set forth in this section,
and shall perform the duties of the office of town attorney under the general
and specific direction of the town manager.
B.   Compensation. The town attorney shall receive such compensation as the
town manager shall from time to time determine. The town attorney shall be
reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him or her in the
performance of his or her duties, or incurred when traveling on business
pertaining to the town as approved by the town manager. Reimbursement shall be
made only when a verified itemized claim, setting forth the sums expended for
which reimbursement is requested, has been presented and approved by the town
manager.
C.   Powers and duties.
   1.   The town attorney is the administrative head of the legal department
under the direction and control of the town manager.
   2.   The town attorney shall act as the legal counselor and advisor of the
town council and other town officials, as designated by the town council, and
as such shall give his or her opinions. When requested the opinion shall be in
writing.
   3.   The town attorney shall draft all deeds, contracts, conveyances,
ordinances, resolutions and other legal instruments when requested by the town
council or town manager.
   4.   The town attorney shall approve or disapprove as to form, in writing,
all documents submitted to him or her.
   5.   The town attorney shall return within ten days all ordinances and
resolutions submitted to him or her for consideration by the town council or
town manager, with his or her approval or disapproval as to form noted on them,
together with his or her reasons if disapproved.
   6.   The town attorney shall prosecute and defend all suits, actions or
causes where the town is a party and report to the town manager the condition
of any suit or action to which the town is a party.
   7.   The town attorney shall prosecute in the name of the town or the state
of Arizona all violations of the town code and statutes of the state of Arizona
within the original or concurrent jurisdiction of the Marana municipal court or
lawfully referred to the town attorney, and any associated or related appeals.
D.   Deputies and assistants. At the discretion of the town attorney, the
powers and duties of the town attorney may be undertaken and carried out by
deputy and assistant town attorneys (by whatever rank or title they may be
called) licensed to practice law in the state of Arizona, who shall have the
same authority as the town attorney, under the general supervision of the town
attorney.
Section 3-2-7 was amended by Ordinance 2000.20, 2003.13, 2005.22, 2006.14, and
2013.005
Ordinance 2013.005 added subparagraph C.7 and paragraph D to section
3-2-7
Section 3-2-8 was added by Ordinance 2024.007
3-2-8 Town marshal
The town’s chief of police shall be the town marshal and shall perform the
duties of the town marshal required by law and as the town manager may deem
necessary, except that the town’s finance director shall be the town marshal
for the purpose of collecting all taxes of the town pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-238
and for that purpose only.
Section 3-2-8 was amended by Ordinances 2000.20, 2001.08, 2003.13, 2006.14,
2011.03, and 2014.018. Section was renumbered to 3-2-9 by Ordinance 2024.007
3-2-9 Department heads
A.   Offices established. The positions of department heads are hereby created
and established. Each department head shall be appointed, suspended or removed
as set forth in this title.
B.   Compensation. Department heads shall receive such compensation as the town
manager shall fix from time to time.
C.   Duties. Each department head shall be charged with the responsibilities
set forth by and shall perform the duties of his or her office under the
general and specific direction of the town manager, deputy town manager,
assistant town manager or general manager to whom he or she reports.
Section 3-2-9 was added as section 3 2 11 by Ordinance 2008.19, amended by
Ordinance 2011.03, and amended and renumbered by Ordinance 2014.018
Section was renumbered to 3-2-10 by Ordinance 2024.007
3-2-10 General managers
A.   Offices established. The positions of general managers are hereby created
and established. Each general manager shall be appointed, suspended or removed
as set forth in this title.
B.   Compensation. General managers shall receive such compensation as the town
manager shall fix from time to time.
C.   Duties. General managers shall be charged with the responsibilities set
forth by and shall perform the duties of their office under the general and
specific direction of the town manager, deputy town manager or assistant town
manager to whom he or she reports.
CHAPTER 3-3.
PERSONNEL POLICIES
3-3-1 Creation and scope of personnel policies
A.   The town council shall adopt personnel policies for the employees of the
town, the provisions of which shall apply to all employees of the town, unless
specifically stated otherwise in this code, in the personnel policies or, in
the case of the town manager and town magistrate, in an employment agreement.
The town council may amend or repeal the personnel policies from time to time
in its sole discretion.
B.   In addition to the personnel policies, the town council or town manager
may adopt rules, regulations, and directives to give effect to this title and
to the personnel policies. The town council or town manager may amend or repeal
these rules, regulations and directives from time to time in their sole
discretion.
C.   All personnel policies, rules, regulations, and directives adopted
pursuant to this section shall follow the generally accepted principles of good
personnel administration.
Section 3-3-1 was amended by Ordinance 2014.018
3-3-2 Conditions of employment
The appointment, promotion and tenure of every employee shall be conditioned
solely on merit and fitness and the satisfactory performance of the duties and
responsibilities assigned. No employee or applicant shall be discriminated
against on the basis of race, color, national origin, religion, sex,
disability, marital or familial status, veteran status or political
affiliation.
3-3-3 Political contributions
No officer, official or employee of the town shall use any influence or
pressure upon any employee to obtain any assessment or contribution of money or
time, either direct or indirect, for any political campaign or personal gain.
Section 3-3-3 was renumbered by Ordinance 2014.018
CHAPTER 3-4.
PROCUREMENT
Chapter 3-4 (Procurement) was adopted by Ordinance 2017.022. For prior history
of former
chapter 3-4 (Purchasing), see Ordinances 96.14, 96.31, 98.18, 98.22, 2000.07,
2000.18, 2002.21, 2002.22, and 2005.22.
I. General provisions
3-4-1 Short title
This chapter may be cited as the town of Marana procurement code.
3-4-2 Purpose
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to:
A.   Simplify, clarify, and modernize the laws governing town procurement.
B.   Permit the continued development of procurement policies and practices.
C.   Foster and maintain public confidence in the procurement process.
D.   Ensure the fair and equitable treatment of all persons involved in the
town’s public procurement process.
E.   Maximize the purchasing value of public funds through competitive
procurement practices.
F.   Provide a procurement system of quality, integrity, and transparency.
G.   Obtain in a cost-effective and responsive manner the materials, services,
and construction required by the town to better serve the town’s businesses and
residents.
H.   Ensure the proper disposal of property, equipment and materials that are
no longer of value to the town.
3-4-3 Supplementary general principles of law applicable
Unless displaced by the particular provisions of this chapter, the principles
of law and equity, including the uniform commercial code of this state, the
common law of contracts as applied in this state and law relative to agency,
fraud, misrepresentation, duress, coercion and mistake supplement the
provisions of this chapter.
3-4-4 Requirement of good faith
All parties involved in the negotiation, performance, or administration of town
contracts are required to act in good faith.
3-4-5 Definitions
Ordinance 2022.001 amended section 3-4-5
Ordinance 2025.005 amended section 3-4-5 to include for-profit corporations
The following definitions shall apply throughout this chapter unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise.
A.   "Business" means any corporation, partnership, individual, sole
proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture, or any other legal entity.
B.   "Change order" means a written document authorized by the purchasing
director which directs the contractor to make changes with or without the
consent of the contractor.
C.    "Confidential information" means any information which is available to
any employee only because of the employee's status as an employee of the town
and is not a matter of public knowledge or available to the public on request.
D.   "Construction" means the process of building, altering, repairing,
improving or demolishing any public structure or building or other public
improvements of any kind to any public real property. It does not include the
routine operation, routine repair or routine maintenance of existing
facilities, structures, buildings or real property.
E.   "Contract" means all types of agreements, regardless of what they may be
called, for the procurement of supplies, services, or construction.
F.   "Contract modification" means any written alteration in specifications,
delivery point, rate of delivery, period of performance, price, quantity, or
other provisions of any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties
to the contract.
G.   "Contractor" means any person having a contract with the town.
H.   "Cooperative purchasing" means procurement conducted by, or on behalf of,
one or more public procurement units, including the state of Arizona, any other
state, an agency of the United States, any political subdivision of the state
of Arizona or another state, any agency, board, department or other
instrumentality of such political subdivision, and any nonprofit or for-profit
corporation created solely for the purpose of administering a cooperative
purchase.
I.   "Disadvantaged business" means a small business owned or controlled by a
majority of persons including but not limited to members of minority groups who
have been deprived of the opportunity to develop and maintain a competitive
position in the economy because of social disadvantages.
J.   "Employee" means an individual drawing a salary or wages from the town,
whether elected or not; any non-compensated individual performing personal
services for the town or any department, agency, commission, council, board, or
any other entity established by the executive or legislative branch of the
town; and any non-compensated individual serving as an elected official of the
town.
K.   "Gratuity" means a payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money,
service, or anything of more than nominal value, present or promised, unless
consideration of substantially equal or greater value is received.
L.   "Invitation for bids" means all documents, whether attached or
incorporated by reference, used for soliciting bids.
M.   "Person" means any business, individual, union, committee, club, other
organization, or group of individuals.
N.   "Procurement" means buying, purchasing, renting, leasing or otherwise
acquiring any materials, services, construction or construction services.
Includes all functions that pertain to obtaining any materials, services,
construction or construction services, including description of requirements,
selection and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of contract and
all phases of contract administration.
O.   "Public notice" means the distribution or dissemination of information to
interested parties using methods that are reasonably available, including
publication in newspapers of general circulation, electronic or paper mailing
lists, and web sites designated by the town and maintained for that purpose.
P.   "Purchase" means the use of public funds to buy, rent, lease or otherwise
acquire materials, services, construction or construction services.
Q.   “Purchasing director” means the town’s finance director or the finance
director’s designee.
R.   “Request for proposals” means all documents, whether attached or
incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting proposals.
S.   “Responsible bidder or offeror” means a person who has the capability in
all respects to perform fully the contract requirements, and the experience,
integrity, reliability, capacity, facilities, equipment, and credit which will
assure good faith performance.
T.   “Responsive bidder” means a person who has submitted a bid which conforms
in all material respects to the requirements set forth in the invitation for
bids.
U.   “Services” means the furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor
or subcontractor that does not involve the delivery of a specific end product
other than required reports and performance. This term shall not include
employment agreements or collective bargaining agreements.
V.   “Small business” means an independently owned business not dominant in its
field of operation and not affiliated with or subsidiary to a business dominant
in its field of operation.
W.   “Specification” means any description of the physical or functional
characteristics or of the nature of a supply, service, or construction item. It
may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing, or
preparing a supply, service, or construction item for delivery.
X.   “Supplies” means all property, including but not limited to equipment,
materials, printing, insurance, and leases of real property, excluding land or
a permanent interest in land.
Y.   “Surplus supplies” means any supplies no longer having any use to the
town, including obsolete supplies, scrap materials, and supplies that have
completed their useful life cycle.
Z.   “Technical registrant” means a person who provides any of the professional
services listed in Arizona revised statutes, title 32, chapter 1, as amended,
and includes, but is not limited to, architects, assayers, engineers,
geologists, land surveyors and landscape architects.
3-4-6 Application; exclusions
A.   This chapter shall apply to:
   1.   Every expenditure of public funds for the procurement of supplies,
services, and construction entered into by the town irrespective of the source
of the funds, unless otherwise specified in this code. Nothing in this chapter
shall prevent the town or any department from complying with the terms and
conditions of any grant, gift, or bequest that is otherwise consistent with
law.
   2.   The inventory and disposal of town materials and supplies, unless
otherwise provided by law.
B.   This chapter shall not apply to:
   1.   Contracts between the town and the federal government, the state of
Arizona and political subdivisions of the state of Arizona, except as provided
in this procurement code.
   2.   Contracts for expert services, if the purpose of such services is to
provide for professional services relating to an existing or probable lawsuit
in which the town is or may become a party or to contracts for special
investigative services for law enforcement or administrative investigation
purposes.
   3.   Agreements negotiated by legal counsel representing the town in
settlement of pending litigation or threatened litigation.
   4.   Development agreements, as defined in Arizona revised statutes section
9-500.05, as amended.
   5.   Contracts for the purchase or sale of real property and ancillary
services related thereto, such as title insurance, appraisals or environmental
assessments to the extent that they are negotiated in connection with a
contract for purchase or sale of real property.
II. Procurement organization
3-4-7 Town council approval
Ordinance 2022.001 amended section 3-4-7
A.   The town council approves purchases by or on behalf of the town through
inclusion of the purchase in the town's legally adopted annual budget.
B.   Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, separate town council
approval of purchases is required in the following instances:
   1.   Where prior approval is required by state law or town code.
   2.   Where the purchase exceeds $100,000 and funds for the purchase are not
provided in the budget as adopted.
   3.   For change orders that individually or cumulatively exceed the amounts
set forth in section
3-4-8(A)(3).
C.   A town council resolution or action approving a purchase or contract may
include change order authorization exceeding the amounts otherwise set forth in
this chapter.
3-4-8 Town manager approval
Ordinance 2022.001 amended section 3-4-8
A.   The town manager or designee is authorized to approve all of the following
unless prior town council approval is required by state law or town code:
   1.   Any purchase up to $100,000.
   2.   Any purchase authorized in the adopted budget.
   3.   Change orders that individually or cumulatively total up to:
         a.   $100,000; or
         b.   For purchases more than $1,000,000 up to $5,000,000, 10% of
purchase up to $250,000 maximum; or
         c.   For purchases over $5,000,000, 5% of purchase.
B.   The town manager or designee may approve change orders to public
improvements contracts that exceed the authority otherwise granted by this
section if the town manager reasonably determines that doing so will avoid
unnecessary contractor delay claims or costs or public health or safety hazards
that would otherwise occur while awaiting town council approval, provided that
town council ratification occurs as soon as practicable thereafter.
3-4-9 Authority of purchasing director
The purchasing director shall have general supervision, responsibility and
authority to:
A.   Procure, contract for and execute agreements for supplies and services,
including rentals, service agreements, and leases needed by any town
department, in accordance with this procurement code.
B.   Approve and sign change orders to contracts in accordance with this
procurement code.
C.   Establish and amend all regulations, forms, procedures and rules necessary
and proper to implement the provisions of this procurement code.
D.   Suspend or debar vendors consistent with the provisions of this
procurement code.
E.   Centralize procurement, consistent with this procurement code, by which
materials, supplies, equipment and contractual services for all town
departments are purchased.
F.   Inform town employees and contractors of the ethical standards for public
contracting.
G.   Sell, trade, or otherwise dispose of surplus supplies belonging to the
town, as deemed advantageous.
H.   Designate another town representative to have the authority to perform any
or all of the above tasks.
3-4-10 Determinations
Written determinations required by this chapter shall be retained in the
official bid file of the purchasing director.
3-4-11 Public access to procurement information
Procurement information shall be a public record and available to the public to
the extent provided in Arizona’s public records law.
3-4-12 Authorization for the use of electronic transmissions
The use of electronic media, including acceptance of electronic signatures, is
authorized consistent with applicable statutory, regulatory, or other
authorization and guidance for use of electronic media, and provided that the
electronic media (i) has appropriate security to prevent unauthorized access to
the bidding, approval, and award processes and (ii) can be accurately retrieved
or converted into a medium capable of being inspected and copied.
III. Ethics
3-4-13 Ethical standards
A.   It is a violation of this procurement code:
   1.   For any person to attempt to or influence any town employee to violate
the provisions of ethical conduct set forth in this procurement code.
   2.   For any person preparing specifications or plans pursuant to this
procurement code or any policy or procedure of the town to receive any direct
pecuniary benefit from the use of such plans or specifications.
   3.   For any employee or agent acting on behalf of the town to directly or
indirectly participate in or benefit or receive any pecuniary benefit from a
procurement in violation of state or federal law.
   4.   For any person to offer, give, or agree to give to any town employee,
or for any town employee to solicit, demand, accept, or agree to accept from
another person, a gratuity or an offer of employment in connection with any
decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation, or preparation of any part of
a program requirement or a purchase request, influencing the content of any
specifications or procurement standard, or advice, investigation, auditing, or
any other advisory communication or service, in any proceeding or application,
request for ruling, determination, claim or controversy, or other particular
matter, pertaining to any program requirement or a contract or subcontract, or
to any solicitation, bid, or proposal therefor.
   5.   For any payment, gratuity or offer of employment to be made by or on
behalf of a subcontractor under a contract to the prime contractor or higher
tier subcontractor or any person associated therewith, as an inducement for the
award of a subcontract or order. Violation of this standard shall constitute
grounds for termination of a contract with the town and debarment of the vendor
from doing any further business with the town.
   6.   For a person to be retained, or to retain a person, to solicit or
secure a town contract upon an agreement or understanding for a commission,
percentage, brokerage or contingent fee, except for retention of bona fide
established selling agencies for the purpose of securing business.
   7.   For any employee who is participating directly or indirectly in a
procurement process to become the employee of any person under contract with
the town concerning any matters that the employee participated in during the
same procurement process for a period of 12 months following his or her
employment with the town.
   8.   For any employee or former employee of the town to disclose or use
confidential information acquired by the employee in the performance of the
employee’s official duties for anticipated pecuniary benefit, or for the actual
or anticipated pecuniary benefit of any person.
B.   It is no defense to a violation of this section that the employee to whom
a benefit or offer of employment was made was not qualified to act in the
desired manner.
C.   An employee or person may violate this section by intentionally or
knowingly engaging in a violation or by recklessly or negligently engaging in a
violation.
3-4-14 Recovery of value transferred or received in breach of ethical standards
A.   The value of anything transferred or received in breach of the ethical
standards of this chapter by a town employee or a nonemployee may be recovered
from both the town employee and the nonemployee.
B.   Upon a showing that a subcontractor made a kickback to a prime contractor
or a higher tier subcontractor in connection with the award of a subcontract or
order thereunder, it shall be conclusively presumed that the amount thereof was
included in the price of the subcontract or order and ultimately borne by the
town and will be recoverable from the recipient. In addition, that amount may
also be recovered from the subcontractor making the kickbacks. Recovery from
one offending party shall not preclude recovery from other offending parties.
IV. Source selection and contract formation
3-4-15 Public improvements
A.   Procurement of public improvements contracts. The town shall procure all
contracts for construction for public improvement projects in the manner
prescribed by title 34 of the Arizona revised statutes, as amended. If public
competitive bidding is not required pursuant to state law, then the
requirements of this chapter shall apply. If there is a conflict between this
chapter and Arizona revised statutes, title 34, as amended, the provisions of
title 34 shall govern.
B.   Procurement of construction services. Contracts for construction services
shall be solicited through a design-build, construction-manager-at-risk or job-
order-contracting selection process utilizing a request for qualifications
except as otherwise provided for in this chapter. The procurement agent shall
award and administer contracts for construction services in accordance with the
requirements of A.R.S. title 34 and this chapter.
C.   Construction by town employees. Any building, structure, addition or
alteration may be constructed either with or without the use of the town’s
regularly employed personnel without advertising for bids; provided, that the
total cost of the work, excluding materials and equipment previously acquired
by bid, does not exceed limits established in A.R.S. § 34-201.
3-4-16 Competitive sealed bidding
A.   Conditions for use. Contracts shall be awarded by the use of competitive
sealed bidding except as otherwise provided in this procurement code.
B.   Invitation for bids. An invitation for bids shall be issued and shall
include specifications, and all contractual terms and conditions applicable to
the procurement.
C.   Public notice. Public notice of an invitation for bids shall be in a
manner that is reasonable in the judgment of the purchasing director, given the
commercial context of the proposed purchase.
   1.   The public notice shall state the date, time, and place of bid opening.
   2.   Notice may be given in any publication of general circulation that is
reasonably available to prospective bidders in the judgment of the purchasing
director.
   3.   For purposes of this paragraph, reasonable notice shall be defined as
not less than ten calendar days.
D.   Bid opening. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or more
witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids.
   1.   The amount of each bid, and such other relevant information as the
purchasing director deems appropriate, together with the name of each bidder,
shall be recorded.
   2.   The record of bids shall be open to public inspection immediately, but
individual bids shall be open to public inspection only after the contract is
awarded.
E.   Bid acceptance and bid evaluation. Bids shall be unconditionally accepted
without alteration or correction, except as authorized in this chapter.
   1.   Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the
invitation for bids, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such
as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery, and suitability for a
particular purpose.
   2.   Those criteria that will affect the bid price and be considered in the
evaluation for award shall be objectively measurable, such as discounts,
transportation costs, and total or life cycle costs.
   3.   The invitation for bids shall set forth the evaluation criteria to be
used.
   4.   No criteria may be used in bid evaluation that are not set forth in the
invitation for bids.
F.   Correction or withdrawal of bids; cancellation of awards. Corrections or
withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after bid opening, or
cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid mistakes, may be
permitted where appropriate in the purchasing director’s sole discretion. All
decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids, or to cancel awards
or contracts based on bid mistakes, shall be supported by a written
determination made by the purchasing director.
   1.   Mistakes discovered before bid opening may be modified or withdrawn by
written notice received in the office designated in the invitation for bids
prior to the time set for bid opening.
   2.   After bid opening, corrections in bids shall be permitted only to the
extent that the bidder can show by clear and convincing evidence that a mistake
of a nonjudgmental character was made, the nature of the mistake, and the bid
price actually intended.
   3.   After bid opening, no changes in bid prices or other provisions of bids
prejudicial to the interest of the town or fair competition shall be permitted.
   4.   In lieu of bid correction, a low bidder alleging a material mistake of
fact may be permitted to withdraw its bid if:
      a.   The mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid document but
the intended correct bid is not similarly evident; or
      b.   The bidder submits evidence that clearly and convincingly
demonstrates that a mistake was made.
G.   Award.
   1.   The contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by written
notice to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid meets the
requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids.
   2.   If the low responsive and responsible bid for a construction project
exceeds available funds as determined by the purchasing director, the
purchasing director is authorized, when time or economic considerations
preclude resolicitation of work of a reduced scope, to negotiate an adjustment
of the bid price with the low responsive and responsible bidder, in order to
bring the bid within the amount of available funds.
H.   Multi-step sealed bidding. When it is considered impractical to initially
prepare a purchase description to support an award based on price, an
invitation for bids may be issued requesting the submission of unpriced offers
to be followed by an invitation for bids limited to those bidders whose offers
have been determined to be technically acceptable under the criteria set forth
in the first solicitation.
3-4-17 Competitive sealed proposals
A.   Conditions for use. When the purchasing director or authorized designee
determines that the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable
or not advantageous to the town, a contract may be entered into by use of the
competitive sealed proposals or other approved methods.
B.   Requests for proposals. Proposals shall be solicited through a request for
proposals.
C.   Public notice. Adequate public notice of the request for proposals shall
be given in the same manner as provided in section 3-4-16 C.
D.   Receipt of proposals. Proposals shall be submitted at the time and place
designated in the public notice.
   1.   Proposals shall be opened so as to avoid disclosure of the contents of
any proposal to competing offerors during the process of negotiation.
   2.   A register of proposals shall be prepared containing the name of each
offeror, the number of modifications received, if any, and a description
sufficient to identify the item offered.
   3.   The register of proposals shall be open for public inspection only
after contract award.
E.   Evaluation factors. The request for proposals shall state the relative
importance of price and other evaluation factors; specific numerical weighting
is not required.
F.   Discussion with responsible offerors and revisions to proposals.
Discussions may be conducted with responsible offerors who submit proposals
determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for award for the
purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of, and conformance to,
the solicitation requirements.
   1.   Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any
opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals.
   2.   Revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the
purpose of obtaining best and final offers.
   3.   In conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure of any
information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors.
G.   Award. The award shall be made to the responsible and responsive offeror
whose proposal is determined, in writing, to be the most advantageous to the
town and to best meet the overall needs of the town taking into consideration
the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals.
   1.   No other factors or criteria may be used in the evaluation other than
as set forth in the request for proposals.
   2.   The contract file shall contain the basis upon which the award is made.
H.   Debriefings. The purchasing director is authorized to provide debriefings
that furnish the basis for the source selection decision and contract award.
3-4-18 Professional services contracts; statements of qualifications
A.   Technical registrants. The town shall procure professional services from
technical registrants in the manner prescribed by title 34, chapter 6 of the
Arizona revised statutes, as amended, if either of the following applies:
   1.   The contract is with a technical registrant other than an architect and
is for an amount of more than $500,000.
   2.   The contract is with an architect and is for an amount of more than
$250,000.
B.   Professional legal services. The town attorney is authorized to directly
select legal counsel for any legal matters involving the town.
C.   Other professional services. Except as provided in paragraphs A and B of
this section, the town may procure professional services by soliciting
statements of qualifications for providing such services; provided, however,
that the town may procure professional services by direct selection pursuant to
administrative regulations promulgated by the purchasing director. The
procurement of professional services through the use of statements of
qualifications shall be as follows:
   1.   The purchasing director or authorized designee shall give adequate
notice of the need for such services through a request for qualifications or
request for proposals. The request shall describe the services required, list
the types of information and data required of each offeror, and state the
relative importance of particular qualifications.
   2.   Persons engaged in providing the designated types of professional
services may submit statements of qualifications in providing such professional
services. The town shall supply a uniform format for statements of
qualifications based upon department needs.
   3.   The purchasing director or authorized designee shall appoint a
committee to review qualifications. The committee shall consist of the
purchasing director or authorized designee and one or more professionals
licensed, registered or admitted to the profession which is the subject of the
procurement. Discussions with offerors who submit proposals may be conducted to
determine qualifications for further consideration. Award shall be made to the
offeror determined in writing to be the best qualified. Compensation shall be
negotiated after an award is made.
   4.   The purchasing director or authorized designee shall conduct
negotiations with the offeror determined to be the most qualified to establish
fair and reasonable compensation. If compensation cannot be agreed upon with
the best qualified offeror, then negotiations will be formally terminated with
the selected offeror. If proposals were submitted by one or more other offerors
determined to be qualified, negotiations may be conducted with such other
offeror or offerors, in the order of their respective qualification ranking,
and the contract may be awarded to the offeror then ranked best qualified if
the amount of compensation is determined to be fair and reasonable.
   5.   The contract award shall be made to the offeror determined in writing
by the purchasing director or authorized designee to be best qualified based
upon:
      a.   The evaluation factors set forth in the request for qualifications
or request for proposals; and
      b.   Agreement between the town and the offeror as to fair and reasonable
compensation.
3-4-19 Small purchases
Ordinance 2022.001 amended section 3-4-19
A.   Any procurement not exceeding $100,000 may be made in accordance with the
small purchase procedure authorized in this section.
B.   For small purchases in excess of $5,000 no fewer than three businesses
shall be solicited to submit quotations.
   1.   In awarding contracts for services, in addition to quoted fees, the
purchasing director may consider the relative qualifications of businesses
submitting quotes.
   2.   Award shall be made to the business offering the lowest acceptable
quotation.
   3.   The names of the businesses submitting quotations, and the date and
amount of each quotation, shall be recorded and maintained as a public record.
C.   The purchasing director shall adopt operational procedures for small
purchases of $5,000 or less.
   1.   The operational procedures shall provide for obtaining adequate and
reasonable competition for the supply or service being purchased.
   2.   The operational procedures shall require the preparation and
maintenance of records adequate to document the competition obtained, to
properly account for the funds expended, and to facilitate an audit of the
small purchase made.
D.   Contract requirements shall not be artificially divided so as to
constitute a small purchase under this section.
3-4-20 Sole source procurement
A.   A contract may be awarded without competition when the purchasing director
determines, after conducting a good faith review of available sources, that
there is only one source for the required supply, service, or construction
item, or no reasonable alternative sources exist.
B.   The purchasing director shall conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as to
price, delivery, and terms.
C.   A record of sole source procurements shall be maintained as a public
record and shall list each contractor’s name, the amount and type of each
contract, and a listing of the item(s) procured under each contract
3-4-21 Emergency procurements
A.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the purchasing
director may make or authorize others to make emergency procurements of
supplies, services, or construction items when there exists a threat to public
health, welfare, or safety.
B.   Emergency procurements shall be made with such competition as is
practicable under the circumstances.
C.   A record of each emergency procurement shall be maintained as a public
record and shall list each contractor’s name, the amount and type of each
contract, a listing of the item(s) procured under the contract, and a written
determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the
particular contractor.
3-4-22 Used items
Upon compliance with this section and after determining in writing that it is
in the town’s best interests, the purchasing director may make or authorize
others to make procurements of used items.
A.   The purchasing director may waive or modify any or all bid procedures with
respect to the used items.
B.   The purchasing director’s written determination shall not be made without
the approval of the town manager.
C.   This section does not apply to any procurement the town attorney
determines in writing to be contrary to applicable law.
3-4-23 Cooperative purchasing
Section 3-4-23 was amended by Ordinance 2025.005 to include for-profit
corporations
A.   The purchasing director is authorized to participate in, sponsor, conduct,
or administer a cooperative purchasing agreement for the procurement of any
supplies, services or construction with one or more eligible procurement units,
including a state, another political subdivision of a state, state
cooperatives, the federal government, and national nonprofit and for-profit
governmental purchasing cooperatives in accordance with an agreement entered
into between the participants.
B.   All cooperative purchasing conducted under this section shall be through
contracts awarded through full and open competition, including use of source
selection methods substantially equivalent to those specified in this code.
C.   The town shall not enter into a cooperative purchasing agreement for the
purpose of circumventing this chapter.
3-4-24 Cancellation of invitations for bids or requests for proposals
An invitation for bids, a request for proposals, or other solicitation may be
cancelled, or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in part
as may be specified in the solicitation, when the purchasing director
determines it is in the best interests of the town to do so.
The reasons for the cancellation or rejection shall be made part of the
contract file.
3-4-25 Determination of nonresponsibility; right of nondisclosure
A.   If a bidder or offeror who otherwise would have been awarded a contract is
found nonresponsible, a written determination of nonresponsibility, setting
forth the basis of the finding, shall be prepared by the purchasing director. A
copy of the written determination shall be sent to the nonresponsible bidder or
offeror and shall be made part of the contract file.
B.   The unreasonable failure of a bidder or offeror to promptly supply
information regarding an inquiry with respect to responsibility may be grounds
for a determination of nonresponsibility.
C.   Confidential information furnished by a bidder or offeror pursuant to this
section shall not be disclosed outside of the office of the purchasing director
without prior written consent by the bidder or offeror.
3-4-26 Bid and contract security
A.   The purchasing director or authorized designee may require the submission
of security to guarantee faithful bid and contract performance.
B.   In determining the amount and type of security required for each bid or
contract, the purchasing director shall consider the nature of the performance
and the need for future protection to the town.
C.   The requirement for security must be included in the invitation for bids
or request for proposals.
D.   Bid, performance, and payment bonds shall not be used as a substitute for
a determination of bidder responsibility.
E.   The purchasing director or authorized designee may waive the security
requirement if he or she finds by clear and convincing evidence that waiver is
in the best interest of the town.
3-4-27 Types of contracts
Subject to the limitations of this section, any type of contract that will
promote the best interests of this town may be used, except that the use of a
cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost contract is prohibited.
3-4-28 Multi-year contracts
A.   Unless otherwise provided by law, a contract for supplies or services may
be entered into for any period of time deemed to be in the best interests of
the town, provided the term of the contract and conditions of renewal or
extension, if any, are included in the solicitation and funds are available for
the first fiscal period at the time of contracting. Payment and performance
obligations for succeeding fiscal periods shall be subject to the availability
and appropriation of funds therefor.
B.   A multi-year contract is authorized when:
   1.   Estimated requirements cover the period of the contract and are
reasonably firm and continuing; and
   2.   Such a contract will serve the best interests of the town by
encouraging effective competition or otherwise promoting economies in town
procurement.
C.   When funds are not appropriated or otherwise made available to support
continuation of performance in a subsequent fiscal period, the contract shall
be cancelled and the contractor shall be reimbursed for the reasonable value of
any non-recurring costs incurred but not amortized in the price of the supplies
or services delivered under the contract. The cost of cancellation may be paid
from any appropriations available for such purposes.
3-4-29 Reporting of anticompetitive practices
When for any reason collusion or other anticompetitive practices are suspected
among any bidders of offerors, a notice of the relevant facts shall be
transmitted to the state attorney general’s office.
3-4-30 Retention of procurement records
All procurement records shall be retained and disposed of in accordance with
records retention guidelines and schedules approved by the state of Arizona.
3-4-31 Supply management
A.   The purchasing director shall be responsible for the management of town
supplies during their entire life cycle.
B.   The purchasing director may sell, lease, transfer, or dispose of surplus
supplies in accordance with state law, in the best interests of the town, and
in as competitive a manner as the purchasing director determines to be
practicable.
C.   No town employee shall be entitled or permitted to purchase any surplus
supplies from the town.
D.   Unless otherwise provided by law, all proceeds from the sale of surplus
property will be deposited into the town’s general fund. Proceeds from sale of
enterprise, federal, grant or other special designation property will be
reimbursed, less pro-rated selling expenses, to the appropriate fund, after
completion of each sale.
3-4-32 Specifications
A.   Preparation. Each solicitation shall include specifications for the
supplies, services, or construction to be provided.
B.   Multiple or conflicting provisions.
   1.   If specifications for a solicitation address the same subject matter as
a provision of this chapter, they shall be harmonized and read together, to the
extent possible.
   2.   To the extent a specification directly conflicts with a provision of
this chapter, the provision of this chapter shall control unless the purchasing
director is notified of and approves in writing the conflicting specification
before the contract is awarded.
C.   Purchasing director’s duties.
   1.   The purchasing director shall determine and ensure the adequacy of
specifications in solicitations issued under this chapter.
   2.   The purchasing director shall obtain expert advice and assistance from
the department or departments for whose benefit the solicitation is occurring
in the development of specifications.
   3.   The purchasing director may delegate in writing to a department head
the authority to prepare and utilize its own specifications.
D.   Maximum practicable competition. All specifications shall seek to promote
overall economy for the purposes intended and encourage competition in
satisfying the town’s needs, and shall not be unduly restrictive.
E.   Specifications prepared by other than town personnel. The requirements of
this article regarding the maximum practicable competition of specifications
shall apply to all specifications prepared other than by town personnel,
including, but not limited to, those prepared by architects, engineers,
designers, and consultants for public contracts, or subcontractors. No person
preparing specifications shall receive any direct or indirect benefit from the
utilization of such specifications.
F.   Brand name or equal specification. A brand name or equal specification may
be used to describe the standards of quality, performance, and other
characteristics needed to meet the requirements of a solicitation, and which
invites offers for equivalent products from a manufacturer. Use of a brand name
or equal is not intended to limit or restrict competition.
G.   Brand name specification. A brand name specification may be used to
identify the sole acceptable item that meets the town’s needs.
   1.   The using agency requesting a brand name specification shall provide
written evidence to support a brand name determination.
   2.   A written determination by the procurement agent of the basis for the
brand name shall be maintained as public record.
   3.   Past success in the material’s performance, traditional purchasing
practices, or inconvenience of drawing specifications do not justify the use of
a brand name specification.
3-4-33 Assistance to small and disadvantaged businesses
A.   Policy. The town hereby adopts and implements a policy to assist small and
disadvantaged businesses in learning how to do business with the town.
B.   Implementation. Implementing the town’s policy to assist small and
disadvantaged businesses, the purchasing director shall do all of the
following:
   1.   Where feasible, provide appropriate staff to assist small and
disadvantaged businesses in learning how to do business with the town.
   2.   Give special publicity to procurement procedures and issue special
publications designed to assist small and disadvantaged businesses in learning
how to do business with the town.
   3.   Compile, maintain, and make available source lists of small and
disadvantaged businesses for the purpose of encouraging procurement from small
and disadvantaged businesses.
   4.   Include small and disadvantaged businesses on solicitation mailing
lists, where appropriate.
C.   Compliance with federal and contract requirements. Where a procurement
involves the expenditure of federal assistance or contract funds, the
purchasing director shall comply with the requirements associated with the
federal assistance or contract funds, even if they mandate actions not
reflected in this chapter.
V. Legal and contractual remedies
3-4-34 Bid protests
A.   Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror, or contractor who is aggrieved
in connection with the solicitation or award of a contract may protest to the
purchasing director. The protest shall be submitted in writing within ten
calendar days after the town’s issuance of the notice of intent to award
contract.
B.   The purchasing director is authorized, prior to the commencement of an
action in court concerning the protest, to take any necessary and appropriate
action to settle and resolve a protest of an aggrieved bidder, offeror, or
contractor, actual or prospective, concerning the solicitation or award of a
contract.
C.   If the protest is not resolved by mutual agreement, the purchasing
director shall promptly issue a decision in writing. The decision shall:
   1.   Sustain or deny the protest;
   2.   State the reasons for the action taken; and
   3.   Inform the aggrieved party of its right to judicial review of the
matter, if appropriate.
D.   A copy of the decision shall be mailed or otherwise furnished immediately
to the aggrieved party and any other party intervening.
E.   The purchasing director’s decision regarding a bid protest shall
constitute final administrative action. The aggrieved party may seek judicial
review of the administrative action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
3-4-35 Debarment or suspension
A.   The purchasing director, after consulting with the town attorney, is
authorized to debar or suspend a person for cause from consideration for award
of contracts.
B.   A debarment shall be for a period of not more than three years. A
suspension shall be for a period not to exceed three months.
C.   The causes for debarment or suspension include the following:
   1.   Conviction for commission of a criminal offense as an incident to
obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract,
or in the performance of such contract or subcontract;
   2.   Conviction under state or federal statutes of embezzlement, theft,
forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen
property, or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or
business honesty which currently, seriously, and directly affects
responsibility as a town contractor;
   3.   Conviction under state or federal antitrust statutes arising out of the
submission of bids or proposals;
   4.   Violation of contract provisions, as set forth below, of a character
which is regarded by the purchasing director to be so serious as to justify
debarment action:
      a.   Deliberate failure without good cause to perform in accordance with
the specifications or within the time limit provided in the contract; or
      b.   A recent record of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory
performance in accordance with the terms of one or more contracts, except that
failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance caused by acts beyond the
control of the contractor shall not be considered to be a basis for debarment;
   5.   Any other cause the purchasing director determines to be so serious and
compelling as to affect responsibility as a town contractor, including
debarment by another governmental entity for any cause listed in this section;
and
   6.   For violation of the ethical standards set forth in this chapter.
D.   The purchasing director shall issue a written notice of intent to debar or
suspend to the person involved. The notice shall include justification for the
debarment or suspension with references to the statutes, ordinances, codes or
substantive policy statements on which the debarment or suspension is based.
The notice shall be mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the person.
E.   The person receiving the notice of intent may object to the debarment or
suspension by responding in writing to the purchasing director within 14
calendar days of receipt of the notice. If the person does not object within
the allotted time, the purchasing director shall finalize the debarment or
suspension in the manner set forth in this section.
F.   The purchasing director is authorized to take any necessary and
appropriate action regarding the proposed debarment or suspension, including
but not limited to, meeting with the person involved, requesting more
information from the person, or conducting further investigation regarding the
reasons for debarment or suspension.
G.   After taking any necessary and appropriate action, the purchasing director
shall issue a written decision to debar or suspend. The decision shall state
the reasons for the action taken and inform the debarred or suspended person of
its rights concerning judicial review.
H.   A copy of the written decision shall be mailed or otherwise furnished
immediately to the debarred or suspended person and any other party
intervening.
I.   The purchasing director’s decision regarding a debarment or suspension
shall constitute final administrative action. The aggrieved party may seek
judicial review of the administrative action in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
3-4-36 Contract claims
A.   Any contractor may submit a contract claim in writing to the purchasing
director. The contractor may request a conference with the purchasing director
on the claim. Claims include, without limitation, disputes arising under a
contract, and those based upon breach of contract, mistake, misrepresentation,
or other cause for contract modification or rescission.
B.   The purchasing director is authorized, prior to the commencement of an
action in court concerning the claim, to take any necessary and appropriate
action to settle and resolve the claim.
C.   If the claim is not resolved by mutual agreement, the purchasing director
shall promptly issue a decision in writing. The decision shall:
   1.   Sustain or deny the claim
   2.   State the reasons for the action taken
   3.   Inform the contractor of its right to judicial review of the matter, if
appropriate.
D.   A copy of the decision shall be mailed or otherwise furnished immediately
to the contractor.
E.   The purchasing director’s decision regarding a contract claim shall
constitute final administrative action. The aggrieved party may seek judicial
review of the administrative action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
F.   If the purchasing director does not issue a written decision regarding any
contract claim within seven days after written request for a final decision, or
within such longer period as may be agreed upon between the parties, then the
contractor may proceed as if an adverse decision had been received.
CHAPTER 3-5.
CLAIMS AND SETTLEMENT
Chapter 3-5 was added by Ordinance 2014.022. Sections 3-5-1 and 3-5-2 were
amended by Ordinance 2024.026.
3-5-1 Claims administration
A.   The town manager, in consultation with the town attorney and the risk
manager, shall establish procedures to process, evaluate, investigate and
report claims filed against the town.
B.   The town attorney is authorized to file such claims, counter-claims, or
third party claims, and to take such other legal action, as may be necessary to
seek subrogation and reimbursement or to collect for damages sustained by the
town.
3-5-2 Settlement authority
A.   Whenever any contemplated settlement of a claim by or against the town is
for the sum of not more than $15,000, after due consideration and in the best
interest of the residents of the town, the town manager, in consultation with
the town attorney and the risk manager, is authorized to settle the claim.
B.   The town manager shall not settle a claim of more than $15,000 except with
the approval of the council.
C.   The town’s insurance provider is authorized to enter into settlements in
accordance with the provisions of the town's coverage agreement with the
insurance provider.
TITLE 4
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Title 4 was adopted by Ordinance 96.11
CHAPTER 4-1.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
CHAPTER 4-1.
POLICE DEPARTMENT
4-1-1 Created; composition
There is hereby created a police department for the town which shall consist of
a chief of police and as many police officers as may from time to time be
deemed necessary by the town council for the safety and good order of the town.
4-1-2 Appointment of officers
The chief of police shall be appointed by the town manager. The chief of police
shall appoint as many police officers as may from time to time be deemed
necessary for the safety and good order of the town, consistent with approved
budget capacity and authority.
Section 4-1-2 was amended by Ordinance 2014.019 to provide for appointment by
the town manager and to add the phrase “consistent with approved budget
capacity and authority” in place of “with the approval of the council”
4-1-3 Compensation of officers
The chief of police and the police officers of the town shall be compensated as
determined by the council through adoption of the annual budget. The chief of
police shall not receive any perquisites, commissions or compensation for his
services as chief of police, except as the council may prescribe through
adoption of the annual budget.
Section 4-1-3 was amended by Ordinance 2014.019 to add “through adoption of the
annual budget” in two places
4-1-4 Departmental rules and regulations
The police department shall be operated and managed in accordance with the
departmental rules and regulations as may from time to time be adopted by the
chief of police. The chief of police shall ensure that the police department
rules and regulations are in compliance with all federal and state laws, the
provisions of this code and all town ordinances, personnel policies,
administrative directives and other rules and procedures as established by the
town council or the town manager. If any provision of the police department
rules and regulations conflicts with federal or state law or any provision of
this code or a town ordinance, personnel policy, administrative directive or
other town rule or procedure, the federal or state law, this code and the town
ordinance, personnel policy, administrative directive, rule or procedure shall
control.
Section 4-1-4 was amended by Ordinance 2009.24, which removed a requirement for
approval by the town council and added the last two sentences
4-1-5 Duties of chief of police
A.   It shall be the duty of the chief of police to:
   1.   Enforce this code and state statutes by arresting and charging
violators within jurisdictional limits;
   2.   Render any account of the police department, its duties and receipts as
may be required by the council, and keep records of the office open to
inspection by the council at any time, except those records as may be exempted
by state or federal law. Investigate or direct the investigation of criminal
acts occurring within his jurisdiction and file or supervise the filing of
necessary reports;
   3.   Direct and ensure the orderly flow of traffic and investigate and make
reports of traffic accidents;
   4.   Inspect and ascertain the condition of traffic control devices of every
description which have been erected within the town on the authority of the
town engineer and to notify the town engineer of any defects found in them;
   5.   Reserved;
   6.   Supervise and control officers and personnel of the police department;
   7.   Perform any additional duties as may be required by the council or
manager.
Paragraph A(1) was rewritten by Ordinance 2005.22
4-1-5 was amended by Ordinance 2024.009 striking subparagraph 5 of paragraph A
4-1-6 Animal control
The chief of police and members of the police department, in addition to their
other powers, are hereby authorized and empowered to enforce any and all rules
or regulations of the county board of health relating to animals.
4-1-7 Answering calls outside the town
The members of the police department of the town are duly authorized to answer
calls for aid and assistance beyond the corporate limits of the town pursuant
to mutual aid agreements and state statutes.
4-1-8 [Reserved]
Section 4-1-8, entitled “Public safety employee-employer relations; meet and
confer,” was added by Ordinance 2007.05 and deleted by Ordinance No. 2013.026
TITLE 5
MUNICIPAL COURT
Title 5 was adopted by Ordinance 96.10. See Ordinance 77-4 and 77-5 for prior
history.
CHAPTER 5-1.   MUNICIPAL COURT ESTABLISHED; JURISDICTION
CHAPTER 5-2.   MAGISTRATE DEPARTMENT
CHAPTER 5-3.   COURT ADMINISTRATION DEPARTMENT
CHAPTER 5-4.   PROCEEDINGS OF COURT
CHAPTER 5-5.   JURY SYSTEM
CHAPTER 5-6.   FEES
CHAPTER 5-7.   CIVIL TOWN CODE VIOLATIONS
CHAPTER 5-8.   HOME DETENTION PROGRAM
CHAPTER 5-1.
MUNICIPAL COURT ESTABLISHED; JURISDICTION
5-1-1 Jurisdiction
There is hereby established in the town a municipal court which shall have
jurisdiction of all violations of this code, other town ordinances, and
jurisdiction concurrently with justices of the peace of precincts in which the
town is located of violations of laws of the state committed within the limits
of the town.
5-1-2 Municipal court departments
There are hereby established within the municipal court: a magistrate
department, consisting of the town magistrate, the necessary support staff to
the town magistrate, any assistant town magistrates, and all judges pro
tempore; and a court administration department, consisting of the court
administrator and all other court personnel.
Section 5-1-2 was added by Ordinance 2001.08.
CHAPTER 5-2.
MAGISTRATE DEPARTMENT
Chapter 5-2 was renamed from “Presiding Officer” to “magistrate Department” by
Ordinance 2001.08.
5-2-1 Town magistrate
There shall be appointed by the town council a town magistrate and those
assistants as are necessary for the performance of the office. The town council
shall enter into an employment contract with the town magistrate, which shall
be for a minimum period of two years. During said term, the town magistrate and
assistant magistrates may be removed only for cause. The provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to magistrates pro tempore, special magistrates or
acting magistrates appointed by the council, for the purposes of hearing a
particular case, or as a substitute for the town magistrate in the town
magistrate's absence.
Section 5-2-1 was amended by Ordinance 2001.06, 2001.08, 2007.32, 2010.14, and
2022.020. Ordinance 2001.06 provided for the appointment of the Town magistrate
in even-numbered years instead of odd-numbered years, and extended the sitting
town magistrate's term of office by one year. Ordinance 2001.08 added a second
sentence, appointing the town magistrate as the department head of the
magistrate department, which was deleted by Ordinance 2007.32. Ordinance
2010.14 provided for the appointment of the town magistrate for a two year term
from the date of appointment. Ordinance 2022.020 provided that the town
magistrate's term of office shall be for a minimum of two years.
5-2-2 Powers and duties of town magistrate
The town magistrate shall be the presiding officer of the municipal court. In
addition to the powers and duties of a presiding officer, the powers and duties
of the magistrate shall include:
A.   The powers and duties set forth and conferred upon him or her under the
provisions of the state constitution and statutes, this code and the ordinances
and resolutions of the town.
B.   The supervision of the assistant town magistrates, judges pro tempore,
magistrate’s assistants, court administrator and other personnel of the
municipal court.
C.   The responsibility for fixing all bonds, bails and other monies as
provided by law.
D.   Preparation of a schedule of traffic violations not involving the death of
a person, listing specific bail for each violation.
E.   Designation of a deputy other than a law enforcement officer and a
specific location where the deputy shall, during hours when court is not open,
set and collect the amount of bail in accordance with the foregoing schedule,
or accept proper bail bonds in lieu of bail, for and on behalf of the court.
F.   Preparation of a schedule of civil traffic violations listing a specific
deposit for each violation.
Section 5-2-2 was rewritten by Ordinance 2001.08 and 2007.32.
Paragraph E was rewritten by Ordinance 2005.22
5-2-3 Hearing officers
The magistrate, with the approval of the council, may appoint one or more
hearing officers to preside over civil code violation cases and civil traffic
violation cases when the appointment of hearing officers is necessary to assure
prompt disposition of the cases. Hearing officers may hear and dispose of civil
code violation cases and civil traffic violation cases under supervision of the
presiding officer of the municipal court which are appealable to the superior
court pursuant to title 22, chapter 2, article 4, Arizona revised statutes.
Section 5-2-3 was modified by Ordinance 2006.15 to add civil code violation
cases
CHAPTER 5-3.
COURT ADMINISTRATION DEPARTMENT
Chapter 5-3 was adopted by Ordinance 2001.08
5-3-1 Court administrator
There shall be appointed by the town magistrate a court administrator. The
court administrator shall provide administrative supervision of the municipal
court, under the direction of the town magistrate.
Section 5-3-1 was modified by Ordinance 2007.32 to place the court
administrator under the direction of the town magistrate
5-3-2 Powers and duties of court administrator
The powers and duties of the court administrator shall include:
A.   The supervision of the court clerk in keeping a docket where each action
and the proceedings of the court in each action shall be entered.
B.   The responsibility for receiving all bonds and bails fixed by the town
magistrate and receiving all fines, penalties, fees and other monies as
provided by law.
C.   Payment of all fees, fines, penalties and other monies collected by the
court to the town treasurer, including JCEF funds.
D.   Supervision of all personnel within the court administration department.
E.   Other reasonable duties as established by job description or as determined
by the town magistrate.
The introductory paragraph and paragraph E of Section 5-3-2 were modified by
Ordinance 2007.32
Paragraph A was rewritten by Ordinance 2005.22
5-3-3 Personnel
The municipal court shall employ the following personnel, under the supervision
of the court administrator:
A.   The clerk of the court, who shall be responsible for maintaining the
court’s docket and who shall receive all bonds, bails, fines, penalties, fees
and other monies as provided by law that are paid to the court.
B.   The court bailiff and/or marshal, who shall be responsible for maintaining
the order of the court.
C.   Any other personnel necessary to the functioning of the municipal court.
The introductory paragraph and paragraph C of Section 5-3-3 were modified by
Ordinance 2007.32
CHAPTER 5-4.
PROCEEDINGS OF COURT
5-4-1 Rules of court
The proceedings of the court shall be conducted in accordance with the state
constitution, the applicable state statutes and rules of the state supreme
court pertaining to municipal courts. The proceedings shall also be conducted
in accordance with the rules of criminal procedure for the superior court,
unless otherwise prescribed, and providing this code and resolutions of the
town are not in conflict therewith.
Section 5-4-1 was amended by Ordinance 2001.08.
5-4-2 Complaint
The municipal court proceedings shall be commenced by complaint under oath and
in the name of the state setting forth the offense charged with and those
particulars of time, place, person and property necessary to enable the
defendant to understand distinctly the character of the offense complained of
and to answer the complaint.
CHAPTER 5-5.
JURY SYSTEM
5-5-1 Formation of jury
The formation, summoning, drawing, disposition of names and the impaneling of
jurors in the municipal court shall be accomplished in the same manner as
provided for in courts of record as more fully set forth in title 21, chapter
3, of the Arizona revised statutes.
5-5-2 Selection of jurors
For the selection of potential jurors, the list of registered voters shall be
furnished by the clerk of the Board of Supervisors of Pima County.
CHAPTER 5-6.
FEES
5-6-1 Fee schedule for court costs
A.   The following municipal court fees are established, the amounts of which
are set forth in a fee schedule adopted by the council and amended from time to
time, to be imposed in addition to fees otherwise assessable by statute.
   1.   Any person who has been convicted of a misdemeanor criminal offense in
the municipal court and sentenced to a term of incarceration in any detention
facility authorized by law shall be required to pay a jail reimbursement fee in
the amount actually paid by the town for that incarceration.
   2.   Upon a defendant’s conviction at trial or conviction by plea agreement
the municipal court shall impose a prosecution fee against each defendant,
unless a higher or lower amount is imposed by a written plea agreement based
upon the actual cost of prosecution services and the indigent status of the
defendant.
   3.   An administrative warrant fee shall be imposed to cover the municipal
court's costs for processing warrants when a municipal court magistrate issues
a warrant for failure to appear.
4. The municipal court shall impose a court improvement fee which shall be
applied by the court on all fines, sanctions, penalties and assessments imposed
by the court.
5. A jury cancellation fee shall be imposed on a party who requests a jury
trial and then decides, within five days before the trial and after the court
has arranged for a jury to be impaneled, not to proceed with the jury trial.
The jury cancellation fee shall equal the actual costs incurred to cancel the
jury (typically $100 to $400).
6. A default fee shall be imposed to cover additional costs for processing a
case default.B. There is hereby established a court improvement fund which
shall be used exclusively to enhance the technological, operational and
security capabilities of the municipal court. The court improvement fund shall
be established as a designated fund account with the town treasurer. The court
shall collect the court improvement fees as defined in this section and deposit
them in the court improvement fund account. Half of the court improvement fund
shall be available for use as determined by the court for training, additional
contract work, temporary court help, and other similar purposes, as documented
in a manner requested by the town manager. The town treasurer may invest the
monies in the fund in the same manner as town funds. Interest earned on fund
monies shall be deposited in the fund.
Section 5-6-1 was amended by Ordinance 2007.32, which standardized references
to the municipal court, and by Ordinance 2009.11, which replaced specific fee
amounts with references to the comprehensive fee schedule
Paragraphs B, C and D were added by Ordinance 99.01 and paragraphs B and D were
rewritten by Ordinance 2006.08
Ordinance 2007.21 modified subparagraph 2 by increasing the fee, which
Ordinance 2009.11 moved to the comprehensive fee schedule.
Ordinance 2007.21 modified subparagraph 4 by increasing the fee, which was then
moved to the comprehensive fee schedule by Ordinance 2009.11
Ordinance 2024.008 modified paragraph D by changing ‘shall’ to ‘may’
Ordinance 2025.025 amended the section title, struck paragraphs A and C,
renumbering the rest, and amended language throughout
5-6-2 Probation fees
A. When granting court-monitored probation to a defendant, the court shall, as
a condition of probation, assess a monthly probation monitoring fee.
B. The monthly probation monitoring fee shall reflect the actual costs of the
monitored probation, including probation intake sessions, but not be less than
the sum specified in A.R.S. § 13-901(A) or any successor provision.
C. The monthly probation monitoring fee shall only be assessed when a defendant
is placed on monitored probation.
Section 5-6-2 was added by Ordinance 2007.12
Ordinance 2025.025 amended language in paragraph B
5-6-3 Authority to waive fees
A.   The magistrate shall retain the power to waive all or any part of
municipal court fees and probation fees if any of the following conditions
apply:
   1.   The defendant is found by the municipal court to be indigent; or
   2.   The fee imposed upon a defendant causes a hardship on the defendant or
the defendant’s immediate family; or
   3.   In the opinion of the magistrate, the waiver would be in the interest
of justice.
Section 5-6-3 was created by Ordinance 2025.025
CHAPTER 5-7.
CIVIL TOWN CODE VIOLATIONS
Chapter 5-7 was added by Ordinance 2006.15 and substantially amended by
Ordinance 2010.02
5-7-1 Town code violations treated as civil matters
Ordinance 2010.02 added into section
5-7-1 reference to the land development code or a town ordinance
Violations of the town code, the land development code or a town ordinance for
which a civil sanction is imposed shall be treated as civil matters as provided
in this chapter.
5-7-2 Commencement of action; jurisdiction of Marana municipal court
A.   A civil code violation case shall be commenced within one year of the
alleged violation.
B.   A peace officer may commence a civil code violation case by issuing and
personally serving an Arizona traffic ticket and complaint as provided in
A.R.S. § 13-3903.
C.   A code compliance officer, as defined in
chapter 1-9 of this code, may commence a civil code violation case by issuing a
uniform civil code complaint pursuant to this chapter.
D.   The town attorney or designee may commence a civil code violation case by
filing a long form civil code complaint with the Marana municipal court. Upon
receipt of the long form civil code complaint, the Marana municipal court shall
issue a summons.
E.   The Marana municipal court shall have jurisdiction over all civil
violations of the town code, the land development code or other town
ordinances.
Section 5-7-2 was revised by Ordinance 2013.029 and Ordinance 2010.02. The Town
Attorney made a January 17, 2014 scrivener’s revision to remove unnecessary
capitalization.
5-7-3 Service of uniform or long form civil code complaint
Ordinance 2010.02 revised the title of section
5-7-3 by adding “or long form,” substantially rewrote paragraph B, and added
paragraphs C and D
A.   A uniform civil code complaint may be served by delivering a copy of the
uniform civil code complaint to the person charged with the violation or by any
means authorized by the Arizona rules of civil procedure.
B.   The original uniform civil code complaint shall be filed in the Marana
municipal court within five days after it is issued.
C.   The long form civil code complaint and summons may be served by delivering
a copy of the long form civil code complaint and summons to the person charged
with the violation or by any means authorized by the Arizona rules of civil
procedure.
D.   If service cannot be accomplished by the methods set forth in this
section, the uniform civil code complaint or long form civil code complaint may
be served by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested. If service
of either the uniform civil code complaint or the long form civil code
complaint is made by certified or registered mail, the return receipt shall be
prima facie evidence of service.
5-7-4 Authority to detain persons to serve civil code complaint; failure to
provide evidence of identity; penalty
A.   A peace officer or a code compliance officer may stop and detain a person
as is reasonably necessary to investigate an actual or suspected violation of
the town code, the land development code or a town ordinance and to serve a
copy of a uniform civil code complaint or Arizona traffic ticket and complaint.
Ordinance 2013.029 added “uniform” and “or Arizona traffic ticket and
complaint” to paragraph A. Ordinance 2010.02 revised paragraphs A and B of
section
5-7-4 by replacing “duly authorized agent of the town” with “a code compliance
officer” and adding “the land development code or a town ordinance.” The Town
Attorney made a January 17, 2014 scrivener’s revision to remove unnecessary
capitalization.
Ordinance 2007.32 added “class 1” before “misdemeanor” in paragraph B
Ordinance 2010.02 revised section
5-7-5 to add “uniform and long form” to the title, added numbering to and
substantially rewrote paragraph A, and added paragraphs B and C
B.   A person who fails or refuses to provide evidence of his or her identity
to a peace officer or a code compliance officer upon request, when the officer
has reasonable cause to believe the person has committed a violation of the
town code, the land development code or a town ordinance, is guilty of a class
1 misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
$2,500 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 6 months, or by both such
fine and imprisonment.
5-7-5 Form for uniform and long form civil code complaints
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-26.png]
A.   The uniform civil code complaint shall be in the form of the document
marked “town of Marana uniform civil code complaint” reproduced in and made a
part of this section by this reference.
B.   The long form civil code complaint and summons shall be in a form
determined by the town attorney or designee and shall contain at a minimum the
date and place of the alleged violation, a reference to the town code or land
development code section or town ordinance provisions alleged to have been
violated and the time, date and place for the defendant to appear.
C.   The uniform and long form civil code complaint shall contain notice that
default judgment will be entered and a civil sanction and order to abate the
violation will be imposed on a person who is cited and fails to appear as
directed in the complaint.
5-7-6 Certification of uniform and long form civil code complaints
A.   A uniform civil code complaint need not be sworn to if it contains a form
of certification by the issuing officer in substance as follows: “I hereby
certify that I have reasonable grounds to believe and do believe that the
person named in this complaint committed the civil violation described in this
complaint.”
B.   The town attorney or designee shall swear to the contents of the long form
civil code complaint under oath and sign the complaint in the presence of the
magistrate.
C.   A false certification under this section constitutes perjury.
Ordinance 2010.02 revised section
5-7-6 to delete the word “false” and add “uniform and long form” in the title,
add “uniform” in paragraph A, add paragraph B, and renumber paragraph C
5-7-7 Admission or denial of allegations in complaint; hearings; findings of
court; civil sanction; order to abate
A.   A person named in a civil code complaint shall appear at the time and
place stated in the complaint or may appear prior to the time if so authorized
by the court and upon the directions contained in the complaint and admit or
deny the allegations of the complaint. Allegations not denied at the time of
appearance are admitted. No fee shall be charged for appearance in a civil code
violation case.
B.   If the person named in a civil code complaint admits the allegations in
the complaint, the court shall enter judgment for the town and impose a civil
sanction.
C.   Allegations in a civil code complaint may be admitted with an explanation.
When this occurs, the court shall enter judgment for the town and impose a
civil sanction determined with the court’s due consideration of the explanation
submitted.
D.   If the person named in a civil code complaint denies the allegations of
the complaint, the court shall set the matter for hearing. All civil code
violation hearings are informal and without a jury, and the town is required to
prove the violation by a preponderance of the evidence. Technical rules of
evidence do not apply, except for statutory provisions relating to privileged
communications. A person who elects to be represented by counsel shall notify
the court of this fact at least ten days prior to the hearing date. Hearings
may be recorded. If the court finds in favor of the person, the court shall
enter an order dismissing the civil code violation case. If the court finds in
favor of the town, the court shall enter judgment for the town and impose a
civil sanction.
E.   If the person served with a civil code complaint fails to appear on or
before the time directed to appear or at the time set for hearing by the court,
the allegations in the complaint shall be deemed admitted and the court shall
enter judgment for the town and impose a civil sanction.
F.   A civil sanction imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not exceed $1,000
unless otherwise designated in this code, the land development code, a town
ordinance or under state law.
G.   Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
H.   In addition to civil sanctions, upon finding that a violation exists, the
court shall order the person to perform whatever action is reasonably necessary
to correct and abate the violation. An order to abate shall remain in effect
for one year. When issuing an order to abate, the court shall advise a violator
that additional fines will be imposed for failure to abate a violation and that
the town may bring criminal charges for failure to obey the order to abate.
On March 31, 2010, the town attorney corrected, as a scrivener’s error under
the authority of section
1-4-5, the numbering of sections
5-7-7 through
5-7-11. They had been inadvertently and incorrectly renumbered to 5-7-8 through
5-7-12 by Ordinance 2010.02
Ordinance 2010.02 revised paragraph F to add “unless otherwise designated in
this code, the land development code, a town ordinance or under state law,”
added paragraph G, and renumbered paragraph H.
5-7-8 Appeal
Any party may appeal the judgment of the court. The appeal may be to the
superior court in the same manner as promulgated by the supreme court. The
posting of an appeal bond stays enforcement of the judgment.
Ordinance 2010.02 revised section
5-7-8 by deleting the sentence “Commissioners of the superior court may hear
and determine appeals”
5-7-9 Subpoena of witnesses; inapplicability of rules of civil procedure
A.   The town and the person charged with a civil code violation may subpoena
witnesses as provided by A.R.S. § 13-4072. Witnesses are not entitled to fees
for appearing in connection with a civil code violation case.
B.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the rules of civil procedure
do not apply.
5-7-10 Failure to pay civil sanction; collection procedure
All civil sanctions imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be paid within 30
days from entry of judgment, except that the court may extend the time for
payment or provide for installment payments if the court finds that payment
within 30 days will impose an undue economic burden on the defendant. A civil
sanction may be collected in the same manner as any other judgment in favor of
the town.
5-7-11 Failure to obey order to abate violation; penalty
Any person who fails to obey an order to abate a violation issued by a
magistrate, is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. A violation of this section is
punishable by up to a maximum six months in jail and by a maximum fine of
$2,500; and by probation up to three years.
Section 5-7-11 was revised by Ordinance 2007.32, which added “class 1” before
“misdemeanor,” and Ordinance 2010.02, which deleted “special magistrate, or
special limited magistrate” after “magistrate”
CHAPTER 5-8.
HOME DETENTION PROGRAM
There is hereby established in the municipal court a home detention program for
eligible offenders who are sentenced to jail confinement. The home detention
program is governed by the provisions of A.R.S. § 9-499.07.
Chapter 5-8 was added by Ordinance 2007.11
Chapter 5-8 was amended by Ordinance 2025.021
TITLE 6
ANIMAL CONTROL
Title 6 was adopted by Ordinance 2017.011. See Ordinances 90.02, 91.20, 94.01,
96.01, and 2005.22 for prior history. Land use regulations relating to animals
may be found in the Land Development Code.
CHAPTER 6-1.   DEFINITIONS
CHAPTER 6-2.   ENFORCEMENT
CHAPTER 6-3.   VACCINATION AND LICENSING OF DOGS
CHAPTER 6-4.   DOGS AT LARGE; DOGS ON SCHOOL GROUNDS
CHAPTER 6-5.   ANIMAL WASTE REMOVAL
CHAPTER 6-6.   CRUELTY AND NEGLECT OF ANIMALS
CHAPTER 6-7.   VICIOUS, AGGRESSIVE, OR DESTRUCTIVE ANIMALS AND BITING ANIMALS
CHAPTER 6-8.   REMOVAL, IMPOUNDMENT, FORFEITURE AND DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS
CHAPTER 6-9.   EXCESSIVE NOISE CAUSED BY ANIMALS OR BIRDS
CHAPTER 6-10.   PET STORES
CHAPTER 6-1.
DEFINITIONS
6-1-1 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply throughout this title unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise.
   A.   “Aggressive animal” means any animal that has bitten attempted to bite,
endangered, acted in an aggressive manner, or otherwise injured a person or
domestic animal without provocation or that has a known history of attacking
persons or domestic animals without provocation and is not a vicious animal, or
that has been so declared after an opportunity for a hearing before the town
magistrate, or that has been so declared by another jurisdiction after the
owner has been provided notice and an opportunity to be heard.
   B.   “Aggressive manner” means the animal approaches a person or domestic
animal, and can include but not limited to, threat displays of lunging,
charging, growling, snarling, snapping, barking, or biting.
   C.   “Altered dog” means a spayed female or neutered male dog.
   D.   “Animal” means every non-human mammalian species of animal, both
domestic and wild.
   E.   “At large” means being neither confined inside a house or other
building or confined entirely by a fence or similar enclosure nor physically
restrained by a leash.
   F.   “Bite” means any penetration of the skin by the teeth of any animal.
   G.   “Collar” means a band, chain, harness or suitable device worn around
the neck of a dog to which a dog license tag may be affixed.
   H.   “Community cat program” means a program in which healthy, free-roaming
cats are humanely trapped or otherwise humanely captured, sterilized,
vaccinated against rabies, ear-tipped, and returned to the location where they
were found.
   I.   “Destructive animal” means any animal that has a propensity to destroy,
damage, act in a destructive manner, or cause damage to the property of a
person other than the animal’s owner, or that has been so declared after an
opportunity for a hearing before the town magistrate, or that has been so
declared by another jurisdiction after the owner has been provided notice and
an opportunity to be heard.
   J.   “Destructive manner” means and includes, but not limited to, chewing,
digging, ripping, scratching, clawing, and destroying.
   K.   “Dog” means any member of the canine species.
   L.   “Dog park” means any designated, fenced, off-leash dog area which
allows dogs to run freely and socialize with other dogs while being supervised
by their owners.
   M.   “Domestic animal” means any of various animals that have been tamed and
made fit for a human environment, but does not include wild animals or hybrids
of animals and wild animals.
   N.   “Household” means all those persons who regularly dwell together at the
same place of residence.
   O.   “Impound” means the act of taking or receiving an animal into custody
for the purpose of confinement at a shelter or pound approved by the town
enforcement agent.
   P.   “Leash” or “lead” means:
      1.   A chain, rope, leather strap, cord or similar restraint attached to
a collar or harness or otherwise secured around an animal; and
      2.   That is of sufficient strength to restrain the animal; and
      3.   That is used by the person handling the animal as it was designed
and intended to be used to control the animal.
   Q.   “Licensed dog” means any dog having a current license.
   R.   “Livestock” means neat animals, horses, sheep, goats, swine, mules and
asses.
   S.   “Muzzle” means a device constructed of strong, soft material or of
metal, designed to fasten over the mouth of a dog that prevents the dog from
biting any person or other animal and that does not interfere with its
respiration.
   T.   “Owner” means any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring,
maintaining or having custody or otherwise having control of an animal within
the town limits.
   U.   “Police dog” means any dog belonging to any law enforcement agency
service dog unit.
   V.   “Property line” means the line which represents the legal limits of
property (including an apartment, condominium, room or other dwelling unit)
owned, leased or otherwise occupied by a person, business, corporation or
institution. In cases involving sound from an activity on a public street or
other public right-of-way, the “property line” shall be the nearest boundary of
the public right-of-way.
   W.   “Provocation” means any behavior toward an animal or its owners or its
owner’s property which is likely to cause a defensive reaction by the animal.
   X.   “Service animal” means any dog that is individually trained to do work
or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including
a physical, sensory, psychiatric, intellectual, or other mental disability. The
work or tasks performed by a service animal must be directly related to the
individual’s disability. The crime deterrent effects of an animal’s presence
and the provision of emotional support, well-being, comfort, or companionship
do not constitute work or tasks for the purpose of this definition. A dog does
not necessarily require certification in order to be a service animal for
purposes of this definition; however, to be eligible for no cost licensing
pursuant to this title, the dog must be certified in writing as a service
animal.
   Y.   “Tie out” means a chain, leash, wire cable or similar restraint
attached to a swivel or pulley and located to keep an animal exclusively inside
the property line.
   Z.   “Town enforcement agent” means that person who is designated by the
town manager to be responsible for the enforcement of this title and any
deputies designated by the town enforcement agent or this title.
   AA.   “Vaccination” means an anti-rabies vaccination using a type of vaccine
approved by the state veterinarian and administered by a state licensed
veterinarian.
   BB.   “Vicious animal” means any animal that has a propensity to attack, to
cause injury to, act in a vicious manner, or to otherwise endanger the safety
of human beings or domestic animals without provocation, or that has been so
declared after an opportunity for a hearing before the town magistrate, or that
has been so declared by another jurisdiction after the owner has been provided
notice and an opportunity to be heard.
   CC.   “Vicious manner” means approaches people or domestic animal and
exhibits conduct, which includes, but not limited to, growling, showing teeth,
snapping, biting, charging, circling, cornering a person or domestic animal, or
creating a reasonable fear of imminent attack.
   DD.   “Wild animal” means any animal which is now or historically has been
found in the wild, or in a wild state. Wild state means living in its original,
natural condition, not domesticated.
Ordinance 2018.004 expanded the definition of “destructive animal”
Ordinance 2018.004 expanded the definition of “vicious animal”
Ordinance 2021.005 added the definitions of “aggressive animal,” “muzzle,” and
“wild animal,” and amended the definitions of “destructive animal,” “domestic
animal,” “tie out,” and “vicious animal”
Ordinance 2023.006 added the definitions of “aggressive manner,” “destructive
manner,” and “vicious manner,” and amended the definitions of “aggressive
animal,” “destructive animal,” and “vicious animal”
Ordinance 2023.038 added the definition of “dog park”
Ordinance 2024.020 expanded the definition of “at large” and “leash” or “lead”
CHAPTER 6-2.
ENFORCEMENT
6-2-1 Powers and duties of town enforcement agent
A.   The town enforcement agent shall:
   1.   Enforce the provisions of this title.
   2.   Issue citations for the violation of the provisions of this title.
B.   The town enforcement agent may designate deputies to carry out the powers
and duties set forth in this section.
6-2-2 Appointment of animal control officers; authority
A.   The appointment of town animal control officers is hereby authorized.
B.   Animal control officers shall be designated as deputies to the town
enforcement agent and may commence an action or proceeding before a court for
any violation of this code or any town ordinance or state statute relating to
rabies or animal control that occurs within the jurisdiction of the town.
C.   An animal control officer may stop and detain a person as is reasonably
necessary to investigate an actual or suspected violation of this title or any
state statute relating to rabies or animal control that occurs within the
jurisdiction of the town, and to serve a copy of a written notice to appear and
complaint.
Ordinance 2018.016 amended paragraph B
Ordinance 2018.004 added paragraph C
6-2-3 Peace officer authority; code compliance officer authority
A.   Any peace officer is hereby designated a deputy to the town enforcement
agent and is authorized and empowered to enforce the provisions of this title
and to issue citations for violations of it.
B.   Any code compliance officer, as defined in
chapter 1-9 of this code, is hereby designated a deputy to the town enforcement
agent and is authorized and empowered to enforce the provisions of this title
that are classified as civil offenses and to issue citations for violations of
those civil offenses.
6-2-4 Commencement of action
A.   An animal control officer or a peace officer may commence an action for
violation of this title by issuing and personally serving an Arizona traffic
ticket and complaint as provided in A.R.S. § 13-3903 or other approved written
notice to appear and complaint, except that an animal control officer shall not
make an arrest before issuing the complaint.
B.   A code compliance officer may commence an action for a civil violation of
this title by issuing a uniform civil code complaint pursuant to
chapter 5-7 of this code.
C.   The town attorney or designee may commence an action for violation of this
title by filing a long form complaint with the Marana municipal court. Upon
receipt of the long form complaint, the Marana municipal court shall issue a
summons.
D.   The issuance of citations pursuant to this section shall be subject to the
provisions of A.R.S. § 13-3899.
Ordinance 2018.004 expanded and re-worded paragraph A
Ordinance 2021.005 amended paragraph C
6-2-5 Unlawful interference with town enforcement agent; classification
A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the town enforcement
agent or any deputy authorized to enforce this title in the performance of his
duties, or to release any animal duly impounded.
B.   Violation of this section is a class 1 misdemeanor.
6-2-6 Enforcement; continuing violations
A.   Civil violations of this title may be enforced pursuant to the provisions
of
chapter 5-7 or in any manner provided by town ordinances and state laws.
B.   Criminal violations of this title shall be enforced in any manner provided
by town ordinances and state laws.
C.   In addition to any other sanction or penalty, upon finding that a
violation of this title exists, the court may order a person to perform
whatever action is reasonably necessary to correct and abate the violation.
D.   Any person violating the provisions of this title shall be responsible or
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion of a day during
which any violation of this title is committed or permitted.
Ordinance 2018.004 added paragraph C and renumbered paragraph D to conform
CHAPTER 6-3.
VACCINATION AND LICENSING OF DOGS
6-3-1 Vaccination required; classification
A.   It shall be unlawful to own, keep, possess, harbor or maintain a dog over
the age of three months in the town unless it is vaccinated in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter.
B.   Any person who fails to comply with this section is guilty of a class 2
misdemeanor.
6-3-2 Type of vaccination
The type or types of anti-rabies vaccination that may be used for vaccination
of dogs, the period of time between vaccination and revaccination, and the
dosage and method of administration of the vaccine shall be in accordance with
the rules and regulations designated by the state veterinarian.
6-3-3 Vaccination certificate
The person causing a dog to be vaccinated shall demand and be given an official
certificate of vaccination that includes the owner’s name and address, a brief
description of the dog, the date and type of vaccination, the manufacturer and
serial number of the vaccine used, and the date the dog is due for
revaccination.
6-3-4 License required; classification
A.   It shall be unlawful to own, keep, possess, harbor or maintain a dog over
the age of three months in the town for more than 30 days without having the
dog licensed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
B.   It shall be unlawful to knowingly fail to obtain a license for a dog
required to be licensed within 15 days after receiving written notification
from the town enforcement agent of the requirement.
C.   Any person who fails to comply with this section is guilty of a class 2
misdemeanor.
Ordinance 2018.004 added paragraph B and renumbered paragraph C to conform
6-3-5 Vaccination certificate prerequisite to license
No license shall be issued for any dog until the owner has presented a
vaccination certificate from a licensed veterinarian containing the information
required by this chapter.
Ordinance 2018.004 changed “signed by” to “from” in Section 6-3-5
6-3-6 Vaccination outside the state
A dog vaccinated in any other state prior to entry into the town may be
licensed in the town, provided that, at the time of licensing, the dog’s owner
presents a vaccination certificate signed by a duly licensed veterinarian and
the certificate contains the information required by this chapter.
6-3-7 License fees; rebate; penalty fees
A.   No dog license shall be issued by the town until the dog owner has paid a
license fee, in an amount established by a fee schedule adopted by the council
and amended from time to time.
B.   Any person who presents to the town an affidavit or veterinarian’s
certificate stating that the dog is already altered, that the dog is at least
ten years old, or that the dog cannot be altered for health reasons, shall be
eligible for the altered dog fee.
C.   Any person 65 years of age or older shall be eligible for the senior
citizen license fee. The town shall establish reasonable standards of proof for
eligibility. No more than four dogs per household shall be licensed at the
senior citizen rate.
D.   Any person who presents to the town a statement from a qualified health
care professional certifying that the person has a disabling condition as
defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act shall be eligible for the
disabled citizen license fee.
E.   Any person who has paid the license fee for an unaltered dog who, during
the license year, presents to the town a statement from a veterinarian
certifying that the licensed animal has been altered shall be entitled to a
rebate. The rebate shall be the difference between the fee paid and the fee for
an altered dog.
F.   Any person who fails to renew a license within 30 days of the renewal due
date established by the town shall be charged a penalty fee in an amount
established by a fee schedule adopted by the council and amended from time to
time.
The title and paragraph F of section
6-3-7 were amended by Ordinance 2017.025
6-3-8 License fee exemptions; false certification; classification; sanction
A.   A service animal, or an animal training to be a service animal, as defined
in A.R.S. § 11-1024, shall be licensed without paying a license fee. An
applicant for a license fee waiver for a service animal must sign a written
certification in substantially the same language as in A.R.S. § 11-1008(F)(2)
certifying that the animal is a service animal or in training to be a service
animal.
B.   An active working police dog belonging to a law enforcement agency, an
active working fire dog belonging to a fire department, an active working
military dog belonging to the United States armed forces, or an altered retired
police, fire, or military dog, shall be licensed without paying a license fee.
An applicant for a license fee waiver for a police, fire, or military dog shall
provide adequate proof satisfactory to the town enforcement agent that the dog
is an active working or altered retired police, fire, or military dog.
C.   A search and rescue dog shall be licensed without paying a license fee. An
applicant for a license fee waiver for a search and rescue dog shall provide
adequate proof satisfactory to the town enforcement agent that the dog is a
search and rescue dog.
D.   A person who makes a false certification pursuant to paragraph A of this
section is guilty of a petty offense and subject to a fine of not more than
$50.
6-3-9 Transfer of license; classification
A.   Whenever the ownership of a dog changes, the new owner shall secure a
transfer of the dog’s license within ten days of transfer.
B.   Failure to comply with this section is a civil infraction.
Ordinance 2018.004 deleted “fee” from the title of Section 6-3-9, added the
ten-day provision to paragraph A, deleted former paragraphs B and C, and
renumbered former paragraph D as paragraph B
6-3-10 Issuance, contents of dog license tag
The town enforcement agent shall issue or cause to be issued a durable dog
license tag, imprinted with the license number, to the owner of each dog
licensed under this chapter.
6-3-11 Tag required; exceptions; classification
A.   The dog license tag provided by the town enforcement agent shall be
affixed to a collar provided by the dog’s owner and worn at all times by the
dog.
B.   Properly vaccinated and licensed dogs need not wear a collar with the
license tag affixed in the following circumstances:
   1.   While being exhibited at or transported to and from an American Kennel
Club approved show;
   2.   While engaged in or transported to and from races approved by the
Arizona Racing Commission; or
   3.   While acting as a police dog.
C.   Failure to comply with this section is a class 2 misdemeanor.
6-3-12 Duplicate tags, fee
Whenever a dog license tag is lost, a duplicate tag will be issued upon
application by the owner and the payment of a fee to the town enforcement agent
in an amount established by a fee schedule adopted by the council and amended
from time to time.
6-3-13 Counterfeiting or transferring of tags prohibited; classification
A.   It shall be unlawful to counterfeit or attempt to counterfeit an official
dog license tag, to remove an official dog license tag from any dog for the
purpose of intentional or malicious mischief, or to remove a dog’s license tag
and place it on another dog.
B.   Violation of this section is a class 2 misdemeanor.
Ordinance 2018.004 expanded paragraph A
CHAPTER 6-4.
DOGS AT LARGE; DOGS ON SCHOOL GROUNDS
6-4-1 Dogs at large prohibited; exceptions; classification
   A.   It is unlawful for an owner of a dog to allow the dog to be at large
within the town limits.
   B.   Dogs may be at large as an exception to this section under the
following circumstances:
      1.   While participating in field trials, obedience classes or kennel
club events, or while engaging in races approved by the Arizona Racing
Commission, provided that the dog is accompanied by and under the control of
the dog’s owner or trainer.
      2.   While being used or trained for legal hunting or for control of
livestock.
      3.   While assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties.
      4.   While within a dog park.
      5.   While acting as a service animal and assisting an individual with a
disability and only if the individual with a disability is unable because of
the disability to restrain the service animal by leash, chain, rope, cord or
similar device, or the use of a leash, chain, rope, cord or similar device
would interfere with the service animal’s safe, effective performance of work
or tasks, in which case the service animal must be otherwise under the
individual’s control, by voice control, signals or other effective means.
   C.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, violation of this section
is a civil infraction.
   D.   Violation of this section is a class 2 misdemeanor if the owner of the
animal has been found responsible or guilty of a violation of this section
within the 12-month period prior to the date of offense.
   E.   Violation of this section is a class 1 misdemeanor if the owner of the
animal has knowledge that the animal has been declared vicious, aggressive or
destructive after an opportunity for a hearing before the town magistrate or
that has been so declared by another jurisdiction after the owner has been
provided notice and an opportunity to be heard.
Ordinance 2018.016 amended paragraph A
Ordinance 2021.005 amended paragraphs A and B and added paragraph F
Ordinance 2023.038 amended subparagraph 4 of paragraph C
Ordinance 2024.020 repealed paragraphs A and B and added a new paragraph A
6-4-2 Liability for dogs at large
Injury to any person or damage to any property by a dog while at large shall be
the full responsibility of the dog owner or person or persons responsible for
the dog when such damages were inflicted.
6-4-3 Dogs on school grounds prohibited; exceptions; classification
A.   It shall be unlawful to bring a dog onto the grounds of any school,
regardless of whether the dog is on a leash.
B.   Dogs may be on school grounds as an exception to this section under the
following circumstances:
   1.   While participating as part of a formal school activity or event.
   2.   While acting as a service animal to an individual with a disability, as
defined in this title.
   3.   While assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties.
C.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, violation of this section is
a civil infraction.
D.   Violation of this section is a class 2 misdemeanor if the owner of the
animal has been found responsible or guilty of a violation of this section
within the 12-month period prior to the date of offense.
6-4-4 Dog park regulations
A.   Dogs must be accompanied by their owner at all times within the dog park.
B.   Dogs must be restrained upon entering and exiting the dog park.
C.   Dogs are to be removed by the owner from the dog park immediately
following any indication of aggressive behavior.
   1.   A town employee can require a dog to leave a designated dog park.
D.   Dog owners are solely responsible for the conduct of their dogs at all
times.
E.   Dog owners and all visitors to the dog parks enter at their own risk and
assume all risks related to their visit and use of the areas, including, but
not limited to, all dog bites and damage to personal property.
Ordinance 2023.038 added section
6-4-4
CHAPTER 6-5.
ANIMAL WASTE REMOVAL
Ordinance 2018.004 changed “dog” to “animal” in the title of Chapter 6-5 and
Section 6-5-1, and changed every mention of dog to domestic animal in
paragraphs A and B of Section 6-5-1
6-5-1 Animal waste removal; exceptions; classification
A.   It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having custody of any
domestic animal to fail immediately to remove and dispose of in a sanitary
manner any solid waste deposited by the domestic animal on public property or
on private property without the consent of the person in control of the
property.
B.   It shall be unlawful for the owner, proprietor, agent or occupant of any
premises where domestic animals are kept to deposit, cause to be deposited, or
allow to accumulate, within or about the premises, any solid wastes from
domestic animals for more than 72 hours or in such a manner that the waste
creates an unsanitary condition or is a health hazard to humans or animals.
Pending disposal, animal waste shall be placed in a closed or sealed container.
This paragraph applies to private property, including property owned, leased or
controlled by the owner of the domestic animal.
C.   Paragraph A of this section shall not apply to blind persons, persons with
mobility disabilities, or police officers or other law enforcement officers
accompanied by police dogs while on emergency.
D.   Violation of this section is a civil infraction.
Ordinance 2021.005 amended paragraph B
CHAPTER 6-6.
CRUELTY AND NEGLECT OF ANIMALS
6-6-1 Cruelty prohibited; classification; penalty
A.   It shall be unlawful for a person having care, control, charge, or custody
of any animal, either as owner or otherwise, to:
   1.   Overdrive, overload, overwork, torture, torment, cruelly beat, mutilate
or unlawfully kill the animal.
   2.   Cause or procure an animal to be overdriven, overloaded, driven when
overloaded, overworked, tortured, tormented, cruelly beaten, mutilated or
killed.
   3.   Inflict unnecessary cruelty upon the animal.
   4.   Cruelly drive or work the animal when unfit for labor.
   5.   Cruelly abandon the animal.
   6.   Carry or cause the animal to be carried in or upon a vehicle or
otherwise, in an unnecessarily cruel or inhumane manner.
   7.   Knowingly and willfully authorize or permit the animal to be subjected
to unreasonable or unnecessary torture, suffering or cruelty of any kind.
B.   Violation of this section is a class 1 misdemeanor.
C.   Upon conviction of violation of this section, in addition to any other
penalty imposed by the magistrate, the magistrate may order that the owner of
the animal shall not be permitted to own or control any animal for a period of
up to three years and that the animal(s) which is the subject of this action be
forfeited to the town enforcement agent.
6-6-2 Neglect prohibited; classification; penalty
A.   The purpose of this section is to guarantee that animals under human
custody or control are housed in healthy environments and are provided with
proper food, water, shelter, medical care, exercise space and ventilation.
B.   Any person having care, control, charge, or custody of any animal, either
as owner or otherwise, shall provide:
   1.   That the animal receives daily, food that is free from contamination
and is of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to maintain the animal in
good health;
   2.   That potable water is accessible to the animal at all times, either
free-flowing or in a clean receptacle;
   3.   That except for livestock, all animals have convenient access to
natural or artificial shelter throughout the year. Any such artificial shelter
shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair to protect the animal
from injury and from the elements and of sufficient size to permit the animal
to enter, stand, turn around and lie down in a natural manner. Any shelter
which does not protect the animal from temperature extremes or precipitation,
or which does not provide adequate ventilation or drainage, does not comply
with this chapter. Any shelter, all bedding and any spaces accessible to the
animal shall be maintained in a manner which minimizes the risk of the animal
contracting disease, being injured or becoming infested with parasites;
   4.   That the animal receives care and medical treatment for debilitating
injuries, parasites and diseases, sufficient to maintain the animal in good
health and minimize suffering;
   5.   That the animal is given adequate exercise space either:
      a.   within an enclosure that shall be constructed of material, and in a
manner, to minimize the risk of injury to the animal, and shall encompass
sufficient usable space to keep the animal in good condition; or
      b.   on a tie out so located that the animal cannot become entangled with
other objects. Choke collars or similar such collars shall not be used to
attach an animal to a tie out. No tie out shall employ a restraint that is less
than ten feet in length. No tie out shall restrict access to clean water, food,
or shelter.
C.   Violation of this section is a class 1 misdemeanor.
D.   Upon conviction of violation of this section, in addition to any other
penalty imposed by the magistrate, the magistrate may order that the owner of
the animal shall not be permitted to own or control any animal for a period of
up to three years and that the animal(s) which is the subject of this action be
forfeited to the town enforcement agent.
Ordinance 2021.005 expanded paragraph (B)(5) to (B)(5) - (B)(5)(a) and added
paragraph (B)(5)(b)
6-6-3 Confinement of animals in motor vehicles prohibited; exceptions;
authority; classification
A.   No person having charge or custody of an animal, as owner or otherwise,
shall place or confine the animal or allow the animal to be placed or confined
or to remain in a motor vehicle under such conditions or for such period of
time as may endanger the health or well-being of the animal due to heat, lack
of food or drink, or such other circumstances as may reasonably be expected to
cause suffering, disability or death.
B.   No person having dominion or control over a motor vehicle, as owner or
otherwise, shall place or confine an animal or allow an animal to be placed or
confined or to remain in a motor vehicle under such conditions or for such
period of time as may endanger the health or well-being of the animal due to
heat, lack of food or drink, or such other circumstances as may reasonably be
expected to cause suffering, disability, or death.
C.   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the transportation of
horses, cattle, sheep, poultry or other agricultural livestock in trailers or
other vehicles designed and constructed for such purpose.
D.   Any town enforcement agent is authorized to use whatever force is
reasonable and necessary to remove any animal from a vehicle whenever it
appears that the animal’s life or health is endangered.
E.   No town enforcement agent shall be liable for damages to property caused
by the use of reasonable force to remove an animal from a vehicle under the
circumstances described in this section.
F.   Violation of this section is a class 1 misdemeanor.
6-6-4 Duty to obtain or render aid to animal struck by vehicle
A.   The driver of a vehicle that collides with an animal that is readily
identifiable as a domestic animal shall make a reasonable effort to obtain aid
for the animal or to render aid and assistance to the animal. A person may
discharge his or her duty under this section by reporting the incident to 911
or to other appropriate authorities.
B.   Violation of this section is a class 1 misdemeanor.
6-6-5 Animal hoarding prohibited; exception; definitions; penalty;
classification
A.   No person shall own, possess, keep, harbor, or maintain ten or more
animals under circumstances injurious to the health or welfare of any animal or
person. Circumstances injurious to the health or welfare of any animal or
person may include, but are not limited to, the following:
   1.   Unsanitary, overcrowded, or other inhumane conditions; or
   2.   Failure to provide appropriate medical care; or
   3.   Failure to provide suitable water or food for the species; or
   4.   Abandonment.
B.   Feral cats that are not domesticated, have become wild, or are free-
roaming shall not be considered owned, possessed, kept, harbored, or maintained
for purposes of this section.
C.   For purposes of this section only, “animal” means a mammal, bird, reptile
or amphibian, but excludes rodents, which may be controlled as otherwise
allowed by the law of the state of Arizona. The exclusion of rodents from the
definition of animal shall not apply to rodents classified as fur-bearing
animals as defined in A.R.S. § 17-101, or to any particular rodent known by the
person alleged to have violated this section to be kept as a pet, or any rodent
clearly marked and denominated as being a pet, such as rodents wearing collars
or harnesses.
D.   Upon conviction of violation of this section, in addition to any other
penalty imposed by the magistrate, the magistrate may order one or more of the
following:
   1.   That the person complete a court-approved mental health evaluation and
any recommended treatment at the convicted person’s expense.
   2.   That the person shall not be permitted to own, possess, keep, harbor,
or maintain any animal for a period of up to three years.
   3.   That the person submit to periodic property inspections by any town
enforcement agent.
E.   Violation of this section is a class 1 misdemeanor.
CHAPTER 6-7.   VICIOUS, AGGRESSIVE, OR DESTRUCTIVE ANIMALS AND BITING ANIMALS
Ordinance 2021.005 revised chapter 6-7 by adding “aggressive” and “biting
animals” to the title, amending and renumbering existing sections, and adding
new sections 6-7-3, 6-7-4, 6-7-5, 6-7-8, and 6-7-9
6-7-1 Keeping vicious, aggressive, or destructive animals prohibited;
exceptions; classification
A.   It is unlawful for any person to keep, control, harbor or otherwise have
under control any animal which is vicious, aggressive, or destructive.
B.   This section does not apply to zoos, wild animal parks or animal shelters.
C.   This section does not apply to persons who are in compliance with an order
of the town magistrate issued pursuant to this title or an order issued by
another jurisdiction.
D.   Violation of this section is a class 1 misdemeanor.
Ordinance 2018.004 expanded paragraph B
Ordinance 2021.005 added “aggressive” to the section title and paragraph A, and
restructured paragraphs B and C as paragraphs B, C, and D
6-7-2 Evaluation of animals
A.   Whenever the town enforcement agent has reason to believe an animal is
vicious, aggressive, or destructive, the town enforcement agent may conduct an
investigation and/or evaluation of the animal, whether the animal is impounded
or not.
B.   The town enforcement agent shall develop guidelines to determine if an
animal is vicious, aggressive, or destructive.
C.   If the town enforcement agent finds that an animal is vicious, the
provisions of
chapter 6-8 regarding impoundment shall apply.
D.   If the town enforcement agent finds that an animal is aggressive or
destructive, the provisions of
chapter 6-8 regarding impoundment may apply. An aggressive or destructive
animal may remain at the home with the consent of and in a manner prescribed by
the town enforcement agent, if:
   1.   The town enforcement agent finds confinement at the home is not a
contributing factor; and
   2.   The owner of the animal signs a temporary confinement order promising
to keep the animal confined at the home pending the disposition of all legal
proceedings.
E.   The town enforcement agent will not conduct an investigation and/or
evaluation for biting incidents that occur in a dog park, unless it involves
serious physical injury, as defined in A.R.S § 13-105(39), to a human being.
Ordinance 2018.004 added section
6-7-2 as section
6-7-5
Ordinance 2021.005 renumbered and amended the section and added paragraph D
Ordinance 2023.006 amended paragraph A of this section
Ordinance 2023.038 added paragraph E
6-7-3 Declaring an animal vicious, aggressive or destructive
Following an investigation and/or evaluation, the town enforcement agent may
declare that an animal is vicious, aggressive, or destructive if the town
enforcement agent has probable cause to believe that the animal is a vicious
animal, aggressive animal, or destructive animal.
6-7-4 Notice to owner regarding declaration of animal as vicious, aggressive or
destructive; stipulation
A.   If the owner is known, and unless the owner signs a statement permanently
relinquishing ownership of the animal to the town enforcement agent, the owner
shall be provided with a written notice of the vicious, aggressive or
destructive animal declaration by one or more of the following means:
   1.   Personal service of the notice on the owner.
   2.   Leaving a copy of the notice with a person of suitable discretion at
the owner’s residence or place of business.
   3.   Affixing the notice in a conspicuous place where the animal was found.
   4.   Mailing a copy of the notice to the owner’s last-known address by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested.
B.   The notice required by this section shall contain, at a minimum, the
following information:
   1.   The town’s intent to file, within ten days of the owner’s receipt of
the written notice, a written request with the town magistrate for a hearing to
determine if the animal should be declared vicious, aggressive or destructive
by the town magistrate.
   2.   The owner’s right to present witnesses and be represented by an
attorney at the hearing.
C.   If the town and the owner agree that the animal should be declared
vicious, aggressive, or destructive, the town attorney or designee may file a
stipulation signed by the owner with the town magistrate requesting the town
magistrate order the animal to be declared vicious, aggressive or destructive
and imposing conditions as set forth in section 6-7-5(C) that are necessary to
protect the public.
6-7-5 Hearing regarding declaration; findings after court hearing; rules of
hearing; costs
A.   Upon receipt of a written request for a hearing to determine if the animal
should be declared vicious, aggressive, or destructive, the court shall set a
hearing within 15 business days if the animal has been impounded and within 30
days if the animal has not been impounded.
B.   If the town magistrate finds from clear and convincing evidence that the
animal is vicious or aggressive or destructive, then the town magistrate shall
enter orders taking into account the recommendations of the town enforcement
agent and the animal’s owner.
C.   Upon a finding that an animal shall be declared vicious, aggressive or
destructive, the magistrate may enter such orders as the magistrate deems
necessary to protect the public, including one or more of the following:
   1.   That the animal be kept in an enclosure that is secure enough that the
animal cannot bite, harm or injure anyone outside the enclosure, and cannot
escape, as follows:
      a.   The court shall determine the appropriate fencing requirements for
the size and nature of the animal. The court may require a fence, including
gates to be six feet in height; a fence five to six feet in height to incline
to the inside of the confinement area at a 45 degree angle from the vertical;
or that the confinement area be wholly covered by a material strong enough to
keep the animal from escaping.
      b.   The court may require the bottom of the confinement area to be of
concrete, cement or asphalt, or of blocks or bricks set in concrete or cement;
or if the bottom is not provided, then a footing of such material shall be
placed along the whole perimeter of the confinement area to a depth of one foot
below ground level, or deeper if required by the court.
      c.   The court may require the gates to the confinement area to be locked
at all times with a padlock except while entering or exiting.
   2.   That the animal be muzzled and restrained whenever the animal is
outside its enclosure with a leash, chain, rope or similar device not more than
six feet in length sufficient to restrain the animal, and under the control of
a person capable of preventing the animal from engaging in any prohibited
behavior.
   3.   That the owner of the vicious, aggressive or destructive animal display
on every gate or entry way to the enclosure where the animal is kept a sign
that reasonably cautions the public that the animal is vicious, aggressive, or
destructive.
   4.   That the owner maintain liability insurance in a single incident amount
as determined by the court for bodily injury or death of any person or for
damage to property caused by the vicious, aggressive, or destructive animal.
   5.   That the animal’s owner microchip the animal with an identification
number. The town enforcement agent shall maintain a registry of the numbers and
the owners of the animals.
   6.   That the animal be spayed or neutered at the owner’s expense.
   7.   That the animal be defanged or declawed.
   8.   That the animal be banished from the town limits, after first being
spayed or neutered, and microchipped by a licensed veterinarian at the owner’s
expense.
   9.   That the animal be forfeited to the town enforcement agent for transfer
to a legally incorporated humane society or other nonprofit corporate animal-
welfare organization devoted to the welfare, protection and humane treatment of
animals, as described in section
6-8-13.
   10.   That the animal be humanely destroyed.
D.   The rules for the hearing shall be the same as those set forth in section
6-8-8.
E.   This chapter shall not be construed as precluding the destruction of any
animal if destruction is otherwise authorized by law, nor shall anything in
this chapter be construed as precluding the spaying or neutering of any animal.
If any provision of this chapter is in conflict with any other provisions of
this code, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling.
Ordinance 2023.006 amended paragraph A of this section
6-7-6 Prohibited acts; classification; defenses; findings and orders
A.   The owner of any animal that is declared a vicious animal, aggressive
animal, or destructive animal that bites, attempts to bite, endangers or
otherwise injures or causes injury to human beings or other animals is guilty
of a class 1 misdemeanor.
B.   The owner of any animal that is at large and unvaccinated that bites,
attempts to bite, endangers or otherwise injures or causes injury to human
beings or other animals is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor.
C.   The owner of any animal that is a vicious animal, aggressive animal, or
destructive animal that destroys, damages, or causes damage to the property of
another person is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor.
D.   The owner of any animal that bites causing serious physical injury as
defined in A.R.S. § 13-105(39) to a human being is guilty of a class 1
misdemeanor.
E.   It shall be an affirmative defense to the provisions of this section if
the animal is:
   1.   Not at large and there is provocation; or
   2.   The dog is a police dog under the command of its trainer.
F.   Upon conviction of a violation of this section, in addition to any other
penalty or order imposed by the magistrate, the magistrate may find that the
animal is vicious, aggressive, or destructive, and may enter such orders as the
magistrate deems necessary to protect the public, as set forth in section
6-7-5(C).
Ordinance 2018.004 added “findings and orders” to the title of section 6-7-
6 and added paragraph E
Ordinance 2021.005 renumbered the section, amended and expanded paragraph B as
B and C, added paragraph D, renumbered subsequent paragraphs accordingly, and
amended paragraphs A and F
Ordinance 2023.006 amended paragraph A of this section
6-7-7 Restitution
In addition to any other penalty, if a victim suffers economic loss as a result
of a violation of section 6-7-6, the court shall order the owner to pay
restitution to the victim, in the full amount of the victim’s economic loss, as
determined by the court. This remedy shall not abridge any civil cause of
action by the victim.
Ordinance 2021.005 renumbered the section and amended the cross-reference
6-7-8 Vicious, aggressive, or destructive animals; consent to inspection;
inspection; order of compliance; seizure
A.   By continuing to own an animal declared vicious, aggressive, or
destructive, an owner gives consent to any town enforcement agent to inspect
the animal declared vicious, aggressive, or destructive and the premises where
the animal is kept.
B.   Upon inspection, the town enforcement agent may seize and impound the
animal if the owner has failed to comply with the town magistrate’s order on
disposition of the animal.
C.   If the owner of the animal has not demonstrated compliance with the town
magistrate’s order within five days after the seizure of the animal, the town
enforcement agent may humanely destroy the animal.
D.   Any action taken under this section shall be in addition to any available
criminal penalties.
6-7-9 Vicious, aggressive, or destructive animals; required acts and unlawful
activities; classification
A.   An owner or any other person having control of an animal declared vicious,
aggressive, or destructive shall not fail to comply with an order of the town
magistrate regarding the animal.
B.   An owner of an animal declared vicious, aggressive, or destructive shall
not sell, give away, abandon or otherwise dispose of the animal without
notifying the town enforcement agent in writing in advance. Additionally, the
owner shall notify the town in advance of leaving the jurisdiction with the
animal.
C.   An owner of an animal declared vicious, aggressive, or destructive shall
provide proof of liability insurance and a veterinarian’s certificate of
spaying or neutering to the town enforcement agent upon demand, when
applicable.
D.   No person shall prevent or attempt to prevent inspection of an animal
declared vicious, aggressive, or destructive or the premises where the animal
is kept.
E.   When the owner of an animal is notified that the town enforcement agent is
evaluating an animal or wants to evaluate an animal to determine if the animal
is vicious, aggressive, or destructive, the owner of the animal shall present
the animal for inspection within 24 hours of a request by the town enforcement
agent. The owner shall not sell, give away, hide or otherwise prevent the town
enforcement agent from making an evaluation of the animal.
F.   Violation of this section is a class 1 misdemeanor.
6-7-10 Quarantine of biting animals; reporting; handling and destruction;
exception; classification
A.   Any unvaccinated dog or cat that bites any person shall be confined and
quarantined in a shelter approved by the town enforcement agent or, upon
request of and at the expense of the owner, at a veterinary hospital, for a
period of not less than ten days, except that an unvaccinated cat that bites a
member of the cat owner’s household may be quarantined at the home of the
owner, or where the cat is harbored or maintained, with the consent of and in a
manner prescribed by the town enforcement agent.
B.   If a dog that bites any person is properly vaccinated pursuant to
chapter 6-3, the dog may be confined and quarantined for the ten-day period at
the home of the dog’s owner or wherever the dog is harbored and maintained with
the consent of and in a manner prescribed by the town enforcement agent.
C.   Any domestic animal other than a dog, a cat, or livestock that bites any
person shall be confined and quarantined in a shelter approved by the town
enforcement agent or, upon the request of and at the expense of the owner, at a
veterinary hospital, for a period of not less than 14 days.
D.   A caged or pet rodent or rabbit that bites a person may be confined and
quarantined for the 14-day period at the home of the owner or where it is
harbored or maintained with the consent of and in a manner prescribed by the
town enforcement agent.
E.   Livestock that bites any person shall be confined and quarantined in a
manner regulated by the Arizona department of agriculture for a period of not
less than 14 days.
F.   Whenever an animal bites any person, the incident shall be reported to the
town enforcement agent immediately by any person having direct knowledge.
G.   The town enforcement agent may destroy any animal confined and quarantined
pursuant to this section prior to the termination of the minimum confinement
period for laboratory examination for rabies if:
   1.   The animal shows clear clinical signs of rabies; and
   2.   One of the following occurs:
      a.   The owner of the animal consents to its destruction; or
      b.   A court orders the animal’s destruction.
H.   The owner of any animal confined and quarantined pursuant to this section
shall be responsible for any fees incurred by the town enforcement agent for
the impounding, sheltering, and disposition of the animal.
I.   Any animal quarantined pursuant to this section may be impounded and kept
beyond the quarantine period pending the resolution of any criminal complaint
or any hearing requested pursuant to section
6-7-5 arising out of or connected with the biting incident, provided that such
complaint or request for hearing is filed within 10 days of the biting
incident.
J.   This section does not apply to a police dog that bites any person if the
bite occurs while the dog is under proper law enforcement supervision and the
care of a licensed veterinarian, except that the law enforcement agency shall
notify the town enforcement agent if the dog exhibits any abnormal behavior and
shall make the dog available for examination at any reasonable time.
K.   Failure to comply with this section is a class 1 misdemeanor.
Ordinance 2018.004 added the exception to paragraph A
Ordinance 2021.005 amended the cross-reference and the time limit in paragraph
I
6-7-11 Duty to report animal’s status; effect
A.   Any person keeping, controlling, harboring, or otherwise having under
control any animal that has been found to be vicious, aggressive, destructive
or dangerous by another jurisdiction, shall report the animal’s status to the
town enforcement agent within ten days of the animal’s relocation to the town.
B.   The animal shall be subject to all provisions set forth in
chapter 6-7 governing vicious, aggressive, or destructive animals as though the
animal had been declared vicious, aggressive, or destructive by the town.
C.   Failure to comply with this section is a class 1 misdemeanor.
Ordinance 2018.004 added section 6-7-11
Ordinance 2021.005 renumbered and amended the section and added paragraph C
CHAPTER 6-8.
REMOVAL, IMPOUNDMENT, FORFEITURE AND DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS
Ordinance 2021.005 deleted sections 6-8-8 and 6-8-9, amended and restructured
sections 6-8-3 through 6-8-7 as sections 6-8-3 through 6-8-9, and amended
section 6-8-10
6-8-1 Impoundment of unvaccinated and unlicensed dogs; vaccination; costs
A.   Any town enforcement agent may apprehend and impound any unvaccinated or
unlicensed dog.
B.   The town enforcement agent is hereby authorized to have a licensed
veterinarian vaccinate and issue a vaccination certificate for an impounded
unvaccinated dog.
C.   The owner of any dog impounded under this section may reclaim the dog at
any time upon proof of ownership and payment of all costs and fees associated
with the impoundment.
6-8-2 Impoundment of dogs at large; impoundment period; notice; costs
A.   Any town enforcement agent may impound or cause to be impounded any dog
running at large contrary to the provisions of
chapter 6-4.
B.   Each dog or cat that is impounded with a microchip or wearing a license or
any other discernible form of owner identification shall be kept and maintained
at a shelter approved by the town enforcement agent for a minimum of 120 hours,
unless the animal is claimed or surrendered by its owner prior to the
expiration of the impoundment period. The town enforcement agent shall promptly
notify the animal’s owner, in person or by written notice, of the impoundment.
The owner may reclaim the animal within 120 hours from the date of the actual
notice or mailing of notice, upon proof of ownership, current rabies
vaccination and license, and payment of all costs and fees associated with the
impoundment.
C.   Except as otherwise set forth in this section, each dog or cat that is
impounded without any discernable form of owner identification, shall be kept
and maintained at a shelter approved by the town enforcement agent for a
minimum of 72 hours, unless the animal is claimed or surrendered by its owner
prior to the expiration of the impoundment period. The owner may reclaim the
dog within the 72-hour impoundment period by securing a vaccination and a
license for the dog, providing proof of ownership, and paying all costs and
fees associated with the impoundment.
D.   Any impounded cat that is eligible for a community cat program and that
will be returned to the vicinity where the cat was originally captured may be
exempted from the mandatory holding period required by this section. For
purposes of this paragraph, “eligible” means a cat that is free-roaming, lacks
discernible identification, is of sound health, and possesses its claws.
6-8-3 Impoundment of animals subject to cruelty or neglect
Any town enforcement agent is authorized and empowered to remove and impound
any animal in plain view, or subject to a valid search warrant, if the agent
has probable cause to believe any of the following:
A.   That an animal is in distress caused by mistreatment, tie out, exposure to
the elements, extremes of temperature, lack of adequate ventilation or
drainage, lack of sanitation, deprivation of proper food or potable water,
restraint, restriction of movement, confinement, lack of sufficient exercise
space, constrictive gear, injury, illness, physical impairment, hoarding
conditions as described in section
6-6-5, or parasites.
B.   That an animal’s well-being is threatened by a dangerous condition or
circumstance and the agent has reason to believe either:
   1.   That the distress of the animal or the dangerous condition or
circumstance was caused or allowed to be caused by the willful act or omission
or negligence of the owner; or
   2.   That it is likely the animal would be in distress from any cause, or
its well-being would be threatened by any dangerous condition or circumstance
if the owner retains ownership of the animal.
Ordinance 2018.004 added “evaluation” to the title of Section 6-8-3 and added
paragraph D
Ordinance 2021.005 removed “vicious or destructive animals; evaluation” from
the title of section 6-8-3, deleted paragraphs C, D.1, and D.2, and amended
paragraph D to create section 6-8-4
6-8-4 Impoundment of vicious, aggressive or destructive animals
Any town enforcement agent is authorized and empowered to remove and impound
any animal in plain view, or subject to a valid search warrant, if the agent
has probable cause to believe that an animal is vicious, aggressive, or
destructive.
Ordinance 2021.005 added section 6-8-4 by amending paragraph D of former
section 6-8-3
6-8-5 Notice to owner regarding impoundment
A.   Whenever the town removes or impounds any animal pursuant to section
6-8-3 or
6-8-4, if the owner is known, and unless the owner signs a statement
permanently relinquishing ownership of the animal to the town enforcement
agent, written notice shall be provided by one or more of the following means:
   1.   Personal service of the notice on the owner.
   2.   Leaving a copy of the notice with a person of suitable discretion at
the owner’s residence or place of business.
   3.   Affixing the notice in a conspicuous place where the animal was found.
   4.   Mailing a copy of the notice to the owner’s last-known address by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested.
B.   The notice required by this section shall contain, at a minimum, the
following information:
   1.   The town’s intent to file, within ten days of the owner’s receipt of
the written notice, a written request with the town magistrate for a hearing to
determine if the animal should be returned to the owner or forfeited to the
town enforcement agent.
   2.   The owner’s right to present witnesses and be represented by an
attorney at the hearing.
   3.   The bond amount required pursuant to section
6-8-6, along with a statement that if the bond is not posted within ten days of
the owner’s receipt of the written notice, the animal shall be deemed forfeited
to the town enforcement agent.
Ordinance 2021.005 renumbered the section and amended its title and paragraphs
A and B.3
6-8-6 Bond
Whenever the town removes or impounds any animal pursuant to section
6-8-3 or
6-8-4 pending a hearing to determine if the animal should be returned to the
owner or forfeited to the town enforcement agent, the owner must post 20 days
of impoundment fees in advance as a bond to defray some of the costs of
boarding and impoundment, and any necessary veterinary care for the animal.
Ordinance 2021.005 renumbered the section and amended the cross-reference
6-8-7 Hearing
Upon receipt of a written request for a hearing regarding an animal impounded
pursuant to section
6-8-3 or
6-8-4, the court shall set a hearing within 15 business days.
Ordinance 2021.005 renumbered paragraph A of former section 6-8-6 as section 6-
8-7 and amended the cross-reference
6-8-8 Rules of hearing; remedies; testimony of defendant; appeal
A.   The hearing shall be held in an informal manner and is open to the public.
Oral and documentary evidence may be taken from any interested party or witness
and considered in making a determination. The rules of evidence do not apply,
and hearsay is admissible.
B.   Any owner who fails to appear after notice may be deemed to have waived
any right to introduce evidence.
C.   The town enforcement agent may be represented by the town attorney or
designee.
D.   The owner may be represented by counsel at the animal owner’s cost.
E.   Use of the civil procedures and remedies provided for in this chapter
shall neither require nor preclude other enforcement action on the same facts,
including a criminal prosecution of the owner. The civil procedures and
remedies provided for in this chapter are remedial and not punitive, and are
not precluded by an acquittal or conviction in a criminal proceeding.
F.   This chapter shall not be construed as precluding the destruction of any
animal if destruction is otherwise authorized by law, nor shall anything in
this chapter be construed as precluding the spaying or neutering of any animal.
If any provision of this chapter is in conflict with any other provisions of
this code, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling.
G.   If a defendant testifies at a hearing held pursuant to this section, the
defendant does not, by so testifying, waive the right to remain silent during
the trial; and if the defendant does testify at the hearing, neither this fact
nor the defendant’s testimony at the hearing shall be mentioned at the trial
unless the defendant testifies at the trial concerning the same matters.
H.   Appeal of the decision of the town magistrate shall be by way of special
action to the superior court on the record of the hearing. The appealing party
shall bear the cost of preparing the record of the hearing on appeal. No appeal
shall be taken later than 10 days after the town magistrate’s decision. If
forfeiture is ordered, the town magistrate may order the owner to post a bond
equivalent to 60 days of impoundment costs in order to perfect the appeal.
Notice of the amount due shall be given to the owner by the town magistrate at
the time of the hearing if forfeiture is ordered.
Ordinance 2019.005 amended paragraph H to change “30 days” to “10 days”
Ordinance 2021.005 deleted paragraph J and renumbered paragraphs B through I of
former section 6-8-6 as section 6-8-8, and amended paragraph H
6-8-9 Findings of court after hearing
A.   If the town magistrate finds from a preponderance of the evidence that the
animal was subject to cruelty or neglect under the circumstances set forth in
section
6-8-3 (A) or (B), the town magistrate shall order the animal forfeited to the
town enforcement agent.
B.   If the animal is impounded to determine if the animal is vicious,
aggressive, or destructive, the town magistrate shall make a finding in
accordance with section
6-7-5(B).
C.   Unless good cause is shown, the animal’s owner shall be responsible for
all fees associated with the impoundment of an animal pursuant to sections
6-8-3 and
6-8-4, including without limitation veterinary, removal, impoundment, boarding,
microchipping, and disposition fees, until a final decision by the town
magistrate, including the pendency of an appeal. No magistrate may waive or
reduce any veterinary, impound or board fees resulting from the animal’s
impoundment unless the owner prevails at the hearing.
Ordinance 2019.005 amended subparagraph C.5 to change “tattoo” to “microchip”
Ordinance 2019.005 amended subparagraph C.8 to remove “tattooed”
Ordinance 2021.005 renumbered the section as 6-8-9 and replaced paragraphs B,
C, D with revised paragraphs B and C
6-8-10 Duty to produce; exemption; classification
A.   An owner of an animal charged with a violation of
chapter 6-6 or
chapter 6-7, or of an animal quarantined pursuant to section
6-7-10, shall produce that animal for inspection or impoundment upon the
request of any town enforcement agent.
B.   This section shall not apply where the violation in question occurred when
the animal bit a member of the owner’s household.
C.   Violation of this section is a class 1 misdemeanor.
Ordinance 2021.005 amended the cross-reference in paragraph A
6-8-11 Authority to microchip
The town enforcement agent is authorized and empowered to place or cause to be
placed an identity-tracing microchip in any animal impounded under this title.
6-8-12 Payment of costs and fees associated with impoundment
Except as otherwise provided in this title, all fees associated with the
impoundment of an animal for any reason under the authority of this title,
including without limitation veterinary, removal, impoundment, boarding,
microchipping, and disposition fees, shall be paid by the animal’s owner.
6-8-13 Disposition of animals
A.   Any animal forfeited, abandoned, ownerless or unclaimed, and any other
animals to be permanently disposed of by the town enforcement agent pursuant to
this title shall be disposed of by one of the following methods.
   1.   Placed by adoption in a suitable home.
   2.   Transferred to a legally incorporated humane society or other nonprofit
corporate animal-welfare organization devoted to the welfare, protection and
humane treatment of animals. Transferred animals shall be disposed of by one of
the following methods.
      a.   Placed by adoption in a suitable home after first being sterilized.
      b.   Released as part of a community cat program.
      c.   Humanely destroyed.
   3.   Humanely destroyed.
B.   As a condition of any transfer of animals pursuant to this section, the
town enforcement agent shall verify that any organization that receives animals
is organized for the pursuit of animal welfare activities, is actively engaged
in those activities, does not breed nor release unsterilized animals, releases
animals only through community cat programs or through adoption or fostering
into suitable homes after first being sterilized, and complies with the
sterilization and placement provisions of this title, and all applicable laws.
Verification shall include announced and unannounced inspections of the
organization’s facilities and records. The town enforcement agent may repossess
any animals and their offspring from any organization that is not in compliance
with these conditions, and shall repossess these animals if the organization is
not in compliance with the mandates set forth in subparagraph (A)(2) of this
section, or if the organization or its personnel violate a cruelty law. Any
organization wishing to receive animals must agree in writing to the terms of
this section.
CHAPTER 6-9.
EXCESSIVE NOISE CAUSED BY ANIMALS OR BIRDS
6-9-1 Excessive noise prohibited; classification
A.   It is unlawful to own, possess, harbor or control any animal or bird which
frequently or for continuous duration howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes
other sounds, without provocation, if the sounds are clearly audible beyond the
property line of the property on which they are conducted and they disturb the
public peace, quiet or comfort of the neighboring inhabitants.
B.   If the owner of the animal or bird which has engaged in an activity
prohibited by this chapter cannot be determined, the owner, lessee or occupant
of the property on which the activity is located shall be deemed responsible
for the violation.
C.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, violation of this section is
a civil infraction.
D.   Violation of this section is a class 2 misdemeanor if the owner of the
animal has been found responsible or guilty of a violation of this section
within the 12-month period prior to the date of offense.
6-9-2 Exemptions
Persons wishing to continue activities which constitute a violation of this
chapter but were commenced prior to January 4, 1994, may seek an exemption from
the town magistrate. The exemption may be granted if the magistrate finds that
strict application of this chapter would cause undue hardship and that there is
no reasonable or productive alternative method of engaging in the activity.
CHAPTER 6-10. PET STORES
Ordinance 2023.037 added Chapter 6-10
6-10-1 Purpose
This chapter is intended to carry out the provisions of Arizona Revised
Statutes, Title 44, Chapter 11, Article 17 (A.RS. § 44-1799 et seq.), which
sets forth the regulations for Pet Dealers.
6-10-2 Definitions
In this chapter, unless the context or definitions in A.R.S. § 44-1799 indicate
otherwise, the following terms or phrases are defined as follows:
A.   “Clinically ill” means an illness that is apparent to a veterinarian based
on the veterinarian’s observation, examination, or testing of an animal or on a
review of the animal’s medical records.
B.   “Nonelective surgical procedure” means a surgical procedure that is
necessary according to commonly accepted standards of veterinary medicine to
preserve or restore the health of the cat or dog, to prevent the animal from
experiencing pain or discomfort, or to correct a condition that would interfere
with the cat’s or dog's ability to walk, run or jump or to otherwise function
in a normal manner.
C.   “Pet dealer” means a person who owns a pet store.
D.   “Pet store” means a commercial establishment that engages in a for-profit
business of selling at retail cats, dogs or other animals, but does not include
commercial livestock operations and commercial livestock auction markets. “Pet
store” does not mean a publicly operated pound or a private, charitable not-
for-profit humane society or any animal adoption activity that a pound or
humane society conducts off site at any pet store or other commercial
enterprise.
E.   “Purchaser” means a person who purchases any cat or dog without intent to
resell.
6-10-3 Initial veterinary inspection
A.   A veterinarian, who is licensed pursuant to A.RS. § 32-2212, shall examine
all cats and dogs that are received by a pet dealer before the cat or dog is
placed for sale.
B.   If the veterinarian determines that a cat or dog is afflicted with a
contagious disease, the cat or dog may be returned to the source or kept by the
pet dealer. If the pet dealer keeps the cat or dog, the pet dealer shall cage
the cat or dog separately from healthy animals and shall house and handle the
cat or dog in a manner that will minimize the likelihood of contagion.
6-10-4 Information statement; purchaser rights; notice
A.   At the time of sale, each pet dealer shall give the purchaser of a cat or
dog a written statement that contains the following information:
   1.   The date of the animal's birth, if known, the state in which the animal
was born, if known, and the date the pet dealer received the animal.
   2.   The immunizations and deworming treatments that have been administered
to the animal as of the time of sale, if known, including the dates of
administration and the type and brand of vaccine or deworming treatment.
   3.   The breed, sex, color, and other identifying marks apparent at the time
of sale. If the animal is from a source that is licensed by the United States
department of agriculture, the individual identifying tag, tattoo, or color
number for the animal shall be included. If the breed is unknown or mixed, this
fact shall be stated.
   4.   Any veterinary treatment or medication that the animal received while
in the possession of the pet dealer and either of the following:
      a.   A statement signed by the pet dealer and the purchaser at the time
of sale that contains all of the following:
         i.   A statement that a veterinarian examined the animal and the
animal has no apparent disease or illness.
         ii.   A statement that a veterinarian examined the animal and at the
time of the examination the animal had no apparent congenital or hereditary
condition that would adversely affect the health of the animal at the time of
sale or that is likely to adversely affect the health of the animal in the
future.
      b.   A record of any known disease or illness or any hereditary or
congenital condition that adversely affects the health of the animal at the
time of sale or that is likely to adversely affect the health of the animal in
the future. The record shall include a statement that is signed by a
veterinarian who is licensed pursuant to A.RS. § 32-2212, that recommends
necessary treatment, if any, and that verifies that the disease, illness, or
condition does not require hospitalization or nonelective surgical procedures
and is not likely to require hospitalization or nonelective surgical procedures
in the future. A veterinarian's statement is not required for intestinal or
external parasites. The pet dealer and the purchaser shall sign the statement
required by this paragraph.
B.   The purchaser shall acknowledge in writing that the purchaser has received
the information required by paragraph A .
C.   In addition to information required to be given to a purchaser pursuant to
paragraph A, at the time of sale and on request of the purchaser, a pet dealer
that sells a cat or dog shall provide the prospective purchaser with written
notice of the purchaser's rights. The notice shall be a legible copy of A.R.S.
§ 44-1799 et seq.
D.   A pet dealer shall post the following notice within close proximity of the
cages or enclosures in which cats or dogs are offered for sale:
   Pursuant to Title 44, Chapter 11, Article 17, Arizona Revised Statutes,
information on the source of the cat or dog and any veterinary treatment
received by the cat or dog is available for review. You are entitled to a copy
of the law describing your rights as a consumer.
6-10-5 Record keeping
A.   A pet dealer shall maintain a written record on the health, status, and
disposition of each cat and dog at the time of sale for at least one year after
the cat or dog is sold or as otherwise provided by law.
B.   The records shall contain all of the information that is required by
Section
6-10-4 and shall be made available to town enforcement agents, law enforcement
officers, and representatives of the county health or environmental services
department for inspection during normal business hours.
6-10-6 Animal care requirements; violation; classification
A.   A pet dealer shall do the following:
   1.   Maintain facilities in which cats or dogs are housed in a sanitary
condition.
   2.   Provide cats or dogs with potable water and adequate nutrition.
   3.   Provide adequate space that is appropriate to the age, size, weight,
species and breed of cat or dog. For the purposes of this paragraph, “adequate
space” means sufficient space for the cat or dog to experience normal body
movements without having to make contact with the sides or top of the
enclosure, including the ability to stand up, sit down, turn about freely, and
relax in a natural position.
   4.   If cats or dogs are housed on wire flooring, provide a resting board, a
floormat or another similar device that is maintained in a sanitary condition
and that allows the cat or dog to rest off of the wire flooring.
   5.   If a cat or dog is afflicted with a contagious disease, handle the cat
or dog in a manner that is required by Section
6-10-3.
   6.   Promptly provide appropriate veterinary care when it is necessary.
B.   A pet dealer shall not offer for sale a cat or dog that is less than eight
weeks old.
C.   A pet dealer who violates paragraph A of this section is guilty of a Class
1 misdemeanor.
6-10-7 Pet stores; pet dealers; prohibitions on dog and cat purchases;
recordkeeping
A.   A pet store or pet dealer may not obtain a dog or cat for resale or sell
or offer for sale any dog or cat obtained from a person who is required to be
licensed by the pet dealer regulations of the United States department of
agriculture under the Animal Welfare Act (7 United States Code §§ 2131 through
2159) if any of the following applies:
   1.   The person is not currently licensed by the United States Department of
Agriculture under the Animal Welfare Act (7 United States Code §§ 2131 through
2159).
   2.   Within two years before obtaining the dog or cat, the person commits a
direct violation of any of the pet dealer regulations of the United States
Department of Agriculture under the Animal Welfare Act (7 United States Code §§
2131 through 2159).
   3.   The person receives an indirect no access violation on each of the two
most recent inspection reports issued by the United States Department of
Agriculture under the Animal Welfare Act (7 United States Code §§ 2131 through
2159).
   4.   The person commits three or more indirect violations of the pet dealer
regulations of the United States Department of Agriculture during the two-year
period before obtaining the dog or cat for violations relating to the health or
welfare of the animal and the violations were not administrative in nature. The
indirect violations described in this paragraph do not include a violation
described in subparagraph 3 of this paragraph.
B.   A pet store or pet dealer may not obtain a dog or cat for resale or sell
or offer for sale any dog or cat obtained from a person who directly or
indirectly obtained a dog or cat from a person described in paragraph A of this
section. A pet store or pet dealer is presumed to have acted in good faith and
to have satisfied its obligation to ascertain whether a person meets the
criteria described in paragraph A of this section if, when placing an order to
obtain a dog or cat for sale or resale, the pet store or pet dealer conducts a
search for inspection reports of the breeder on the animal care information
system search tool maintained by the United States Department of Agriculture.
C.   Notwithstanding paragraphs A and B of this section, a pet store or pet
dealer may obtain a dog or cat for resale or sell or offer for sale any dog or
cat obtained from a publicly operated pound or a private, charitable nonprofit
humane society or from any animal adoption activity conducted by a pound or
humane society.
D.   A pet dealer shall maintain records verifying its compliance with this
section for at least two years after obtaining the dog or cat to be sold or
offered for sale. Records maintained pursuant to this paragraph shall be open
to inspection on request by a town enforcement agent.
E.   A pet dealer shall display the source of any dog or cat offered for sale
by providing the name of the breeder of the animal, the United States
Department of Agriculture license number of the breeder if the animal is from a
breeder that is licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture and the
United States Department of Agriculture website where information about the
breeder may be obtained. The pet dealer shall display the information described
in this paragraph on both of the following:
   1.   The cage or enclosure for each animal.
   2.   All printed or electronic marketing materials about a specific dog or
cat that has been obtained by the pet dealer and that is being offered for
sale.
6-10-8 Civil Penalties; enforcement actions
A.   Except as provided in paragraph B or C of this section, a pet dealer who
violates this chapter is subject to a civil penalty of not more than one
thousand dollars per violation.
B.   Any violation of Section
6-10-7 by a pet store or pet dealer or a violation of Section
6-10-7 by someone who should have known the dog or cat was obtained for sale or
resale shall have the following penalties:
   1.   For a first violation, a civil penalty of not more than one thousand
dollars per violation.
   2.   For a second violation within a five-year period, a civil penalty of
not more than two thousand five hundred dollars per violation.
   3.   For a third or subsequent violation within a five-year period:
      a.   A civil penalty of not more than five thousand dollars per
violation.
      b.   An order entered by the court enjoining the pet store or pet dealer
from selling or offering for sale, for up to three years, a dog or cat obtained
from any person other than a publicly operated pound or a private, charitable
nonprofit humane society or from any animal adoption activity conducted by a
pound or humane society.
C.   In an action brought to enforce Section
6-10-7:
   1.   A violation is a subsequent violation if it occurs within a five-year
period after a final judgment or order that the pet store or pet dealer
knowingly violated Section
6-10-7 or A.RS. § 44-1799.10, paragraph A or B or should have known of the
violation.
   2.   In addition to any other defense that may be raised, a pet store or pet
dealer is presumed to have acted in good faith and to have satisfied its
obligation to ascertain whether a person meets the criteria described in
Section
6-10-7 if, when placing an order to obtain a dog or cat for sale or resale, the
pet store or pet dealer conducts a search for inspection reports of the breeder
on the animal care information system search tool maintained by the United
States Department of Agriculture.
   3.   Each order placed by a pet store or pet dealer to obtain a dog or cat
for sale or resale shall be considered a single act, regardless of the number
of dogs or cats obtained in the order.
D.   This section does not prohibit prosecution for criminal violations.
TITLE 7
BUILDING
Title 7 was adopted by Ordinance 95.32. Ordinance 2007.22 changed “building
department” to “building safety department” throughout Title 7.
CHAPTER 7-1.   BUILDING CODES
CHAPTER 7-2.   BUILDING PERMITS
CHAPTER 7-3.    [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 7-4.   SOLAR ENERGY UTILIZATION CREDIT
CHAPTER 7-5.   SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION SITE REQUIREMENTS
CHAPTER 7-1.
BUILDING CODES
7-1-1 Purpose
A.   The Marana building code shall have the following purposes:
   1.   Regulate the site preparation and construction, alteration, moving,
demolition, repair, use and occupancy of buildings, structures and building
service equipment within the jurisdiction;
   2.   Provide for the issuance of permits and collection of fees;
   3.   Provide for a building codes advisory board;
   4.   Provide for penalties for the violation of building codes.
7-1-2 Building codes adopted
A.   The Marana building code consists of the following code documents
incorporated by this reference in this title, all of which are on file with the
town clerk’s office:
   1.   The 2024 international building code, with local amendments.
   2.   The 2024 international existing building code, with local amendments.
   3.   The 2024 international plumbing code, with local amendments.
   4.   The 2024 international residential code, with local amendments.
   5.   The 2024 international mechanical code, with local amendments.
   6.   The 2024 international property maintenance code, with local
amendments.
   7.   The 2018 international energy conservation code, with local amendments.
   8.   The 2023 national electrical code, with local amendments.
   9.   The 2024 international fire code, with local amendments.
   10.   The 2024 international fuel gas code, with local amendments.
   11.   The 2024 international swimming pool and spa code, with local
amendments.
B.   The Marana building code adopts by reference the 2021 Town of Marana
outdoor lighting code, which is on file with the town clerk’s office.
Section 7-1-2 was adopted by Ordinance 2001.04 and revised by Ordinances
2006.16, 2006.33, 2007.22, 2013.007, 2019.011, 2021.007, and 2025.013. For
prior history, see Ordinance 95.32 and 96.34. The local amendments are found
here.
The 2021 Marana outdoor lighting code is found here.
7-1-3 Copies on file
Three copies of the Marana building code are on file in the office of the town
clerk and available for public inspection during regular working hours.
7-1-4 Building official designated
The building official, or his or her duly authorized representative, is the
authority charged with the administration and enforcement of the Marana
building code. The building official may appoint an assistant building
official, inspection team leaders and other employees as shall be authorized
from time to time.
Section 7-1-4 was revised by Ordinance 2006.16
7-1-5 Violation a civil infraction
It shall be a civil infraction for any person, firm or corporation to violate
any of the provisions of this title. Civil infractions shall be enforced as
provided in
chapter 5-7 of this code. Each day a violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
Section 7-1-5 was revised by Ordinance 2006.16
7-1-6 Administrative appeal process
A.   Whenever a violation of this building code is determined, whether during
construction or at the plan review stage, and the applicant wishes to appeal
the decision of the staff because of code interpretation, unreasonable hardship
or other acceptable reasons, the applicant may appeal to the building official
as follows:
   1.   The applicant shall file a written appeal on the forms provided by the
building official. If the building official rules in favor of the applicant,
the issue is closed.
   2.   If an appeal is denied by the building official, the applicant shall
either comply with the decision or appeal to the board of adjustment in
accordance with the building code.
Section 7-1-6 was revised and simplified by Ordinance 2006.16. Ordinance
2019.011 changed “board of appeals” to “board of adjustment in subparagraph
A.2.
CHAPTER 7-2.
BUILDING PERMITS
Section 7-2-1 was revised by Ordinance 2006.16.
7-2-1 Application requirements
A.   Any person, partnership, firm or corporation desiring to construct, erect,
enlarge, substantially modify or move any residential building or mobile home
or other structure shall first make application for a building permit to the
building safety department and shall not commence that construction without
first obtaining a building permit from the town.
B.   Any person, partnership, firm or corporation desiring to erect, construct,
enlarge, move or substantially modify any commercial, industrial, quasi-public
or public building or structure shall first make application to the building
safety department for a separate building permit for each building or structure
and shall not undertake that construction, enlargement, movement or
modification without first obtaining a building permit from the town.
C.   All applications for a building permit shall be accompanied by plans which
have been drawn to scale and which show the actual dimensions of the lot to be
built upon, the size and location of existing buildings with respect to front,
rear and side property lines, and the location and layout of proposed off-
street parking areas.
D.   Plans shall provide sufficient details of proposed structural features,
and electrical, plumbing, and mechanical installations for review by the town
plans examiner to permit evaluation of their adequacy by the town building
inspector.
E.   The term “substantially modify” means the installation or removal of any
interior or exterior wall or the addition or replacement of any element of a
plumbing, mechanical or electrical system.
CHAPTER 7-3.
[RESERVED]
Chapter 7-3, formerly entitled “fees,” was superseded by Ordinance 2005.16,
which adopted various development-related fees by separate ordinance. See
Ordinance 82.05 and 89.10 for prior history.
CHAPTER 7-4.
SOLAR ENERGY UTILIZATION CREDIT
Chapter 7-4 was adopted by Ordinance 2001.23 and amended by Ordinance 2006.16
to remove water conservation credit. Chapter 7-4 sunsets on May 1, 2008 or when
cumulative credits of $300,000 are given. Chapter 7-4 was revised by Ordinance
2005.22. Former
chapter 7-4 (“Fiber Optics code”) was deleted by Ordinance 99.28.
7-4-1 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the use of solar energy utilization
within the town by reducing the permit fee for permits in accordance with the
currently adopted permit fee schedule.
Ordinance 2005.22 amended section
7-4-1 by adding the section number and heading and correcting a reference to
now-superseded
chapter 7-3 relating to fees. Ordinance 2006.16 removed the words “and water
conservation”
7-4-2 Credit program
A.   All single family residences within the town are eligible to apply for
solar energy utilization credits. Approval by the building official will be
based on the nature of the technologies to be used and if appropriate for the
site.
B.   Solar utilization for new construction will include photo voltaic
generation, whole house water heating and active solar heating. Passive solar
heating will be considered when designed and certified by a professional
engineer.
C.   Existing single family residences may add solar heating systems and photo
voltaic systems.
D.   Other systems not mentioned above may be evaluated by the building
official to receive credit. Decisions regarding credits may be appealed to the
town manager.
E.   The installations shall be reviewed and inspected per the building code.
If the applicant fails to install the system, the credits given shall be paid
to the town. The system shall be considered not installed if at the time of
intermediate inspections the system is not roughed in or at final inspections
the system is not operational. Final utility installation shall not be approved
until the fee is paid or the system is installed and approved.
Ordinance 2005.22 amended section
7-4-2 by adding the section number and heading and inserting “town manager” for
“development services director”. Ordinance 2006.16 removed various references
to water conservation credits
CHAPTER 7-5.
SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION SITE REQUIREMENTS
Ordinance 2006.16 renamed Chapter 7-5 from “additional building requirements”
and deleted section
7-5-1 entitled “location of gasoline pumps”
7-5-1 Sewage disposal
A.   Septic tank systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the standards of the Arizona department of health services and the applicable
county health department, and compliance with those standards shall be
certified by the appropriate state or county agency or the town engineer.
B.   Sewer systems shall be designed, constructed, and reviewed in accordance
with the adopted plumbing code and other applicable state and local laws and
regulations. Before a building permit is issued, all connections to any sewer
system must be approved in writing by the wastewater utility that owns and
operates the affected sewer system.
Ordinance 2006.16 renumbered and renamed Section 7-5-1, deleted “sewerage
systems and/or” from the beginning of paragraph A and added paragraph B.
Ordinance 2016.009 made minor revisions to this section to update and clarify
wastewater utility and regulatory review references.
7-5-2 Sanitation and trash
A.   Each construction site shall be provided with one portable toilet per site
or one for every 15 workers in a commercial site or subdivision. Work performed
on a residence by or under contract with the owner is exempt.
B.   Construction debris shall be contained and controlled on each construction
site. A roll-off or similar container shall be provided at each site. The
permit holder shall collect debris that has blown off the construction site.
Debris shall not be buried on site and shall be removed to a solid waste
landfill registered with the Arizona department of environmental quality
pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-747.
Section 7-5-2 was added by Ordinance 2006.16.
TITLE 8
TRANSACTION PRIVILEGE TAX
Title 8 was adopted by Ordinance 96.03. See Ordinance 79-3 for prior history.
CHAPTER 8-1.   ADOPTION OF TAX CODE
CHAPTER 8-1.
ADOPTION OF TAX CODE
The Town of Marana’s tax rates and a link to the Model City Tax Code may be
found here.
That certain document known as “the tax code of the town of Marana, Arizona”,
three copies of which are on file in the office of the town clerk and which has
been made a public record by resolution, and any amendments to it, is hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part of this town code as if fully set out in
this title.
TITLE 9
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 9-1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 9-2.   BUSINESS LICENSES
CHAPTER 9-3.   PEDDLERS
CHAPTER 9-4.   SWAP MEETS
CHAPTER 9-5.   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
CHAPTER 9-6.   CLOTHING AND CONDUCT FOR QUALIFIED ESTABLISHMENTS
CHAPTER 9-7.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 9-8.   LIQUOR LICENSES
CHAPTER 9-9.   VIDEO SERVICE
CHAPTER 9-10.   SURFACE MINING AND LAND RECLAMATION
CHAPTER 9-11.   SALE OF PRODUCTS CONTAINING PSEUDOEPHEDRINE
CHAPTER 9-12.   COMMERCIAL FILMING AND PHOTOGRAPHY PERMITS
CHAPTER 9-13.   MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
CHAPTER 9-14.   SHORT-TERM AND VACATION RENTALS
CHAPTER 9-15. SOLICITING IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS
Title 9 was adopted by Ordinance 96.09. See Ordinance 93.02 for prior history.
Ordinance 2009.14 made revisions throughout title 9 to transfer the licensing
duties from the town clerk to the license inspector. See Appendix (Table of
Revisions) for affected sections.
CHAPTER 9-1.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Ordinance 2019.012 added Chapter 9-1
9-1-1 Purpose and effect of title
A.   This title is enacted to assist businesses, citizens, and the town to
collect and provide accurate information on the types and locations of
businesses in the town, to help existing business growth and services, to
assist in new business planning, and to protect the public from fraud and harm.
B.   Persons possessing a town business license of any type shall remain
subject to all applicable local, state, and federal laws, ordinances, rules,
and regulations, including all applicable revenue, regulatory, and zoning laws.
9-1-2 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply throughout this title unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
A.   “Applicant” means the person who applies for a license pursuant to this
title.
B.   “Business” means all activities or acts, including professions, trades and
occupations, personal or corporate, engaged in and caused to be engaged in with
the object of gain, benefit, or advantage, either direct or indirect, but not
casual activities or sales.
C.   “Casual activities or sales” means those transactions which are isolated
sales of goods or services by a person who is not engaged in business and does
not represent himself or herself as being in business, and includes
transactions where persons sell personal property within the confines of that
person’s residential premises, so long as the activity neither exceeds three
consecutive days or is performed on more than four occasions within a one-year
period.
D.   “Controlling person” means a natural person who either (A) has a 10% or
greater interest in the ownership or earnings of the business, or (B) is any of
the following:
   1.   An officer, director, or any stockholder who owns 10% or more, of a
corporation licensee or applicant;
   2.   A general partner of a limited partnership licensee or applicant or
partner of a non-limited partnership licensee or applicant;
   3.   An officer, president, or secretary of a limited liability company or
corporation licensee or applicant; or
   4.   The sole proprietor of a sole proprietorship licensee or applicant.
E.   “Designated agent” means the person designated by the licensee or
applicant to receive notices from the town pursuant to this title.
F.   “Federally exempt organization” means an organization determined exempt
under 26 U.S.C. section 501(c) by the commissioner of the internal revenue
service.
G.   “Governmental entity” means the federal government, the state of Arizona,
any other state, and any political subdivision, department, or agency of any of
these governments.
H.   "Licensee" means the person who applied for a license pursuant to this
title and in whose name the license was issued by the town pursuant to this
title.
I.   “License inspector” means the town employee designated by the town manager
to administer and enforce the provisions of this title and any designees or
deputies designated by the license inspector or this chapter.
J.   “Natural person” means a human being, as distinguished from a person
created by operation of law (e.g., a corporation).
K.   “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, or broker.
L.   “Public educational entity” means any educational entity operated pursuant
to title 15 of the Arizona revised statutes.
M.   “Residential real property rental” means the business of offering for
rent, lease, or license a building or structure that is used for a home or
residence by one or more persons who maintain a household. This definition does
not include any of the following:
   1.   The use of a home or residence for business activities, including
assisted living or behavioral health residential facilities; or
   2.   The use of a home or residence for any other business operation that
does not meet this definition of residential real property rental.
N.   “Short-term vendor” means a person who engages in business in the town for
ten consecutive days or less at a time and includes vendors who participate in
special events in the town.
O.   “Temporary business license” means a business license issued to a short-
term vendor authorizing temporary business activity of ten consecutive days or
less.
Ordinance 2019.016 deleted a subparagraph from paragraph M that referred to
short term rentals for a period of 29 consecutive days or less, and renumbered
the other subparagraphs to conform
Ordinance 2019.016 added paragraph P
Ordinance 2023.009 amended paragraph H and repealed paragraph P
9-1-3 Conflicting provisions
If a provision of this chapter is in conflict with any other provision of this
title, the more specific provision shall apply and shall control over the
general provisions of this chapter.
9-1-4 Licenses not cumulative
Except as otherwise provided in this title, a licensee who holds a valid
license pursuant to any chapter in this title shall not be required to obtain
any additional license required by another chapter of this title for the same
business activity.
9-1-5 Powers and duties of license inspector
A.   It shall be the duty and responsibility of the license inspector to
interpret, administer, and enforce the provisions of this title, with the
assistance of deputy license inspectors and other town departments as
requested. Pursuant to this duty, the license inspector or designee shall
issue, renew, deny, suspend, or revoke licenses as required by this title.
B.   The license inspector may examine or cause to be examined all businesses
in the town to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this title,
including inspecting records and making sure that licenses are conspicuously
posted.
C.   The license inspector may make rules and regulations consistent with the
provisions of this title as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this
title.
On July 26, 2019, the town attorney made a scrivener’s error correction to make
“departments” plural in paragraph A, by authority of section
1-4-5
9-1-6 Deputy license inspectors
A.   Any peace officer is hereby designated a deputy to the license inspector
and is authorized and empowered to enforce the provisions of this title and to
issue citations for violations of it.
B.   Any code compliance officer, as defined in
chapter 1-9 of this code, is hereby designated a deputy to the license
inspector and is authorized and empowered to enforce the provisions of this
title that are classified as civil offenses and to issue citations for
violations of those civil offenses.
9-1-7 Classification; enforcement; continuing violations
A.   Except as otherwise provided in this title, whenever in this title any act
is prohibited or declared to be unlawful, or the doing of any act is required,
or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of that
provision is a civil infraction.
B.   This chapter may be enforced in any manner provided for by town ordinances
and state laws.
C.   Each day any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
CHAPTER 9-2.
BUSINESS LICENSES
Ordinance 2019.012 added Chapter 9-2. For prior history, see Ordinances 93.02,
96.09, 98.12, 2000.06, 2000.10, 2002.07, 2009.11, 2009.14, 2009.25, 2010.13,
2013.013, 2013.014, and 2014.021.
9-2-1 Business license required; non-transferability
A.   It is unlawful for any person to operate a business in the town without
first obtaining and maintaining a valid business license issued pursuant to the
applicable provisions of this title.
   1.   Notwithstanding the general applicability of this chapter to all
businesses in the town, massage establishments shall be governed by the
licensing requirements in
chapter 9-5, and sexually oriented businesses shall be governed by the
licensing requirements in
chapter 9-7.
B.   A separate business license is required for each business address where a
business is operated, and for each business under separate operation or
ownership at the same location.
C.   Any person who operates a business with a fixed location outside the town
limits, but who solicits business or advertises within the town, or delivers
products or performs services within the town, is required to obtain a license
pursuant to this section.
D.   All business licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are non-
transferable. Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in a business, a new
application must be submitted for that business and all provisions of this
chapter shall apply to the new application.
9-2-2 Exemptions; documentation
A.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   1.   Any person engaging in any business exempted from licensing by the
constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the state of
Arizona.
   2.   A federally exempt organization, governmental entity, or public
educational entity.
   3.   Casual activities or sales.
   4.   Residential real property rental.
   5.   Any business that is operated by a person who is under 19 years old and
operated only occasionally.
B.   Any person claiming an exemption from the licensing requirement pursuant
to subparagraphs A.1 or A.2 of this section shall file a signed statement with
the license inspector stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed. The
license inspector shall file the signed statement in lieu of issuing a license
to such person. If the license inspector subsequently obtains information that
the person is not entitled to the exemption, the license inspector may revoke
the person's exempt status after giving the person notice and a reasonable
opportunity for a hearing.
Ordinance 2024.021 added subparagraph A.5.
9-2-3 Federally exempt organization registration
A.   A federally exempt organization doing business within the town, to include
soliciting money, donations of money or property, or financial assistance of
any kind, or selling or distributing items of literature or merchandise to
persons other than members of that organization, shall register with the
license inspector on a form provided by the license inspector for that purpose.
B.   The license inspector shall not charge a fee to a federally exempt
organization registering under this section.
9-2-4 Application; fees
A.   Any person desiring to obtain a business license shall apply to the
license inspector on the form provided by the license inspector for that
purpose.
B.   Each application for a business license shall consist of, as applicable,
the following:
   1.   The name and exact nature or type of business being operated.
   2.   The location and address of the business.
   3.   The business owner’s name, address, and contact information.
   4.   If the applicant is an entity, the application shall include the names,
addresses, and contact information for all controlling persons and the
designated agent of the entity.
   5.   For individuals, proof required by A.R.S. § 41-1080 (A), that the
applicant is a citizen of the United States, or a non-citizen authorized to
work in the United States.
   6.   The transaction privilege tax license number for the business.
   7.   Proof of compliance with all regulations, if any, of the business being
operated, including but not limited to, possession of any required
certification, permit, or similar documentation.
   8.   Any additional information required by the license inspector.
C.   The applicant has an affirmative duty to supplement a pending application
with new information received subsequent to the date the application was
submitted to the town.
D.   Each application shall be accompanied by the applicable fee as set forth
in a fee schedule approved by the council and amended from time to time. The
license inspector will not process an application until the applicant has paid
the applicable fee.
Ordinance 2023.009 renumbered this section
9-2-5 License application investigation
A.   The town shall have a reasonable time within which to investigate each
business license application.
B.   The license inspector shall refer the application to the appropriate town
departments for investigation. Based on the investigation, the departments
shall recommend to the license inspector approval or denial of the business
license.
Ordinance 2023.009 renumbered this section
9-2-6 Issuance of license; term of license; mistake
A.   Upon completion of the license application investigation and the license
inspector’s determination that the applicant qualifies for a license, the
license inspector shall issue a business license to the applicant.
B.   The business license shall contain all of the following information:
   1.   The name of the licensed business.
   2.   The address where the business is to be transacted and carried on.
   3.   The date of the expiration of the license.
   4.   The type of business licensed.
   5.   Any other information necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
C.   Except for temporary business licenses, the business license shall remain
in effect for one year, unless sooner revoked or suspended by the license
inspector.
D.   In no case shall any mistake made by the town in issuing any license, or
collecting a fee for any license, prevent, prejudice, or stop the town from
revoking any license erroneously issued and refunding the fee collected, or
collecting the correct amount of fee or charge for any license.
Ordinance 2023.009 renumbered this section
9-2-7 License renewal
A.   Within one year of the issue date for the previously effective license,
all licensees under this chapter wishing to remain licensed, except for short-
term vendors who possess a temporary business license, shall submit the
applicable license renewal fee to the license inspector.
B.   If the renewal fee is submitted more than 15 days after the expiration of
the license, the licensee will also be assessed a late license renewal fee as
set forth in the fee schedule approved by the council and amended from time to
time.
C.   The license inspector will not renew a license until the licensee has paid
all applicable fees.
D.   The licensee shall also submit proof of continuing compliance with all
regulations, if any, of the business being operated, including but not limited
to, continued possession of any required certification, permit, or similar
documentation. The license inspector is authorized to investigate and obtain
necessary information to update the original license application and to
determine whether the license should be renewed. The license inspector may
refer the application to the appropriate town departments for investigation.
Based on the investigation, the departments shall recommend to the license
inspector approval or denial of the renewal of the business license. The town
shall have a reasonable time within which to investigate each business license
renewal.
E.   No license shall be renewed unless the licensee complies with all
provisions of this chapter.
Ordinance 2023.040 amended paragraph D
Ordinance 2023.009 renumbered this section
9-2-8 Posting and display of license
A.   Any business required to be licensed under this chapter shall keep the
license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises of the business.
B.   Notwithstanding paragraph A of this section, if the business is located in
a residence, the license shall be available for inspection.
Ordinance 2023.009 renumbered this section
9-2-9 Temporary business license
A.   A short-term vendor may apply for a temporary business license in lieu of
a business license with a one-year term. Except as otherwise set forth in this
section, the temporary business license shall be issued pursuant to and subject
to the provisions of this chapter.
B.   A temporary business license shall remain in effect for the time requested
by the short-term vendor, not to exceed ten consecutive days.
C.   A short-term vendor may reapply for a temporary business license at any
time that the short-term vendor wishes to do business within the town.
Ordinance 2023.009 renumbered this section
9-2-10 Grounds for denial, suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal of license
A license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be denied, revoked,
suspended, or denied renewal upon any one or more of the following grounds:
A.   The applicant or licensee is guilty of fraud, deceit, misrepresentation,
or material false statement in conducting the business, or in applying for or
obtaining a license.
B.   The applicant or licensee, or any controlling person has violated this
chapter, or any local, state, or federal law, regardless of the location at
which the violation occurred.
C.   The business has been conducted in an unlawful manner or in a manner that
constitutes a breach of the peace or a menace to the public health, safety, or
welfare.
D.   The applicant or licensee, or, if the applicant or licensee is not a
natural person, any controlling person, is delinquent in payment to the town of
any taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the
applicant or licensee, in relation to or arising out of any business activity
of the applicant or licensee.
E.   The license application is incomplete and the applicant fails to provide
the missing information within the timeframe set forth in a written notice
specifying the missing or incomplete information and provided to the applicant
by the license inspector.
F.   The applicant or licensee is not a United States citizen or a non-citizen
authorized to work by the government of the United States, or does not provide
proof required by A.R.S. § 41-1080 (A).
G.   The applicant or licensee is a corporation which is not qualified to
transact business in Arizona.
H.   The applicant or controlling person was a licensee or controlling person
for a business whose license was revoked within the 12-month period prior to
the date of the current application.
I.   An employee of the licensee does not comply with the requirements set
forth in
chapter 9-15 while soliciting in a residential area.
J.   Any other reason or reasons deemed sufficient by the license inspector, as
long as the reason or reasons are based upon statutes, ordinances, codes or
substantive policy statements which provide justification for the denial,
suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of the license.
Ordinance 2023.040 added paragraph I and relettered previous paragraph I
Ordinance 2023.009 renumbered this section
9-2-11 Procedure for denial, suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal
A.   If the license inspector determines that grounds exist to deny, suspend,
or revoke a business license, or to deny renewal of a business license, the
license inspector shall notify the applicant or licensee or designated agent in
writing of the denial, suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal.
   1.   The notice shall include justification for the denial, suspension,
revocation, or nonrenewal with references to the statutes, ordinances, codes or
substantive policy statements on which the denial, suspension, revocation, or
nonrenewal is based.
   2.   The notice shall be either:
      a.   Personally served upon the applicant or licensee or designated
agent, or upon any responsible person at the business address on file with the
license inspector or at the actual business address, if different; or
      b.   Mailed by certified mail or other method for which proof of receipt
may be obtained by the license inspector to the address of the applicant or
licensee or designated agent listed in the current year’s license application
or renewal application or to the business address of the applicant or licensee.
   3.   The effective date of the notice shall be the date the notice is
actually received.
B.   If the reason for the denial, suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal of the
license is subject to remediation by the applicant or licensee, the notice
described in paragraph A of this section shall state that the applicant or
licensee shall have 30 days after receipt of the notice in which to remedy the
issue. The notice shall advise that business activity at a currently licensed
business is allowed to continue during this remedial period, unless otherwise
directed by the license inspector.
   1.   If the applicant or licensee does not remedy the issue or notify the
license inspector of remedial action within the 30-day remedial period, the
license inspector shall provide a second written notice to the applicant or
licensee or designated agent, delivered in the manner described in subparagraph
A.2 of this section, that the license is denied, suspended, revoked, or denied
renewal for the reasons set forth in the original notice, and that all business
activity associated with any existing license must immediately cease.
   2.   The notice described in subparagraph B.1 of this section shall also
advise the applicant or licensee that he or she may submit a written request
for a review hearing to the license inspector within ten calendar days of
receipt of the notice. The effective date of the notice shall be the date the
notice is actually received.
C.   If the reason for the denial, suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal is not
subject to remediation by the applicant or licensee, or if the reason for the
denial, suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal is due to a threat to the public
health, safety, or welfare, the notice described in paragraph A of this section
shall state that the license is denied, suspended, revoked, or denied renewal,
and that any existing business activity shall cease immediately upon receipt of
the notice. The notice shall also advise the applicant or licensee or
designated agent of the right to request a review hearing, as described in
subparagraph B.2 of this section.
D.   If the license inspector does not receive a request for review hearing
within the ten-day time period, the denial, suspension, revocation, or
nonrenewal is final.
Ordinance 2023.009 renumbered this section
9-2-12 Review hearing
A.   If an applicant or licensee requests a review hearing pursuant to the
procedure described in section
9-2-11, the hearing shall be scheduled within 30 calendar days of the license
inspector’s receipt of the request, and the applicant or licensee or designated
agent shall receive notice of the date, time and place of the review hearing
delivered in the manner described in subparagraph
9-2-11A.2.
   1.   The review hearing shall be before the town manager or his or her
designee to determine whether the license should have been denied, suspended,
revoked, or denied renewal.
   2.   The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner and the rules of
evidence shall not apply.
B.   If applicable, the applicant or licensee may take remedial action while
awaiting the review hearing, and apply to the license inspector to have the
license issued or fully restored.
C.   The decision of the town manager or designee is final and not subject to
any further administrative review.
Ordinance 2023.009 renumbered this section
CHAPTER 9-3.
PEDDLERS
Ordinance 2019.012 added Chapter 9-3. For prior history, see Ordinances 93.02,
96.09, 2000.06, 2005.22, 2009.11, and 2009.14.
9-3-1 Definition
The following definition shall apply throughout this chapter unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
A.   “Peddler”:
   1.   Means an individual, natural person, also commonly known as a
“solicitor” or “transient merchant,” who travels from door to door, from place
to place, from house to house, from street to street, or from business to
business engaging in any of the following activities:
      a.   Carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise,
edible foodstuffs, or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or
making sales and delivering articles to purchasers;
      b.   Taking, attempting to take, or soliciting orders for sale of goods,
wares and merchandise, or edible foodstuffs or provisions for future delivery;
      c.   Taking, attempting to take, or soliciting orders for services to be
furnished or performed in the future;
      d.   Promoting or advertising any product or service where no sales or
orders are taking place at the time of promotion or advertisement.
   2.   Does not include vendors who sell goods wares, merchandise, edible
foodstuffs, or provisions at temporary locations such as arts and craft fairs,
trade shows, special events, and similar events, as long as those vendors do
not travel from door to door, from place to place, from house to house, from
street to street, or from business to business as described in subparagraph A.1
of this section.
9-3-2 License required
It is unlawful for any person to conduct business as a peddler in the town
without first obtaining and maintaining a valid business license issued
pursuant to and subject to the provisions of
chapter 9-2.
9-3-3 Exemptions
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
A.   Producers selling food products, as those terms are defined in A.R.S. § 3-
561 et seq.
B.   Persons conducting bona fide religious or charitable business, including:
   1.   Soliciting money, donations of money or property, or financial
assistance of any kind;
   2.   Selling or distributing items of literature or merchandise to persons
other than members of that organization.
C.   News vendors, as long as the news companies the vendors work for obtain
and maintain a valid business license issued pursuant to and subject to the
provisions of
chapter 9-2.
D.   Merchants or their employees soliciting orders for goods or services or
delivering goods and services in the regular course of business, as long as the
merchants obtain and maintain a valid business license issued pursuant to and
subject to the provisions of
chapter 9-2.
E.   Sales required by statute or by order of any court, including a bona fide
auction sale pursuant to law.
Ordinance 2019.016 modified paragraph D to add the phrase “soliciting orders
for goods or services or”
9-3-4 Supplemental application requirements
A.   In addition to the application requirements set forth in section
9-2-5, any person desiring to obtain a license to conduct business as a peddler
shall submit:
   1.   A peddler supplemental license application on the form provided by the
license inspector for that purpose.
   2.   A full set of fingerprints on a standard fingerprint card, recorded by
the police department, and the fee established by the director of the Arizona
department of public safety for the processing of fingerprints pursuant to this
chapter and A.R.S. § 41-1750.
   3.   One digital photograph of the applicant taken by the license inspector
or designee at the time of application.
B.   The peddler supplemental license application shall consist of, as
applicable, the following:
   1.   Name and physical description of the applicant;
   2.   Complete permanent home and local addresses of the applicant and, if
applicable, the local address from which proposed sales will be made;
   3.   A brief description of the nature of the business and goods to be sold;
   4.   If employed, the name and address of the applicant’s employer; a post
office box address will not be accepted;
   5.   The source of supply of the goods or property proposed to be sold or
for which orders are to be taken, or services to be provided; where those
goods, services or products are located at the time the application is filed;
and the proposed method of delivery;
   6.   Information regarding all felony and misdemeanor convictions of the
applicant, excluding those for civil traffic offenses; the grounds for each
conviction; and the punishment or penalty assessed;
   7.   The most recent counties, cities, or towns, if any, where applicant
carried on business immediately preceding the date of application and the
address from which business was conducted in those locations; and
   8.   A description of any vehicles, including license plate numbers, to be
used in conducting business in the town.
9-3-5 Authority to receive criminal history record information; use of criminal
history record information
A.   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750, the town is hereby authorized to receive
criminal history record information for evaluating the fitness of current and
prospective peddlers.
B.   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750 and public law 92-544, the town shall submit
all fingerprints obtained pursuant to this chapter to the Arizona department of
public safety for the purpose of obtaining state and federal criminal history
record information. The Arizona department of public safety is authorized to
exchange this fingerprint data with the federal bureau of investigation.
C.   Criminal history record information obtained by the town pursuant to this
chapter shall be used only for evaluating the fitness of current and
prospective peddlers. The town shall comply with all relevant state and federal
rules and regulations regarding the dissemination of criminal history record
information.
9-3-6 Unlawful activities
It is unlawful for:
A.   Any peddler to transact or carry on business without having his or her
business license in his or her possession.
B.   Any peddler to fail to exhibit his or her business license upon request of
any person, including any town official.
C.   Any peddler to exhibit a copy or facsimile of an original business
license.
D.   Any peddler to make exclusive use of any location on any street, alley,
sidewalk or right-of-way for the purpose of selling, delivering, or exhibiting
goods or merchandise.
E.   Any peddler to operate in a congested area where the operation may impede
or inconvenience the public use of the street, alley, sidewalk, or right of-
way. For the purpose of this chapter, the judgment of a police officer,
exercised in good faith, is conclusive as to whether the area is congested and
the public impeded or inconvenienced.
F.   Any child under the age of 16 years to operate as a peddler within the
town pursuant to a license issued under this chapter unless supervised by the
child’s parent or legal guardian holding a license issued pursuant to this
chapter.
G.   Any peddler to operate from door to door, from place to place, from house
to house, from street to street, or from business to business earlier than 9:00
a.m. or later than 7:00 p.m. on any day.
H.   Any peddler to come upon any premises posted with a sign exposed to public
view bearing the words “no peddlers” or “no canvassers” or “no solicitors” or
any combination of those or similar terms, or to remain on any premises after
having been requested to leave by the owner or occupant of the premises whether
they are posted as specified above or not.
I.   Any peddler to enter or remain unlawfully on any real property after
reasonable notice prohibiting entry.
9-3-7 Additional grounds for denial, suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal of
license
A.   In addition to the grounds set forth in section
9-2-11, a license to conduct business as a peddler issued under the provisions
of this chapter may be denied, revoked, suspended, or denied renewal if the
applicant or licensee, within five years from the date that the application is
submitted, has been convicted of any of the following:
   1.   A felony involving trafficking in stolen property, fraud, forgery,
theft, burglary, robbery, extortion, conspiracy to defraud, or any preparatory
offenses of the aforementioned crimes;
   2.   A felony involving a fraudulent or dishonest act;
   3.   A felony involving the sale, manufacture or transportation of any
dangerous drug as defined under A.R.S. § 13-3401;
   4.   A “violent crime” under A.R.S. title 13, chapters 11, 12, 13;
   5.   A “sexual offense” under A.R.S. title 13, chapter 14;
   6.   An offense for conduct in another jurisdiction which if carried out in
Arizona would constitute an offense under one of the statutory provisions
enumerated in this paragraph; or
   7.    A misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
B.   The fact that the conviction is being appealed or has been set aside shall
have no effect.
9-3-8 Procedure for denial, suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal; review
hearing
A.   If the license inspector determines that grounds exist to deny, suspend,
or revoke a business license issued pursuant to this chapter, or to deny
renewal of a business license issued pursuant to this chapter, the license
inspector shall proceed as set forth in section
9-2-10, except that in all cases, any existing business activity by the peddler
shall cease immediately upon receipt of the notice.
B.   The denial, suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of a business license
issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to a review hearing as
provided in sections
9-2-11 and
9-2-12.
CHAPTER 9-4.
SWAP MEETS
Ordinance 2019.012 added Chapter 9-4. For prior history, see Ordinances 93.02,
96.09, and 2000.06.
9-4-1 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply throughout this chapter unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
A.   “Operator” means any person who directly or indirectly controls the
admission of participants or merchandise into the selling or trading area of a
swap meet.
B.   “Participant” means any person who brings merchandise to a swap meet for
purposes of displaying, trading, bartering, or selling the merchandise at the
swap meet.
C.   “Swap meet” means a market consisting of multiple participants who operate
from one general business location, under the control of a common operator or
operators, on an irregular or semi-regular basis and who display, trade,
barter, buy, or sell used merchandise at the location, regardless of whether
new merchandise is also displayed, traded, bartered, bought, or sold at the
location; also commonly known as a “park-and-swap.”
9-4-2 Licenses required
A.   It is unlawful for any person to conduct business as a swap meet operator
in the town without first obtaining and maintaining a valid business license
issued pursuant to and subject to the provisions of
chapter 9-2.
B.   It is unlawful for any person to conduct business as a swap meet
participant for more than three consecutive days or on more than four occasions
within a one-year period without first obtaining and maintaining a valid
business license issued pursuant to and subject to the provisions of
chapter 9-2.
9-4-3 Additional application requirements
In addition to the application requirements set forth in section
9-2-5, any person desiring to obtain a license to conduct business as a swap
meet operator shall present proof either that the operator is the owner of the
property where the swap meet is to be located, or that the operator has the
right to use the property for the swap meet, in the form of a lease or license
agreement, or similar documentation, from the property owner.
9-4-4 Display of license
A.   Any operator required to be licensed under this chapter shall keep the
license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises of the swap meet.
B.   Any participant required to be licensed under this chapter shall keep the
license posted in a conspicuous place at the participant’s stall, booth, or
area at the swap meet.
9-4-5 Swap meet regulations
A.   At least one properly licensed operator shall operate each swap meet.
B.   The operator shall conduct each swap meet in a building, structure,
enclosure, fenced lot, or other area where entry may be restricted to enable
the operator to control effectively all participants and merchandise.
C.   All merchandise, both new and secondhand, for which a participant asks, or
intends to ask, an initial price of $25.00 or more, or which has or had a
serial number, shall at all times be visible to the general public and
officials of the town.
D.   The operator shall provide and pay for adequate security, as determined by
the chief of police.
E.   The operator shall cooperate with law enforcement officials investigating,
examining, or monitoring displayed merchandise.
F.   The operator shall provide for daily clean-up of the premises and shall
maintain the premises in good, clean, and sanitary condition at all times.
G.   At the close of each day’s business, all participants must vacate the
premises and remove all of their merchandise and personal property.
H.   The operator shall maintain a list of all participants at the swap meet
for each day of operations and shall display the list to town officials upon
request.
9-4-6 Prohibited merchandise
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, exchange, display, offer for sale,
or barter at any swap meet any of the following items:
A.   Any live animal
B.   Ammunition or blasting agents
C.   Liquid petroleum gases or other combustible gases
D.   Any type of display fireworks, not including permissible consumer
fireworks, as those terms are defined in A.R.S. § 36-1601
E.   Explosives, acids, caustics, oxidizing agents or any flammable liquids,
including but not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, acetone, thinners, and
solvents
F.   Spray paint containers
CHAPTER 9-5.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 9-5 was adopted as Chapter 9-4 by Ordinance 2011.01 and renumbered to
9-5 by Ordinance 2019.012. Former
chapter 9-4 entitled “Massage Therapists and Establishments” was adopted by
Ordinance 96.09, rewritten by Ordinance 2000.06, and repealed by Ordinance
2005.22 to conform to A.R.S. § 32-4201 et seq.
9-5-1 Purpose and intent
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to enhance the professionalism of
the massage service industry, to protect the health and safety of the public
and to assure the integrity of the massage service industry by reducing
unprofessional practices.
9-5-2 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply throughout this chapter unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise.
A.   “Applicant” means a person who applies for a manager license or a massage
establishment license. The applicant for a massage establishment license must
be an owner of or a controlling person in the establishment or a person who has
day-to-day operational control or responsibility for the establishment, such as
a manager. If the applicant is a corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization or any other group acting as a unit, only one natural person need
serve as the applicant for purposes of this chapter; however, that natural
person must be an owner of or a controlling person in the establishment or a
person who has day-to-day operational control or responsibility for the
establishment, such as a manager.
B.   “Client” means an individual who enters into an agreement for massage
therapy, usually for a fee, income or compensation of some kind.
C.   “Controlling person” means any individual who has a 20% or greater
interest in the ownership or the earnings of the business.
D.   “Designated agent” means the individual designated by the applicant or
licensee who will be the responsible party to receive town notices pursuant to
this chapter.
E.   “Employ” means to hire, or to engage or authorize the services of, without
regard to compensation, any individual, on a full-time, part-time, or contract
basis, whether or not the person employed, hired or engaged is designated an
employee, independent contractor, or sublessee.
F.   “Employee” means any person who performs any service at a massage facility
on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, whether or not the person is
designated an employee, independent contractor, or sublessee. Employee does not
include a person exclusively at the massage facility for repair or maintenance
of the massage facility or for the delivery of goods to the licensee.
G.   “Knowingly” means with respect to conduct or a circumstance described by
this chapter, that a person is aware or believes that his or her conduct is of
that nature or that the circumstance exists. It does not require any knowledge
of the unlawfulness of the act or omission.
H.   ”Licensee” means the person in whose name a massage establishment or
manager license has been issued by the license inspector pursuant to this
chapter. If the licensee is a corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization or any other group acting as a unit, each owner, controlling
person and corporate officer shall be considered a licensee for purposes of
this chapter.
I.   “Manager” means an individual authorized by the massage establishment
licensee to exercise overall operational control of the business, to supervise
employees, or to fulfill any of the functions required of a manager by this
chapter.
J.   ”Massage or touching techniques” means any of the following named subjects
and methods of treatment intended for use upon or in connection with the human
body: oil rubs; alcohol rubs; salt glows; hot or cold packs; herbal wraps; and
touching procedures upon the external parts of the body by use of the hands,
forearms, elbows, knees or feet, or by any electrical, mechanical or vibratory
apparatus, including stroking, friction, kneading, rolling, vibrating, cupping,
petrissage, rubbing, effleurage and tapotement.
K.   ”Massage establishment” means any place of business or establishment where
any of the subjects or methods of treatment listed in paragraphs J or M are
administered, practiced or used, or from which is dispatched a person for the
purpose of administering, practicing or using any of the subjects or methods of
treatment listed in paragraphs J or M.
L.   “Massage therapist” means a person who is licensed pursuant to chapter 42
of title 32 of the Arizona revised statutes to engage in the practice of
massage therapy.
M.   “Massage therapy” means any of the following that are undertaken to
increase wellness, relaxation, stress reduction, pain relief and postural
improvement, or provide general or specific therapeutic benefits:
   1.   The manual application of compression, stretch, vibration or
mobilization of the organs and tissues beneath the dermis, including the
components of the musculoskeletal system, peripheral vessels of the circulatory
system and fascia, when applied primarily to parts of the body other than the
hands, feet and head.
   2.   The manual application of compression, stretch, vibration or
mobilization using the forearms, elbows, knees or feet or handheld mechanical,
electrical, water or vibratory devices.
   3.   Any combination of range of motion, directed, assisted or passive
movements of the joints.
   4.   Hydrotherapy, including the therapeutic applications of water, heat,
cold, wraps, essential oils, skin brushing, salt glows and similar applications
of products to the skin.
N.   “Person” means a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization
and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. It includes a
trustee, receiver, an assignee, or similar representative.
O.   “Private anatomical areas” means the genitals, perineum and anal region of
any person and the area of the breast that includes the areola and the nipple
of any female person.
P.   “Sexual activity” means any of the following:
   1.   Any direct or indirect touching, fondling or manipulating of the
private anatomical areas by any part of the body or by any object.
   2.   Causing a person to engage in the conduct described in subparagraph 1
of this paragraph.
   3.   Offering to engage in the conduct described in subparagraph 1 of this
paragraph.
   4.   Making sexual advances, requesting sexual favors or engaging in verbal
conduct or physical contact of a sexual nature.
Ordinance 2012.13 amended several definitions in section
9-5-2
Ordinance 2011.22 amended paragraph A to add everything after the first
sentence
Ordinance 2011.22 rewrote paragraph H
Upon codification of Ordinance 2011.01, the town attorney renumbered paragraphs
J through O as a scrivener’s error under the authority of section
1-4-5
On December 13, 2011, the town attorney corrected the cross-references in
paragraph K as a scrivener’s error under the authority of section
1-4-5
9-5-3 Duties of license inspector; appeals
A.   It shall be the duty and responsibility of the town’s license inspector,
to administer the provisions of this chapter. Pursuant to this duty, the
license inspector shall issue, renew, deny, suspend, or revoke massage
establishment licenses or manager licenses as required by this chapter.
B.   Any party aggrieved by a decision of the license inspector under this
chapter may appeal as provided in this chapter.
Ordinance 2019.012 deleted an unnecessary cross-reference in paragraph A
Ordinance 2011.22 rewrote paragraph B
9-5-4 Classification; continuing violations; effect of revocation or suspension
on prosecution
A.   Whenever in this chapter any act is prohibited or declared to be unlawful
or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to
be unlawful, the violation of that provision is a class one misdemeanor.
B.   Each day any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
C.   Revocation or suspension of a license shall not be a defense against
prosecution.
9-5-5 Massage therapist license required
It is unlawful for any person to practice or in any manner to claim to practice
massage therapy without first obtaining and maintaining in effect a current,
unrevoked and unsuspended massage therapist license as required by Arizona
revised statutes.
9-5-6 Massage establishment license required; non-transferability; exclusions
A.   It is unlawful for any person to conduct or operate a massage
establishment without first obtaining and maintaining in effect a current,
unrevoked and unsuspended massage establishment license as required by this
chapter.
B.   It is unlawful for any person licensed as provided in this chapter to
operate under any name or conduct business under any designation not specified
in the license.
C.   It is unlawful for any massage establishment licensed as provided in this
chapter to conduct business at any location not specified in the license.
D.   All massage establishment licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are non
-transferable. Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in a massage
establishment, a new application must be submitted for that establishment and
all provisions of this chapter shall apply to the new application.
E.   The provisions of paragraph A shall not apply to a place of business or
establishment where all persons offering massage or touching techniques or
massage therapy are licensed as either a barber, aesthetician, cosmetologist,
or nail technician pursuant to Arizona revised statutes, and who practice
within the scope of that person’s license.
Ordinance 2011.22 added “non-transferability” to the title of section
9-5-6, added paragraph D, and renumbered paragraph E
9-5-7 Manager license required; non-transferability
A.   It is unlawful for any person to exercise overall operational control of a
massage establishment, to supervise employees, or to fulfill any of the
functions required of a manager by this chapter without first obtaining and
maintaining in effect a current, unrevoked and unsuspended manager license as
required by this chapter.
B.   All manager licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are non-transferable
Ordinance 2011.22 added “non-transferability” to the title of section
9-5-7, added paragraph B, and numbered paragraph A
Ordinance 2023.011 continued the enforcement of this section
9-5-8 New license application; fees; supplemental information
A.   Any person desiring to obtain a massage establishment or manager license
shall apply to the license inspector on the form provided by the license
inspector for that purpose. The license inspector shall refer the application
to the appropriate town departments for investigation.
B.   Each application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee
and a first year license fee as set forth by a fee schedule approved by the
council and amended from time to time. If a license application is denied, the
first year license fee will be refunded to the applicant.
C.   In addition to the fees required by paragraph B, each person required to
submit fingerprints pursuant to this chapter shall pay the license inspector
the fee established by the director of the Arizona department of public safety
for the processing of fingerprints pursuant to this chapter and A.R.S. § 41-
1750.
D.   The applicant has an affirmative duty to supplement a pending application
with new information received subsequent to the date the application was
submitted to the town.
Ordinance 2012.13 added “supplemental information” to the title and added
paragraph D of section
9-5-8. Ordinance 2011.22 revised the last sentence of paragraph A and rewrote
paragraph C.
9-5-9 Massage establishment license application; separate license; husband and
wife; additional requirements
A.   Each application for a massage establishment license shall consist of, as
applicable, the following:
   1.   The full legal name, business name, business phone number, legal form
of applicant, current residential phone number and current residence or legal
address of the applicant.
   2.   Physical description and date and place of birth of the applicant.
   3.   Any other names by which the applicant has been known.
   4.   The address at which the applicant desires to do business.
   5.   The applicant’s mailing address for purposes of receiving town notices
and other licensing correspondence relating to the applicant, the licensee, or
the enforcement of this chapter.
   6.   The business hours for the establishment.
   7.   All residence addresses of the applicant for the five-year period prior
to the date of application and the dates of residence at each.
   8.   The name or names of all managers and the designated agent.
   9.   The name or names of all controlling persons.
   10.   The applicant’s business, occupation and employment history for the
five-year period immediately preceding the date of application, including
addresses and dates of employment.
   11.   Written proof, in the form of a current driver’s license with picture,
or other current picture identification document issued by a governmental
agency, that the applicant has reached the age of 18 years.
   12.   The business license history of the applicant; whether the applicant,
while operating in this or another city or state under license, has had a
previous license revoked or suspended, the reason for the revocation or
suspension, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to the
suspension or revocation.
   13.   All felony and misdemeanor convictions of the applicant, excluding
those for civil traffic offenses, and the grounds for each conviction.
   14.   A full set of fingerprints on a standard fingerprint card, recorded by
the police department for each of the following individuals:
      a.   All applicants
      b.   All owners of and controlling persons in the establishment
      c.   The designated agent
   15.   The articles of incorporation, articles of organization, or
certificate of limited partnership, together with any amendments, for the
applicant, as applicable.
   16.   A list of services to be offered by the massage establishment.
   17.   A site plan showing the configuration of the overall business premises
and a floor plan containing the information required by this paragraph. The
plans need not be professionally prepared but must be at least 8½ inches by 11
inches in size. The floor plan shall include the following:
      a.   The location of all interior doors, walls, curtains and room
dividers.
      b.   A description of the use of each interior space or room, including a
designation, by type of use, of each room or space available for massage or
touching techniques or massage therapy by the applicant.
      c.   A designation of each room or space that is being, or is intended to
be, leased, subleased or licensed for use by any person other than the
applicant and a description of its intended and actual use.
      d.   A designation of each room or space that is being, or is intended to
be, leased, subleased, or licensed for use by any person other than the
applicant for purposes of offering massage or touching techniques or massage
therapy and a description of its intended and actual use.
      e.   The location of the business license required to be displayed
pursuant to this chapter.
   18.   One digital photograph of the applicant taken by the license inspector
or designee at the time of application.
   19.   Any other identification and information the license inspector may
require.
   20.   The name or names of all employees of the massage establishment.
   21.   Written proof evidencing the legally enforceable right of the
applicant to have or obtain the use and possession of the tract of land on
which the establishment is to be situated for the purpose of the operation of
the massage establishment, in the form of a lease, purchase contract, purchase
option contract, lease option contract or other similar documents. The license
inspector may also require proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of
land in the form of a copy of the recorded deed.
B.   A single license shall be issued to an applicant that consists of a
husband and wife.
C.   In addition to any other application requirements, the applicant for any
massage establishment to be located at the same location at which a massage
establishment license was denied, revoked, suspended or denied renewal within
the previous six months shall provide to the license inspector a sworn
statement, in a form prescribed by the license inspector, verifying that no
person involved in the ownership, control or management of the previous massage
establishment is involved in the ownership, control or management of the
applicant. The license inspector may also request such documents as are
reasonably believed necessary to verify any of the information in the sworn
statement.
Ordinance 2012.13 amended section
9-5-9 by adding “additional requirements” to the title, adding subparagraphs
(A)(20) and (21); deleting former paragraph B (requiring separate licenses in
certain instances), renumbering former paragraph C to B, and adding paragraph C
Ordinance 2011.22 added “of the applicant” to subparagraphs 7 and 13
Ordinance 2011.22 rewrote subparagraph 14
Ordinance 2011.22 rewrote the introduction to paragraph 17
Ordinance 2016.010 rewrote paragraph 21
9-5-10 Manager license application
Each application for a manager license shall consist of the following:
A.   Full legal name, physical description, and date and place of birth.
B.   Any other names by which the applicant has been know.
C.   Current residence address, mailing address and telephone number.
D.   All residence addresses for the five-year period immediately prior to the
date of application and the dates of residence at each.
E.   Employment history for the five-year period preceding the date of
application with dates and addresses for each.
F.   Written proof, in the form of a current driver’s license with picture, or
other current picture identification document issued by a governmental agency,
that the applicant has reached the age of 18 years.
G.   All felony and misdemeanor convictions, excluding those for civil traffic
offenses, and the grounds for each conviction.
H.   The business license history of the applicant; whether the applicant,
while operating in this or another city or state under license, has had a
previous license revoked or suspended, the reason for the revocation or
suspension, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to the
suspension or revocation.
I.   One digital photograph of the applicant taken by the license inspector or
designee at the time of application.
J.   The applicant’s full set of fingerprints on a standard fingerprint card,
recorded by the police department.
K.   Any other identification and information as the license inspector may
require.
9-5-11 Additional application requirements
A.   No license shall be issued to an individual if the individual does not
present one or more of the following documents as requested by the license
inspector indicating that the individual’s presence in the United States is
authorized under federal law and complies with the Arizona legal workers act:
   1.   An Arizona driver’s license issued after 1996 or an Arizona non-
operating identification license.
   2.   A driver license issued by a state that verifies lawful presence in the
United States.
   3.   A birth certificate or delayed birth certificate issued in any state,
territory or possession of the United States.
   4.   A United States certificate of birth abroad.
   5.   A United States passport.
   6.   A foreign passport with a United States visa.
   7.   An I-94 form with a photograph.
   8.   A United States citizenship and immigration services employment
authorization document or refugee travel document.
   9.   A United States certificate of naturalization.
   10.   A United States certificate of citizenship.
   11.   A tribal certificate of Indian blood.
   12.   A tribal or bureau of Indian affairs affidavit of birth.
B.   This section does not apply to an individual, if all of the following
apply:
   1.   The individual is a citizen of a foreign country or, if at the time of
application, the individual resides in a foreign country.
   2.   The benefits that are related to the license do not require the
individual to be present in the United States in order to receive those
benefits.
9-5-12 License application investigation; authority to receive criminal history
record information; use of criminal history record information; authority to
delay licensing decision
A.   Any applicant for a massage establishment license or a manager license
issued pursuant to this chapter shall personally appear at the office of the
license inspector and shall present the application containing the information
required by this chapter.
B.   The town shall have a reasonable time within which to investigate the
application and the background of the applicant, all owners and controlling
persons, the designated agent and the manager. The investigation shall include
an inspection of the premises of the massage establishment or proposed massage
establishment by the appropriate town departments, as well as any appropriate
federal, state or county agencies, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with
this chapter and any code, statute or regulation relating to human health,
safety or welfare or structural safety. Based on the investigation, the
departments shall recommend to the license inspector approval or denial of the
license.
C.   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750, the town is hereby authorized to receive
criminal history record information for the purpose of evaluating the fitness
of current and prospective massage establishment licensees, including
applicants, owners, controlling persons and designated agents, and current and
prospective massage establishment manager licensees.
D.   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750 and public law 92-544, the town shall submit
all fingerprints obtained pursuant to this chapter to the Arizona department of
public safety for the purpose of obtaining state and federal criminal history
record information. The Arizona department of public safety is authorized to
exchange this fingerprint data with the federal bureau of investigation.
E.   Criminal history record information obtained by the town pursuant to this
chapter shall be used only for the purpose of evaluating the fitness of current
and prospective massage establishment licensees, including applicants, owners,
controlling persons and designated agents, and current and prospective massage
establishment manager licensees. The town shall comply with all relevant state
and federal rules and regulations regarding the dissemination of criminal
history record information.
F.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the license inspector
may delay the granting or denial of a massage establishment license, upon the
submission of a complete application, for a period of up to 90 days if there
exists, or did exist within the 60-day period prior to the date the application
was first submitted, an active massage establishment license at the location
for which the application was submitted and there also exists a law enforcement
report documenting a violation of this chapter at that establishment or a state
prosecution of that existing establishment relating to compliance with any of
the provisions of this chapter. For purposes of this paragraph, an active
massage establishment license includes a license that has been suspended or
revoked, provided that a revoked license is no longer active after passage of
the period of time for appeal with no appeal taken, or after the hearing
officer has ruled in the event an appeal is taken and the decision is in the
town’s favor. Notwithstanding any other provision of this paragraph, any
license subject to a judicial stay or injunction is an active license.
Ordinance 2012.13 amended section
9-5-12 by adding “authority to delay licensing decision” to the title, adding
“owners” to paragraphs C and E, and adding paragraph F
Ordinance 2011.22 rewrote paragraph B
9-5-13 License renewal
A.   Within one year of the issue date for the previously effective license,
all licensees under this chapter wishing to remain licensed shall apply for
renewal on a form established by the license inspector. The renewal form must
be submitted at least 60 days prior to the renewal date with the applicable
renewal fee, as set forth in the fee schedule approved by the council and
amended from time to time. For a massage establishment license renewal, the
licensee must submit a current listing of massage therapists working at the
establishment, and each massage therapist’s Arizona state license number with
date of license expiration. The licensee must also submit a current listing of
managers working at the establishment, and each manager’s town license number
with date of license expiration. The license inspector is authorized to
investigate and obtain necessary information to update the original license
application and to determine whether the license should be renewed. For a
massage establishment license renewal, the investigation may include an
inspection of the premises of the massage establishment by the appropriate town
departments, as well as any appropriate federal, state or county agencies, for
the purpose of ensuring compliance with this chapter and any code, statute or
regulation relating to human health, safety or welfare or structural safety. No
license shall be renewed unless the licensee complies with all provisions of
this chapter.
B.   A licensee who fails to apply for renewal at least 60 days prior to the
renewal date shall be subject to a late renewal penalty fee in accordance with
the fee schedule approved by the council and amended from time to time. If the
licensee fails to start the renewal process at least 30 days prior to the
license renewal date, the license shall expire and become null and void.
Licensees who fail to apply to renew their license yet who wish to continue
operating or managing massage establishments must file a new application for
license and may not operate or manage a massage establishment until a new
license has been issued.
On January 7, 2013, the town attorney corrected the spelling of “licensee” in
the third sentence as a scrivener’s error by authority of section
1-4-5 (B)
Ordinance 2012.13 inserted the third sentence to paragraph A. Ordinance 2011.22
inserted “investigate and” in the fifth sentence and added the sixth sentence
to paragraph A
9-5-14 Denial, suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of license
A.   The license of a massage establishment or license of a manager may be
denied, revoked, suspended for a period not to exceed 60 calendar days, or
denied renewal upon any one or more of the following grounds:
   1.   The applicant, licensee, designated agent or controlling person is
guilty of fraud in conducting the business of a massage establishment or of
fraud or deceit in obtaining a license.
   2.   The applicant, licensee, designated agent or controlling person has
been convicted within the past five years in a court of competent jurisdiction
of a felony or misdemeanor offense having a reasonable relationship to the
functions of a massage establishment or a massage therapist, including but not
limited to any offense involving dishonesty, deceit, theft, assaultive conduct
or sexual misconduct. The fact that the conviction is being appealed or has
been set aside shall have no effect.
   3.   The applicant, licensee, designated agent or controlling person has
been convicted within the last five years of any offense proscribed by title
13, chapters 14, 32, and 35.1 of the Arizona revised statutes, or any offense
committed outside this state or town that if committed in this state or town
would constitute a violation of any offense proscribed by title 13, chapters
14, 32, and 35.1 of the Arizona revised statutes. The fact that the conviction
is being appealed or has been set aside shall have no effect.
   4.   The applicant, licensee, designated agent or controlling person is
guilty of untrue, fraudulent, misleading, or deceptive advertising.
   5.   The applicant, licensee, designated agent or controlling person is
engaged in the business of massage therapist, manager, or massage establishment
under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another therapist or manager
of a like or different name.
   6.   Any violation of this chapter. This paragraph shall apply regardless of
the location at which the violation occurred.
   7.   In the case of a massage establishment, any person who did not qualify
as a controlling person at the time the license was issued has acquired a 20%
or greater interest in the licensee.
   8.   In the case of a massage establishment, the massage establishment has
operated at a location that has not been licensed for use by the town.
   9.   In the case of a massage establishment, the licensee has ceased to use
the license for purposes of offering massage therapy. The failure to offer
massage therapy at a massage establishment for 30 consecutive days shall create
a rebuttable presumption that the licensee has ceased to use the license for
purposes of offering massage therapy.
   10.   In the case of a massage establishment, the applicant or licensee has
failed to maintain in the records of the license inspector the name of an
individual as a designated agent.
   11.   The applicant, licensee, manager, any employee or the designated agent
has photographed a customer while the customer was on the premises of a massage
establishment and located within any treatment room, restroom, locker room or
dressing room, without the express, written permission of that customer. For
purposes of this subparagraph the word “photographed” shall mean the use of any
electronic or mechanical device to record, reproduce or transmit an optical
image.
   12.   The applicant, licensee, designated agent, manager or controlling
person knows or should have known that prostitution, indecent exposure or
pornographic acts are occurring or have occurred in the operation of the
massage establishment.
   13.   The license application was falsified.
   14.   The applicant, licensee or a controlling person has an outstanding
warrant for his or her arrest.
   15.   The applicant was a controlling person for a massage establishment
license that was revoked within the previous five years for an act or acts that
occurred while the controlling person was a controlling person for the
licensee.
   16.   In the case of a massage establishment, the licensee has failed to
maintain in the records of the license inspector the name and license number of
each person employed as a manager at the massage establishment.
   17.   The applicant or licensee is under 18 years of age.
   18.   The license application is incomplete and the applicant fails to
provide the missing information within the timeframe set forth in a written
notice specifying the missing or incomplete information and provided to the
applicant by the license inspector.
   19.   In the case of a massage establishment, business has been conducted in
an unlawful manner.
   20.   In the case of a massage establishment, business has been conducted in
such manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or a menace to the health,
safety or general welfare of the public.
   21.   The applicant, licensee, designated agent or controlling person is
delinquent in payment to the town of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed
against or imposed upon the applicant, licensee, designated agent or
controlling person in relation to a massage establishment business or arising
out of any other business activity of the applicant, licensee, designated agent
or controlling person.
   22.   The applicant failed to provide the sworn statement or supporting
information required by section
9-5-9 C.
   23.   In the case of a massage establishment, the establishment is not in
compliance with the requirements listed in section
9-5-19.
   24.   In the case of a massage establishment, the application is for a
massage establishment to be located in a physical space at which a licensed
massage establishment is in operation. For purposes of this subparagraph, there
shall be a rebuttable presumption that a location with an active massage
establishment license has a massage establishment in operation.
   25.   In the case of a massage establishment, the application is for a
massage establishment to be located on the same business premises whereon is
also conducted or operated a sexually oriented business as defined in title 9
of the town code, or a bar, cocktail lounge, photography studio, model studio,
art studio, motion picture studio/or telephone answering service.
   26.   Any other reason or reasons deemed sufficient by the license
inspector, as long as the reason or reasons are based upon statutes,
ordinances, codes or substantive policy statements which provide justification
for the denial, suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of the license.
B.   The massage establishment license shall be denied if any of the following
persons would be disqualified under this chapter:
   1.   The president or other executive officers of a corporate applicant;
   2.   Each general partner of an applicant that is a limited partnership or
any partner of a non-limited partnership applicant;
   3.   The managing member, officer or employee of the applicant;
   4.   Any controlling person of the applicant.
C.   If a licensee appeals the suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of an
existing license pursuant to the appeal provisions of this chapter, the
licensee shall be permitted to continue operations under the previously
effective license until resolution of the appeal.
Ordinance 2011.22 inserted “for a period not to exceed 30 calendar days” in
paragraph A. Ordinance 2012.13 revised it to 60 calendar days and made various
other changes to section
9-5-14, including adding subparagraphs (A)(16) through (26).
The cross-reference in subparagraph 22 was corrected by the town attorney on
December 13, 2012, by authority of town code section
1-4-5
Ordinance 2011.22 added paragraph C
9-5-15 Procedure for denial, suspension, revocation or nonrenewal; appeals
A.   If the license inspector determines that grounds exist to deny, suspend or
revoke an application or license, or to deny renewal of a license, the license
inspector shall notify the applicant or licensee in writing of the denial,
suspension or revocation. The notice shall include justification for the
denial, suspension or revocation with references to the statutes, ordinances,
codes or substantive policy statements on which the denial, suspension or
revocation is based. The notice shall be personally served upon the licensee or
upon any responsible person at the business address on file with the license
inspector or at the actual business address, if different, or mailed by
certified mail or other method for which proof of receipt may be obtained by
the license inspector to the address of the applicant or licensee listed in the
current year’s license application or renewal application or to the business
address of the applicant or licensee. The notice shall also include an
explanation of the applicant’s or licensee’s right of appeal. The effective
date of the notice shall be the date the notice is actually received.
B.   Within ten business days after the effective date of the notice, the
applicant or licensee may provide a written request for an appeal hearing to
the license inspector, which shall include a statement of reasons why the
license should not be denied, suspended or revoked. If the license inspector
does not receive a request for appeal hearing within this time period, the
denial, suspension or revocation shall be final.
C.   Within seven business days after receipt of the applicant’s or licensee’s
request for appeal hearing, the license inspector shall either grant the
license or rescind the suspension or revocation or schedule an appeal hearing
before the hearing officer, as designated by the town manager or the town
council. The applicant or licensee shall be notified in writing by any of the
means specified in paragraph A of this section of the date, time and location
of the hearing. The hearing shall be scheduled not less than 15 and no more
than 30 calendar days after receipt by the license inspector of the applicant’s
or licensee’s request for hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in an
informal manner and the rules of evidence shall not apply. The applicant or
licensee may be represented by an attorney.
D.   Within five business days after completion of the hearing, the hearing
officer shall render a written decision and shall cause a copy of the decision
to be mailed by certified mail to the address specified by the applicant or
licensee. The hearing officer’s decision shall be deemed final five business
days after it is mailed and shall constitute final administrative action.
E.   After a denial, suspension or revocation has been upheld by the hearing
officer, the applicant or licensee may seek judicial review of the
administrative action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
Ordinance 2011.22 added section
9-5-15 and renumbered the remaining sections of
chapter 9-14 to conform. Ordinance 2012.13 made various clarifying revisions to
section
9-5-15.
9-5-16 Application after denial, revocation or nonrenewal
No applicant may apply for a license within one year of the date of a denial,
revocation or nonrenewal of the applicant’s license, unless the cause of the
denial, revocation, or nonrenewal has been remedied to the satisfaction of the
license inspector and at least 90 calendar days have elapsed since the
effective date of the denial, revocation or nonrenewal.
Ordinance 2011.22 renumbered, inserted “or revocation” in the title of, and
rewrote section
9-5-16. Ordinance 2012.13 inserted “or nonrenewal” in the title and deleted
“suspension” from the body of this section.
9-5-17 Change of location; change of services offered, configuration of
premises, business hours, mailing address, manager or designated agent
A.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a massage
establishment shall not be operated or maintained at a location that has not
been approved by the license inspector. A change of location of a massage
establishment shall be approved by the license inspector if the applicant is in
compliance with all town ordinances and regulations, completes the appropriate
location change application and submits a fee as set forth by a fee schedule
approved by the council and amended from time to time.
B.   A massage establishment shall not change the services it offers, the use
or configuration of its premises, its business hours, its mailing address or
its manager or designated agent without first providing notice of the change to
the license inspector on the form prescribed by the license inspector for that
purpose.
C.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any change listed in this
section shall be submitted to the license inspector within ten calendar days of
the change.
9-5-18 Inspection of massage establishments
An applicant for a massage establishment license, a controlling person or
designated agent for a licensee, a manager, or a licensee shall permit
representatives of the police department, any other town department and any
other federal, state or county agency in the performance of any function
connected with the enforcement of this chapter or any code, statute or
regulation relating to human health, safety or welfare or structural safety,
normally and regularly conducted by the agency, to inspect the premises of a
massage establishment for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at
any time it is lawfully occupied or open for business. The inspection
authorized by this section shall be limited to:
A.   All areas of the premises available to patrons, provided that no
inspection shall be done of a room occupied by a patron until the patron has
been given a reasonable opportunity to dress, gather his or her personal
effects and exit the room.
B.   All dressing, toilet, bathing and wash basin facilities.
C.   Any location used to disinfect and sterilize equipment.
D.   Any location used to store linens.
Ordinance 2012.13 added “or designated agent” to the introductory paragraph of
section
9-5-18
9-5-19 Massage establishment special requirements
An existing massage establishment shall comply with the following requirements
and no massage establishment license shall be issued to an applicant unless
inspection by a town department or, where appropriate, a federal, state or
county agency indicates that the site of the establishment complies with each
of the following requirements. The licensee, owner, controlling person,
designated agent and/or manager shall ensure that the massage establishment is
in compliance with the provisions of this section.
A.   A readable sign shall be permanently affixed at the main entrance to the
business identifying the business as a massage establishment.
B.   Lighting consisting of a minimum of one 40 watt incandescent or equivalent
bulb shall be provided, and used, in each room or enclosure where services are
performed on patrons.
C.   Ventilation shall be provided in accordance with title 7 of the town code.
D.   Adequate equipment shall be provided for disinfecting and sterilizing
instruments used in administering or practicing any of the subjects or methods
of treatment administered or practiced by the establishment.
E.   Closed cabinets shall be provided, and used, for the storage of clean
linens.
F.   Notwithstanding any other requirement of this chapter, a minimum of one
shower or tub shall be provided for any establishment offering any hydrotherapy
services including whirlpool baths, saunas, steam baths, and herbal wraps.
G.   Any pool or spa shall be issued a permit and inspected as required by the
Marana pool and spa code.
H.   All walls, ceilings, floors, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms, and all other
physical facilities within the establishment must be in good repair and
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or
vapor rooms or cabinets, toilets and wash basins shall be thoroughly cleaned
each day business is in operation. Shower compartments and bathtubs, where
provided, shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use.
I.   Clean and sanitary sheets and towels shall be provided for each patron of
the establishment. The head rest of each table shall be provided with a clean
and sanitary covering for each patron.
J.   A hand wash basin shall be provided in each treatment room providing
hydrotherapy services, including whirlpool baths, saunas, steam baths and
herbal wraps.
K.   All wash basins within an establishment, including hand wash basins,
shall: have hot and cold running water, tempered by means of a mixing valve
faucet at all times; provide sanitary towels placed in permanently installed
dispensers or upon a permanently attached roll dispenser; and provide soap in a
soap dispenser that is placed on or near the wash basin.
Ordinance 2012.13 made various changes to section
9-5-19, including adding the last sentence to the introductory paragraph,
adding paragraph J, renumbering paragraph K, deleting the last sentence of
paragraph K, and making other minor revisions
Ordinance 2011.29 modified the lighting requirements in paragraph B
Ordinance 2011.22 deleted former paragraph E, requiring hot and cold running
water, and renumbered the remaining paragraphs to conform
Ordinance 2011.22 inserted “at all times” in the first sentence of what is now
paragraph K
9-5-20 Unlawful activities; definition; duty of manager
A.   It is unlawful:
   1.   For any person to knowingly employ any other person to offer massage
therapy who does not hold a current, unrevoked and unsuspended massage therapy
license issued by the state of Arizona.
   2.   For any person to employ a massage therapist whose true name and state-
issued massage therapist license number has not been previously provided to the
license inspector on the form prescribed by the license inspector for that
purpose.
   3.   For any person to knowingly employ at a massage establishment a manager
who has been convicted within the previous five years of any of the offenses
listed in section
9-5-14 A. 2 or 3.
   4.   For any person to offer massage or touching techniques or massage
therapy in any room or space of the business that has not been specifically
identified as a room or space available for those services on the sketch or
diagram required to be submitted to the license inspector pursuant to this
chapter.
   5.   For any person to offer massage or touching techniques or massage
therapy in a room or space designated as leased, subleased or licensed for use
by any other person on the sketch or diagram required to be submitted to the
license inspector pursuant to this chapter.
   6.   For any massage establishment to remain open for business, to provide
services, to dispatch massage therapists, or to permit massage therapists to
work off the premises on behalf of that massage establishment at any time
between the hours of midnight and 6:00 A.M.
   7.   For any massage establishment to be open for business during hours that
have not been provided to the license inspector as required by this chapter.
   8.   Except as provided in this chapter, for any person to employ any person
to act as a manager at any massage establishment who is not licensed as a
manager pursuant to this chapter.
   9.   For any person to knowingly conduct or operate a massage establishment
on the same business premises, whereon is also conducted or operated a sexually
oriented business as defined in title 9 of the town code, or a bar, cocktail
lounge, photography studio, model studio, art studio, motion picture studio/or
telephone answering service.
   10.   For any person, while on the premises of a massage establishment, to
knowingly provide or offer to provide any service:
      a.   In a manner or under circumstances intended to arouse, appeal to or
gratify sexual desires.
      b.   In such a manner that the person touches the private anatomical
areas of the individual receiving the treatment.
      c.   While the person providing the treatment is clothed in a manner that
fails to cover his or her private anatomical areas with an opaque material.
   11.   For any person on the premises of a massage establishment to
intentionally view a completely or partially disrobed massage establishment
client if the viewing is not related to treatment under current practice
standards and is intended to appeal to the prurient interest of the massage
therapist or the massage establishment client.
   12.   For any person, while on the premises of a massage establishment, to
knowingly ask, direct or allow a client to:
      a.   Touch his or her own anus, genitals or breasts in the presence of
another person.
      b.   Touch the anus, genitals or breasts of any person on the premises.
      c.   Expose his or her genitals, anus or breasts to any person on the
premises with the intention of appealing to the prurient interest of the
massage therapist or the massage establishment client.
   13.   For any person, while on the premises of a massage establishment, to
knowingly place any part of the body of a client in direct or indirect contact
with the anus, genitals or breasts of any other person on the premises.
   14.   For any person, while on the premises of a massage establishment, to
knowingly offer a person any service in exchange for a gratuity or compensation
of any description, that does not appear on the schedule of services required
by this chapter.
   15.   For any person to knowingly operate or maintain a massage
establishment at a location that has not been licensed by the license
inspector.
   16.   For any person to knowingly use a massage establishment as living or
sleeping quarters.
   17.   For any person to knowingly provide the services of a manager to a
massage establishment without a manager license.
   18.   For any employee of a massage establishment, while on the premises of
a massage establishment, to engage in any sexual activity with a client or
other person.
   19.   For any employee of a massage establishment, while on the premises of
a massage establishment, to allow a client to touch the private anatomical
areas of the massage establishment employee.
   20.   For any person, while on the premises of a massage establishment, to
knowingly provide or offer to provide any service to a client or another person
while the client’s or other person’s private anatomical areas are exposed.
   21.   For any person under 18 years of age to obtain massage therapy
services unless that person is accompanied by his/her parent or legal guardian,
has a physician’s prescription for massage therapy, or has a notarized letter
from his/her parent or legal guardian authorizing the massage therapy.
   22.   For any person to provide massage therapy services to any person under
18 years of age unless the person under 18 years of age is accompanied by his/
her parent or legal guardian, has a physician’s prescription for massage
therapy, or has a notarized letter from his/her parent or legal guardian
authorizing the massage therapy.
B.   For purposes of this section, the word “touch” shall include physical
contact that occurs through clothing or by means of any object.
C.   The licensee, owner, controlling person, designated agent or manager shall
not knowingly fail to ensure that a massage establishment is in compliance with
the provisions of this section.
Ordinance 2012.13 revised section
9-5-20 by adding subparagraphs (A)(18) through (22) and making various other
miscellaneous revisions
9-5-21 Display of license; update, retention and inspection of records
A.   Every on duty person to whom a massage establishment license, massage
therapist license or manager license has been granted shall display the license
along with the corresponding photograph in a conspicuous place upon the
business premises that is clearly visible to the general public upon entry to
the business. All massage therapists shall produce their license and produce a
government-issued identification document upon request from an authorized agent
conducting an inspection pursuant to this chapter.
B.   A massage establishment shall report the name of any person whose
employment at the massage establishment has terminated to the license inspector
within ten calendar days after termination.
C.   A massage establishment shall maintain records for each massage therapist
employed by that massage establishment on the business premises during the time
the massage therapist is employed at the establishment and for a period of 90
days after the date of last employment of each massage therapist. These records
shall include:
   1.   A copy of the state-issued massage therapist license.
   2.   For every massage therapist who does not possess a state-issued massage
therapist license that bears a photograph of the licensee, a clearly-legible
copy of a current picture identification document issued by a governmental
agency or such other identification as may be prescribed by the license
inspector.
D.   A massage establishment shall maintain on the business premises a copy of
the most recent sketch or diagram required to be submitted to the license
inspector pursuant to this chapter.
E.   A licensee, owner, controlling person, designated agent, manager or
employee of a massage establishment shall make the records required to be
maintained by this section available for inspection upon demand by any law
enforcement officer or town regulatory license inspections official, during any
period of time that the business premises are open to the public or lawfully
occupied.
F.    The licensee, owner, controlling person, designated agent and/or manager
shall ensure that the massage establishment is in compliance with the
provisions of this section.
Ordinance 2012.13 made several miscellaneous revisions to section
9-5-21
Upon codification of Ordinance 2011.01, the town attorney renumbered paragraph
F from “E” to “F” as a scrivener’s error under the authority of section
1-4-5
9-5-22 Manager list; manager, designated agent or licensee required on premises
A.   A massage establishment licensee shall maintain on file with the license
inspector, on the form provided by the license inspector for that purpose, a
current list of the names and license numbers of each person employed as a
manager at the massage establishment.
B.   The massage establishment licensee, the designated agent and/or manager of
a massage establishment shall ensure that at least one of the following
individuals is physically present on the massage establishment premises during
all times the establishment is open for business:
   1.   A licensed manager.
   2.   The designated agent.
   3.   The massage establishment licensee.
Ordinance 2012.13 substantially rewrote and revised section
9-5-22
9-5-23 Exemptions
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
A.   Establishments whose employees are authorized by the laws of this state to
practice medicine, osteopathy, chiropractic, podiatry, naturopathy, or
acupuncture.
B.   Establishments whose employees are acting as trainers for any bona fide
amateur, semiprofessional, or professional athletic team or athlete.
C.   Establishments whose employees are authorized by the laws of this state as
barbers or cosmetologists, provided their activity is limited to the scope of
their barber or cosmetology license.
D.   Establishments whose employees are providing colon irrigation only.
E.   Businesses that are operating solely as a school that is Arizona state
board of massage therapy-approved.
9-5-24 Licenses; cumulative regulation
A.   The licenses required in this chapter are in addition to any transaction
privilege license required by the Marana town code or state law.
B.   A massage therapist license does not authorize one to operate a massage
establishment.
C.   An applicant for a massage establishment license need not have a massage
therapist license. However, massage establishments shall employ only Arizona
state-licensed massage therapists to perform massage.
D.   A licensed massage therapist who operates as a sole practitioner and who
has no employees must obtain a massage establishment license for the business
location at which massage therapy is provided; however, no separate manager
license is required.
Ordinance 2019.012 deleted mention of business license in paragraph A
CHAPTER 9-6.
CLOTHING AND CONDUCT FOR QUALIFIED ESTABLISHMENTS
Ordinance 2000.06 rewrote this chapter, which was renumbered by Ordinance
2019.012. See Ordinance 95.12 and 96.09 for prior history.
9-6-1 Definitions
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and
phrases shall be construed as follows:
A.   “Entertainer” means any person who performs any dance, show, exhibition,
or performance for any number of persons. The entertainer need not receive
compensation from any source to be covered under this chapter.
B.   “Employee” means any employee, independent contractor, agent, consultant,
or other like person.
C.   “Opaque” means not allowing any light to pass through; not transparent,
semi-transparent, or translucent.
D.   “Premises” means land with its appurtenances and structures on it as well
as any other property adjoining the land that the qualified establishment uses
or allows to be used for its benefit.
E.   ”Qualified establishment” means any restaurant, nightclub, bar, tavern,
taproom, theater or private, fraternal, social, golf, or country club, or any
place that holds a valid Arizona liquor license, which serves spirituous
liquors as defined by A.R.S. § 4-101. This includes the entire premises owned,
leased, or otherwise occupied by the establishment, whether the liquor license
extends to that portion of the premises or not.
Ordinance 2005.22 and Ordinance 2014.014 simplified the statutory reference in
section
9-5-1 (E)
9-6-2 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to:
A.   Provide for the clothing requirements of entertainers, employees serving
spirituous liquors, and other employees in qualified establishments that serve
spirituous liquors as defined by A.R.S. § 4-101.
B.   Provide for conduct requirements of entertainers, employees serving
spirituous liquors, employees, patrons, and operators in qualified
establishments;
C.   Provide for requirements of employment for entertainers, employees serving
spirituous liquors, and employees in qualified establishments;
D.   Provide for penalties, to be enforced by the town, for anyone violating
the provisions of this chapter;
E.   Regulate the conduct and dress of entertainers, employees serving
spirituous liquors, and other employees in qualified establishments so as to
encourage public health, morals, and safety.
Ordinance 2005.22 and Ordinance 2014.014 simplified the statutory reference in
section
9-6-2 (A)
9-6-3 Clothing requirements for female entertainers and employees serving
spirituous liquors in qualified establishments; penalty
Any female entertaining or performing any dance, show, exhibition, or
performance, and any female serving spirituous liquors as defined by A.R.S. §
4-101, as amended, or any female employee, in a qualified establishment, who
appears clothed, costumed, unclothed, or uncostumed shall appear in a way so
that any portion of the nipple and the areola (the more darkly pigmented
portion of the breast encircling the nipple) is not visible and is firmly
covered by a fully opaque material, which does not resemble or simulate the
actual appearance of an areola and/or nipple. No person may knowingly conduct,
maintain, own, manage, and/or operate any qualified establishment where any
person is in violation of this section.
Ordinance 2005.22 and Ordinance 2014.014 simplified the statutory reference in
section
9-6-3
9-6-4 Clothing requirements for all entertainers, employees serving spirituous
liquor, and employees, in qualified establishments; penalty
Any person entertaining or performing any dance, show, exhibition, or
performance, and any person serving spirituous liquors as defined by A.R.S. §
4-101, as amended, in a qualified establishment, who appears clothed, costumed,
unclothed, or un-costumed shall appear in a way so that the lower portion of
his or her torso, consisting of the genitals, pubic hair, or anal cleft or
buttocks, is covered by a fully opaque material and is not so thinly covered as
to appear uncovered. No person may knowingly conduct, maintain, own, manage,
and/or operate any qualified establishment where any person is in violation of
this section.
Ordinance 2005.22 and Ordinance 2014.014 simplified the statutory reference in
section
9-6-4
9-6-5 Screening requirements; operation of qualified establishments in
violation of screening requirements
If any entertainer, employee serving spirituous liquors, employee, owner,
operator, manager, or patron in a qualified establishment is able to view,
either on or off the premises of the qualified establishment, any person who
would be in violation of this chapter if that person were on the premises of a
qualified establishment, the viewing person shall effectively screen the
violating person or persons from view. No person may knowingly conduct,
maintain, own, manage, and/or operate any qualified establishment where any
person is in violation of this section.
9-6-6 Prohibited acts
The following acts are prohibited by entertainers, employees serving spirituous
liquors, employees, owners, operators, managers, and patrons, in qualified
establishments:
A.   No employee, entertainer or person on the premises of a qualified
establishment shall wear or use any devise or covering exposed to view, and no
licensee, operator, manager, or owner of a qualified establishment shall
permit, on the licensed premises, any employee, entertainer or person to wear
or use any devise or covering exposed to view, which simulates the breast,
genitals, anus, pubic hair or any private portion of them.
B.   No person on or visible from the premises of a qualified establishment
shall perform, and no licensee, operator, manager, or owner of a qualified
establishment shall permit on the premises or from any location visible to the
premises of a qualified establishment, any person to perform acts of or acts
which constitute or simulate:
   1.   Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation,
flagellation, or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law;
   2.   The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or
genitals.
9-6-7 Restrictions on employment of entertainers
A.   No entertainer under the age of 18 years shall be employed in a qualified
establishment. All entertainers employed at a qualified establishment must
provide the following to the employer to be kept on permanent file:
   1.   Valid Arizona driver’s license or state ID card; and,
   2.   A certified copy of the entertainer’s birth certificate.
B.   The operator, manager, or owner of the qualified establishment shall have
and keep on file the documents required by this section.
9-6-8 Classification; continuing violations
A.   Whenever in this chapter any act is prohibited or declared to be unlawful
or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to
be unlawful, the violation of that provision is a class 1 misdemeanor.
B.   Each day any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Ordinance 2014.014 added section
9-6-8. On July 9, 2014, the town attorney changed “class one” to “class 1” as a
scrivener’s revision under the authority of section
1-4-5
CHAPTER 9-7.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Ordinance 2000.06 adopted this chapter, which was renumbered by Ordinance
2019.012
9-7-1 Purpose
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses and
related activities to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare
of the citizens of the town, and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually
oriented businesses within the town. The provisions of this chapter have
neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the
content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.
Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or
deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent or
effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
materials.
9-7-2 Definitions
A.   ”Adult arcade” means any place to which the public is permitted or invited
where coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other
image-producing devices are maintained to regularly show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed
are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
B.   “Adult bookstore,” “adult novelty store” or “adult video store” means a
commercial establishment that, regardless of any other purposes it may have,
and as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for
any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
   1.   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or
other visual representations that depict or describe specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or
   2.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities.
C.   “Adult cabaret” means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial
establishment that regularly features:
   1.   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity;
   2.   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities;
   3.   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
D.   ”Adult motel” means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
that offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration and
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right of way
that advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic
reproductions; and
   1.   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than
24 hours; or
   2.   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-lease the room
for a period of time that is less than 24 hours.
E.   “Adult motion picture theater” means a commercial establishment where, for
any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or
similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown that are characterized
by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
F.   “Adult theater” means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment that regularly features persons who appear, in person,
in a state of nudity and/or semi-nudity, and/or live performances that are
characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified
sexual activities.
G.   ”Adult vending machine” means any mechanical device that, regardless of
any other purposes it may have, regularly publicly dispenses for any form or
consideration any books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides, or other visual representations that are characterized by the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
H.   “Employee” means a person who performs any service on the premises of a
sexually oriented business on a full time, part time, contract basis, or
independent basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee,
independent contractor, agent, or otherwise, and whether or not the person is
paid a salary, wage, commission or other compensation by the operator of the
business. A person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the
premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the
premises, as well as a person exclusively on the premises as a patron or
customer is not an employee within the meaning of this chapter.
I.   “Escort” means a person who, for pecuniary or other consideration, agrees
or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who
agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a
striptease for another person.
J.   “Escort agency” means a person or business association who furnishes,
offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary
business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
K.   “Establishment” means and includes any of the following:
   1.   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new
business;
   2.   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
   3.   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business;
   4.   The relocation of any sexually oriented business; or
   5.   A sexually oriented business or premises on which the sexually oriented
business is located.
L.   In assessing whether a particular business is a “family-oriented
entertainment business,” the town shall consider the following factors related
to the business:
   1.   Whether a primary business purpose is related to the sale of food or
food services;
   2.   Whether a primary business purpose relates to the sale or use of
entertainment or educational products, services, facilities or activities;
   3.   The age of patrons for or by which the services, facilities or
activities of the business are primarily appropriate and utilized; and
   4.   Whether the business is primarily a retail establishment.
   A business determined to be primarily a retail or a food services
establishment is presumed to not qualify as a family-oriented entertainment
business unless articulable reasons to the contrary are established by the
town.
M.   “Licensee” means a person in whose name a license has been issued, as well
as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license.
N.   ”Nude model studio” means any place where a person who appears in a state
of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is regularly provided to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons for consideration.
O.   “Nudity” or a “state of nudity” means the appearance of a human bare
buttock, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic area, male genitals, female
genitals, or vulva, with less than a fully opaque covering; or a female breast
with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; or human male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered.
P.   ”Premises” means the real property upon which the sexually oriented
business is located, and all appurtenances to them and buildings located there,
including, but not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds,
private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent to them,
under the ownership, control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in
the application for a business license pursuant to this chapter.
Q.   ”Regularly,” “regularly features,” or “regularly shown” shall be construed
to apply the provisions of this chapter only activities that take place outside
the context of some larger form of expression.
R.   ”School” means a child care facility licensed pursuant to the Arizona
revised statutes, title 36, chapter 7.1, or any public or private institution
established for the purposes of offering instruction to pupils in programs for
preschool children with disabilities, kindergarten programs or any combination
of grades one through twelve, including but not limited to, child day care
facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools,
intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools,
vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education
schools; schools includes the school ground but does not include the facilities
used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school.
S.   “Semi-nude” or “semi-nudity” means the appearance of the female breast
below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point. This
definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breasts,
but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breasts
exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing
apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
T.   “Sexual encounter center” means a business or commercial enterprise that,
as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration
for:
   1.   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between any two
persons of the opposite sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of
nudity or semi-nudity; or
   2.   Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same
sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity.
U.   ”Sexually oriented business” means an adult arcade, adult vending machine,
adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult
motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model
studio, adult novelty store and sexual encounter center.
V.   “Specified anatomical area” means:
   1.   The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if fully
and opaquely covered; or
   2.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
W.   “Specified criminal activity” means any of the following offenses:
   1.   Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity;
sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual
performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public
lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; sexual assault;
molestation of a child; or any sex-related offenses similar to those described
under the criminal code of Arizona, other states, or other countries;
   2.   For which:
      a.   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the
date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
      b.   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
      c.   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more
misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within
any 24-month period.
   3.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant.
X.   “Specified sexual activities” means and includes any of the following:
   1.   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts, whether covered or uncovered;
   2.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
   3.   Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
   4.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in 1 through 3 above.
Y.   “Substantial enlargement” of a sexually oriented business means the
increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than 25%, as the floor
areas exist on May 2, 2000.
Z.   “Transfer of ownership or control” of a sexually oriented business means
and includes any of the following:
   1.   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
   2.   The transfer of securities that form a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
   3.   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device that
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the
ownership or control.
Ordinance 2000.10 added the word “regularly” to the definition of adult arcade
Ordinance 2000.10 deleted former subparagraph 4
Ordinance 2000.10 rewrote the “adult motel” definition
Ordinance 2000.10 rewrote the “adult vending machine” definition
Ordinance 2000.10 rewrote the family-oriented entertainment business definition
Ordinance 2000.10 added the word “regularly” to the definition of nude model
studio
Ordinance 2005.22 deleted a redundant definition of “person” (see section
1-3-2)
Ordinance 2000.10 deleted a former definition of “principal business purpose”
and added the “regularly…” definition
Ordinance 2000.10 added everything after “including but not limited to” in the
school definition
Ordinance 2000.10 changed “or” to “and” in the last clause of the sexually
oriented business definition
Ordinance 2000.10 changed “five years” to “two years” in subparagraph a
Ordinance 2000.10 changed “ten years” to “five years” in subparagraphs b and c
9-7-3 Classification
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
A.   Adult arcades;
B.   Adult bookstores, adult novelty shops or adult video stores;
C.   Adult cabarets;
D.   Adult motels;
E.   Adult motion picture theaters;
F.   Adult theaters;
G.   Adult vending machines;
H.   Escort agencies;
I.   Nude model studios; and
J.   Sexual encounter centers.
Ordinance 2000.10 added paragraph G
9-7-4 License required; non-transferability; exceptions
A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented
business without first obtaining and maintaining a valid sexually oriented
business license issued pursuant to this chapter.
B.   It shall be unlawful for any person who operates a sexually oriented
business to employ a person to work and/or perform services on the premises of
the sexually oriented business, if the employee is not in possession of a valid
sexually oriented business employee license issued to the employee pursuant to
this chapter.
C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain employment with a sexually
oriented business if the person is not in possession of a valid sexually
oriented business employee license issued to the person pursuant to this
chapter.
D.   It shall be unlawful for any person, association, firm or corporation
licensed as provided in this chapter to operate under any name or conduct
business under any designation not specified in the license.
E.   All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be nontransferable
except as provided in this chapter.
F.   The license required by this section shall be in addition to any other
licenses or permits required to engage in the business or occupation, as
applicable, by either the town, the county or the state, and persons engaging
in activities described by this chapter shall comply with all other ordinances
and laws, including the town zoning ordinance, as may be required to engage in
a business or profession.
G.   It shall be a defense to subsections B and C of this section if the
employment is of limited duration and for the sole purpose of repair and/or
maintenance of machinery, equipment, or the premises.
9-7-5 License application
A.   An application for a sexually oriented business license, including a
renewal application, must be made on a form provided by the town. The
application must be accompanied by a sketch or a diagram showing the
configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space
occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally
prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches. The license inspector may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal
applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted
and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since
it was prepared.
B.   Prior to applying for an original sexually oriented business license, all
applicants for the license must have the premises inspected and approved by the
health department, fire department, building safety department, and zoning
department. Written certification of the inspections and approvals by each
inspecting agency must be submitted with each sexually oriented business
license application. A licensee who has not submitted the certifications within
the five previous years or a licensee for an establishment which expanded since
the time of the previous license application must also have the respective
premises inspected and submit written certification of the inspections and
approvals by each inspecting agency with the licensee’s next application for
the renewal of a sexually oriented business license. Agencies responsible for
inspecting the premises of an existing or anticipated sexually oriented
business must complete the requested inspections within 30 days of applicant’s
request; if one or more agencies fails to timely inspect the requested
premises, the requirements of this subsection as they relate to that one or
more inspection are waived by the town.
C.   The application may request, and the applicant shall provide, such
information (including fingerprints) as the town may require to enable the town
to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established under
this chapter. The applicant has an affirmative duty to supplement a pending
application with new information received subsequent to the date the
application was deemed completed.
D.   All applications to own or operate a sexually oriented business must be
submitted by a natural person who must sign the application. If a legal entity
wishes to own or operate a sexually oriented business, each natural person who
owns or controls a 20% or greater interest in the business must sign the
application for a business license as an applicant. If a corporation is listed
as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the entity that wishes to
operate such a business, each individual having a 20% or greater interest in
the corporation must sign the application for a business license as an
applicant. In all cases, any person involved in the day-to-day operation of the
business or has the capacity to significantly influence the operation of the
business must sign the application as an applicant.
E.   Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall be
accompanied by the following:
   1.   Payment of the application fee in full;
   2.   The name of the applicant or organization applying for the license and
the name under which the sexually oriented business will operate.
   3.   If the establishment is a state corporation, a copy of the articles of
incorporation, together with all amendments to them and a signed statement that
the corporation is in good standing in the state;
   4.   If the establishment is a foreign corporation, a copy of the
certificate of authority to transact business in this state, together with all
amendments to it and a signed statement that the corporation is in good
standing in the state of incorporation;
   5.   If the establishment is a limited partnership formed under the laws of
the state, a copy of the certificate of limited partnership, together with all
amendments to it and a signed statement that the corporation is in good
standing in the state;
   6.   If the establishment is a foreign limited partnership, a copy of the
certificate of limited partnership and the qualification documents, together
with all amendments to it and a signed statement that the corporation is in
good standing in the state of incorporation;
   7.   Proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on which the
establishment is to be situated in the form of a copy of the recorded deed;
   8.   If the persons identified as the fee owners of the tract of land in
item 6 are not also the owners of the establishment, then the lease, purchase
contract, purchase option contract, lease option contract or other documents
evidencing the legally enforceable right of the applicants to have or obtain
the use and possession of the tract or portion of them that is to be used for
the establishment for the purpose of the operation of the establishment;
   9.   A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30 days
prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting the property lines
and the structures containing any existing sexually oriented businesses within
1,500 feet of the property to be certified; the property lines of any
established religious institution/synagogue, public park or recreation area, or
family-oriented entertainment business within 1,500 feet of the property to be
certified; the property lines of any school established within 1,500 feet of
the property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be
considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an
application is submitted;
   10.   Any of items 2 through 8, above, shall not be required for a renewal
application or for an application for a secondary classification of sexually
oriented business operated within the same establishment as the primary
application or license if the applicant states that the documents previously
furnished the town with the original application or previous renewals remain
correct and current.
F.   Applications for an employee license to work and/or perform services in a
sexually oriented business, whether original or renewal, must be made to the
license inspector by the person to whom the employee license shall issue. Each
application for an employee license shall be accompanied by payment of the
application fee in full. Application forms shall be supplied by the license
inspector. Applications must be submitted to the office of the license
inspector or the license inspector’s designee during regular working hours and
contain the following information:
   1.   The applicant’s given name, and any other names by which the applicant
is or has been known, including “stage” names and/or aliases;
   2.   Age, date and place of birth;
   3.   Height, weight, hair color, and eye color;
   4.   Present residence address and telephone number;
   5.   Present business address and telephone number;
   6.   Date, issuing state, and number of photo driver’s license, or other
state issued identification card information;
   7.   Social Security number; and
   8.   Proof that the individual is at least 18 years old.
   All information submitted to the town pursuant to this paragraph is
confidential and will not be released except as pursuant to a valid law
enforcement investigation, court order or as otherwise may be required by law.
G.   Each person signing an application as an applicant shall attach to the
application form the following:
   1.   Two identical, passport-quality color photographs of the applicant
clearly showing the applicant’s face and taken within the preceding month, and
a full set of the applicant’s fingerprints on a standard fingerprint card
recorded by the police department. Any fees for the photographs and
fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant.
   2.   A statement detailing the sexually oriented business license history of
the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the filing
of the application, including whether the applicant, in this or any other town,
city, county, state, or country, has ever had any sexually oriented business
license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended,
or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked, or
suspended. If there is any such denial, revocation, or suspension, state the
name or names under which the license was sought and/or issued, the name of the
issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the reasons for the
denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation,
or suspension shall be attached to the application.
   3.   A statement whether the applicant or any person over the age of 18
years with whom the applicant resides has been convicted, or is awaiting trial
on pending charges, of a specified criminal activity and, if so, the nature of
the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of
each.
   4.   A statement made under oath that the applicant has personal knowledge
of the information contained in the application, that the information contained
in and furnished with the application is true and correct and that the
applicant has read the provisions of this chapter.
H.   A separate application and sexually oriented business license shall be
required for each sexually oriented business classification operating within
the same establishment.
I.   The fact that a person possesses other types of permits and/or licenses
does not exempt that person from the requirement of obtaining a sexually
oriented business or employee license.
J.   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750, the town is hereby authorized to receive
criminal history record information for evaluating the fitness of current and
prospective sexually oriented business licensees and current and prospective
sexually oriented business employee licensees.
K.   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750 and public law 92-544, the town shall submit
all fingerprints obtained pursuant to this chapter to the Arizona department of
public safety for the purpose of obtaining state and federal criminal history
record information. The Arizona department of public safety is authorized to
exchange this fingerprint data with the federal bureau of investigation.
L.   Criminal history record information obtained by the town pursuant to this
chapter shall be used only for evaluating the fitness of current and
prospective sexually oriented business licensees and current and prospective
sexually oriented business employee licensees. The town shall comply with all
relevant state and federal rules and regulations regarding the dissemination of
criminal history record information.
Ordinance 2000.10 added the last sentence of paragraph B
Ordinance 2007.22 changed “building department” to “building safety
department.” The town attorney corrected the department name in paragraph B as
a scrivener’s correction, under authority confirmed by Ordinance 2008.16
Ordinance 2000.10 added the last sentence of paragraph D and changed two
occurrences of 10% to 20%
Ordinance 2000.10 rewrote paragraph E
Ordinance 2000.10 added the un-numbered paragraph after subparagraph 8
Ordinance 2000.10 rewrote subparagraphs 1 and 2. Ordinance 2019.012 made minor
revisions to subparagraph 1.
Ordinance 2019.012 added paragraphs J, K, and L
9-7-6 Issuance of license; denial; annual renewal required
A.   Upon the filing of an application for a sexually oriented business
employee license, the license inspector shall issue a temporary license to the
applicant. The application shall then be referred to the appropriate town
departments for investigation to be made on the information contained in the
application. Any inspection requirement of a particular town agency shall be
waived if the respective town agency fails to complete its inspection within 20
days of the date it received an inspection request. The application review
process shall be completed within 90 days from the date of the completed
application. After the investigation, the license inspector shall issue an
employee license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence
that one or more of the following findings is true:
   1.   That the applicant has failed to provide the information required by
this chapter for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form;
   2.   The applicant is under the age of 18 years;
   3.   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity;
   4.   The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for
employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule, or
regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this chapter; or
   5.   The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license
revoked by any jurisdiction within two years of the date of the current
application.
B.   If an application for a sexually oriented business employee license is
denied, the temporary license previously issued is immediately deemed null and
void.
C.   Denial, suspension, or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this
section shall be subject to appeal as set forth in this chapter.
D.   A license issued pursuant to subsection A of this section, if granted,
shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the
expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The
employee shall keep the license on the employee’s person at all times while
engaged in employment or performing services on the sexually oriented business
premises so that the license may be available for inspection upon lawful
request.
E.   If application is made for a sexually oriented business license, the
license inspector shall approve or deny issuance of the license within 90 days
of receipt of the completed application. The failure of the town or a
particular town official or agency to timely act shall result in the waiver by
the town of any requirement under this chapter as applied to that particular
town official or agency. The license inspector shall issue a license to an
applicant unless it is determined that one or more of the following findings is
true:
   1.   An applicant has failed to provide the information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form;
   2.   An applicant is under the age of 18 years;
   3.   An applicant has been denied a license by the town to operate a
sexually oriented business within the preceding 12 months, or applicant’s
license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the
preceding 12 months;
   4.   An applicant is overdue in payment to the town in taxes, fees, fines,
or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in relation to any
business;
   5.   An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity;
   6.   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not
been approved by the health department, fire department, and the building
safety department as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances;
   7.   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business is located
within 1,500 feet of any residential zone, single- or multiple-family dwelling,
family-oriented entertainment business, church, park or school;
   8.   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business is located
within 1,500 feet of either any other sexually oriented business licensed under
this chapter or any other sexually oriented business that would be licensed
under this chapter if it were located with the town limits;
   9.   The license fee required under this chapter has not been paid; or
   10.   An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is
not in compliance with one or more of the provisions of this chapter.
F.   A license issued pursuant to subsection E of this section, if granted,
shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is
granted, the expiration date, the address of the sexually oriented business,
and the section
9-7-3 classification for which the license is issued. The license shall be
posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented
business so that it may be easily read at any time.
G.   A sexually oriented business license shall issue for only one
classification, as set forth in section
9-7-3. Each classification operating within the same establishment and wholly
owned by that establishment requires a separate license.
H.   If the license inspector determines that an applicant is not eligible for
a sexually oriented business license, the applicant shall be given notice in
writing of the reasons for the denial within 90 days of the receipt of the
completed application by the license inspector, provided that the applicant may
request, in writing at any time before the notice is issued, that the period be
extended for an additional period of not more than ten days to make
modifications necessary to comply with this chapter.
I.   Each license issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual
renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the
license inspector that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified
criminal activity, or committed any act during the existence of the previous
license which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The
decision whether to renew a license shall be made within 90 days of receiving
the completed application. The renewal of a license shall be subject to the fee
as set forth in section
9-7-7. Non-renewal of a license shall be subject to appeal as set forth in this
chapter.
Ordinance 2000.10 added the third sentence and added “review” to the fourth
sentence of paragraph A. Ordinance 2019.012 changed the application review
duration from 30 to 90 days.
Ordinance 2000.10 inserted “required by this article” (now chapter) for
“reasonably necessary” in subparagraph 1
Ordinance 2000.10 inserted “any jurisdiction” for “the Town” in subparagraph 5
Ordinance 2000.10 added the second sentence of paragraph E. Ordinance 2019.012
changed “45 days” to “90 days” in the first sentence.
Ordinance 2000.10 deleted the phrase “or a person with whom the applicant is
residing” from the first line of subparagraphs 3, 4 and 5, and inserted
“applicant’s” for “whose” in subparagraph 3
Ordinance 2007.22 changed “building department” to “building safety
department.” The town attorney corrected the department name in paragraph 6 as
a scrivener’s correction, under authority confirmed by Ordinance 2008.16
Ordinance 2000.10 reduced the distance from schools to 1,500 feet (from one
mile) in subparagraph 7
Ordinance 2000.10 added the last sentence of paragraph G
Ordinance 2019.012 changed “45 days” to “90 days” in paragraph H
Ordinance 2019.012 changed “30 days” to “90 days” in paragraph I
9-7-7 Fees
The annual fee for a new sexually oriented business license, whether new or
renewal, shall be established by a fee schedule adopted by the council and
amended from time to time. The annual fee for a sexually oriented business
employee license, whether new or renewal shall be established by a fee schedule
adopted by the council and amended from time to time. These fees are to be used
to pay for the cost of the administration and enforcement of this chapter. The
fees are nonrefundable and may not be prorated for a license period of less
than one year. The fee requirements under this chapter shall not result in the
suspension, non-renewal or revocation of a license pursuant to this chapter if
the applicant or licensee makes full payments within 15 days of being notified
of the fee requirements.
Ordinance 2000.10 rewrote section
9-6-7, which was amended by Ordinance 2009.11 to replace specific fee amounts
with a reference to the comprehensive fee schedule
9-7-8 Inspection
A.   An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police
department, health department, fire department, building safety department, or
other town, state or federal departments or agencies to inspect the premises of
a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the
law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. The inspection shall be
limited to visual assessment of the activities conducted in areas in accord
with the provisions of this chapter: areas to which patrons have access or are
allowed access; to requests for inspection of the licenses required under this
chapter; and to requests for identification of those individuals who reasonably
appear to be under the age of 18 years.
B.   It shall be unlawful for an applicant, licensee or employee of a sexually
oriented business to refuse to permit law enforcement officers or any other
agent allowed by this section to inspect the premises at any time the premises
is occupied or open for business.
C.   The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel
that are currently being rented for use as temporary or permanent habitation.
Ordinance 2000.10 rewrote section
9-6-8
Ordinance 2007.22 changed “building department” to “building safety
department.” The town attorney corrected the department name in paragraph A as
a scrivener’s correction, under authority confirmed by Ordinance 2008.16
9-7-9 Expiration of license
A.   Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by submitting a renewal application to the town. Application for
renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date.
B.   If the license inspector denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall
not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. Notwithstanding
the provisions of this section, if a licensee appeals the non-renewal of a
license, the status quo immediately prior to the non-renewal shall be
maintained while the appeal is pending.
Ordinance 2000.10 added the last sentence of paragraph B. Ordinance 2019.012
changed “town clerk” to “license inspector” in the first sentence of paragraph
B.
9-7-10 Suspension
A.   The license inspector shall issue a notice and order of suspension,
suspending a license for a period not to exceed 30 days, if the license
inspector determines that the licensee or an employee of the licensee has:
   1.   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter;
   2.   Operated or performed services in a sexually oriented business while
intoxicated by the use of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances;
   3.   Refused to allow prompt inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter; or
   4.   Knowingly or intentionally permitted gambling by any person on the
sexually oriented business premises.
B.   The notice and order of suspension shall become effective within ten days
after issuance unless the licensee appeals the suspension of a license.
Ordinance 2000.10 inserted “issue a notice and order of suspension, suspending”
in place of “suspend” in paragraph A, added “Knowingly or intentionally” at the
beginning of subparagraph 4, and added paragraph B
9-7-11 Revocation
A.   The license inspector shall issue a notice and order or revocation,
revoking a license issued pursuant to this chapter if any of the following
occur:
   1.   A cause of license suspension occurs and the license has been suspended
within the proceeding 12 months;
   2.   A licensee knowingly or intentionally gave false or misleading
information in the material submitted during the application process;
   3.   A licensee, or a person with whom the licensee resides, is convicted of
a specified criminal activity on a charge that was pending prior to the
issuance of the license;
   4.   A licensee, subsequent to licensing, is convicted of a specified
criminal activity;
   5.   A licensee knowingly or intentionally permitted the possession, use, or
sale of controlled substances on the premises;
   6.   A licensee knowingly or intentionally permitted the sale, use, or
consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises;
   7.   A licensee knowingly or intentionally permitted prostitution on the
premises;
   8.   A licensee knowingly or intentionally operated the sexually oriented
business during a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;
   9.   A licensee knowingly or intentionally permitted any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sexual conduct to
occur in or on the licensed premises;
   10.   A licensee knowingly or intentionally is delinquent in payment to the
town, county or state for any taxes or fees;
   11.   A licensee knowingly or intentionally permitted a person under 18
years of age to enter the establishment;
   12.   A licensee knowingly or intentionally attempted to sell his business
license, or has sold, assigned, or transferred ownership or control of the
sexually oriented business to a non-licensee; or
   13.   A licensee knowingly or intentionally permitted a person or persons to
engage in specified sexual activities on the premises of the sexually oriented
business.
B.   When the license inspector revokes a license, the revocation shall
continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented
business license for one year from the date revocation became effective. If,
subsequent to revocation, the town determines that the basis for the revocation
has been corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted a license if at
least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.
C.   The notice and order of revocation shall become effective within ten days
after issuance unless the licensee appeals the suspension of a license.
Ordinance 2000.10 inserted “issue a notice and order of revocation, revoking”
in place of “revoke” in paragraph A, added “knowingly or intentionally” in
subparagraphs 2 and 5 through 13, and added the last sentence of paragraph B
and all of paragraph C. Ordinance 2009.25 replaced the term “town clerk” with
“license inspector” in paragraphs A and B
9-7-12 Administrative appeal
An applicant may appeal the decision of the license inspector regarding a
denial, revocation or suspension to the town council by filing a written notice
of appeal with the town clerk within 15 days after service of notice upon the
applicant of the license inspector’s decision. The notice of appeal shall be
accompanied by a memorandum or other writing setting out fully the grounds for
the appeal and all arguments in support of the appeal. The license inspector
may, within 15 days of service upon the town clerk of the applicant’s
memorandum, submit a memorandum in response to the memorandum filed by the
applicant on appeal to the town council. The applicant shall be afforded a
hearing before the town council at which the applicant or the applicant’s
attorney shall be afforded the right to address the council and the license
inspector’s decision, after which the town may respond to the applicant’s
presentation; the hearing shall be taken within 31 calendar days after the date
on which the town clerk receives the notice of appeal. After reviewing
submitted memoranda and exhibits as well as the arguments orally presented by
the applicant and the town, the town council shall vote either to uphold or
overrule the license inspector’s decision. The town council’s decision shall be
effective upon its rendering. Judicial review of a denial by the license
inspector and town council may then be made pursuant to this chapter.
Ordinance 2000.10 rewrote section
9-6-12 and changed the title from “Appeal” to “Administrative appeal”
Ordinance 2009.25 corrected the duties of the town clerk and license inspector
in section
9-6-12, which had been incorrectly revised by Ordinance 2009.14
9-7-13 Judicial review
After denial of an initial or renewal application, or suspension or revocation
of a license by the town council, the applicant or licensee may seek judicial
review of the administrative action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
When the town is notified that an applicant has filed for judicial review of
the administrative action resulting in the denial of an application, the town
shall issue a provisional license to applicant allowing it to carry on its
requested activities, subject to the orders of the reviewing court.
Ordinance 2000.10 added the last sentence of section
9-6-13
9-7-14 Change of employment
A.   An establishment operator covered by this chapter shall keep and maintain
an up to-date register of all employees including the following: each
employee’s name, address, age, sex and duties. The licensee must notify the
license inspector in writing within 15 days of hiring any attendant or
employee.
B.   An establishment operator covered by this chapter must notify the license
inspector in writing within 15 days of any change of licensed employees
employed at the establishment.
C.   An employee covered by this chapter must notify the license inspector in
writing within 15 days of any change in the employee’s place of employment from
one establishment covered by this chapter to another.
Ordinance 2000.10 rewrote paragraphs A and C
9-7-15 Sale, transfer or expansion
A.   Upon the sale or transfer of a substantial interest in a sexually oriented
business, the license for it shall be null and void, unless the transaction was
approved in advance by the license inspector, under the application procedure
of this chapter. An original application shall be made by any person,
association, firm or corporation desiring to own or operate the establishment
upon its transfer.
B.   An establishment licensee shall submit, upon sale or transfer of any
interest in an existing sexually oriented business, or any enlargement or
expansion of the place of business of a sexually oriented business, new
certifications of inspection as required of original applicants by this
chapter.
9-7-16 Notices
A.   Any notice required or permitted to be given by the license inspector or
any other town office, division, department or other agency under this chapter
to any applicant, operator or owner of a sexually oriented business may be
given either by personal delivery or by certified United States mail, postage
prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the most recent address as
specified in the application for the license, or any notice of address change
that has been received by the license inspector. Notices mailed as above shall
be deemed given upon their deposit in the United States mail. If any notice
given by mail is returned by the postal service, the license inspector or the
license inspector’s designee shall cause it to be posted at the principal
entrance to the establishment.
B.   Any notice required or permitted to be given to the license inspector by
any person under this chapter shall not be deemed given until and unless it is
received in the office of the license inspector.
C.   It shall be the duty of each owner who is designated on the license
application and each operator to furnish notice to the license inspector in
writing of any change of residence or mailing address.
9-7-17 Additional reporting requirements
To ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, whenever the license
inspector has reason to believe that the sale or rental for any form of
consideration of any merchandise defined in section
9-7-2(B) is a principal business purpose of any business licensed under this
title, the license inspector may require the business to provide to the license
inspector statements, in a form prescribed by the license inspector, detailing
the percentage of the business’s total retail sales, total inventory and total
retail floor space attributable to such merchandise. The license inspector may
also request that the business provide supporting documentation or information
reasonably necessary to verify any of the information provided in the detailed
statements.
Section 9-7-17 was added by Ordinance 2019.012. An earlier section adopted by
Ordinance 2000.06 (“Additional regulations for adult motels”) that appeared
here was deleted by Ordinance 2000.10.
9-7-18 Additional regulations for escort agencies
A.   An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years;
neither shall any person who is under the age of 18 may be employed or act as
an escort.
B.   A person shall not act as an escort or agree to act as an escort for any
person under the age of 18 years; neither shall an escort agency arrange for an
escort for any person under the age of 18 years.
9-7-19 Additional regulations for nude model studios
A.   A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years.
B.   A person under the age of 18 years shall not appear semi nude or in a
state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio.
C.   A person shall not appear in a state of nudity, or with knowledge, allow
another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio
premises which can be viewed from the public right of way.
D.   A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in
any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room
open to the public and containing a partition to prevent visibility into the
studio.
9-7-20 Solicitation of gratuity prohibited
An employee of a sexually oriented business, while nude or semi-nude, shall not
solicit any gratuity from any patron or customer on the sexually oriented
business premises, nor shall any patron or customer pay or give any gratuity to
any employee who appears in a state of nudity or semi-nudity on the sexually
oriented business premises.
Section 9-6-20 was rewritten by Ordinance 2000.10
9-7-21 Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films and
videos
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business,
other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of
less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, or other
video reproduction, that depicts specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
A.   Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application
shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan of the
proposed business specifying the location of one or more manager’s stations and
the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of
the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s station may
not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the
place where the business license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or architect’s
blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to
the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a
designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various
internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy
of plus or minus six inches. The license inspector may waive the foregoing
diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was
previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has
not been altered since it was prepared.
B.   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
C.   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s station may
be made without the prior approval of the license inspector or the license
inspector’s designee.
D.   It is the duty of the owner and operator of the premises to ensure that at
least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager’s station at all
times that any patron is present inside the premises.
E.   The interior of the premises shall be configured so that there is an
unobstructed view from a manager’s station of the entire area of the premises
to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms.
Restrooms may neither contain nor be subject to surveillance by video
reproduction equipment. If the premises have two or more manager’s stations
designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured so that there
is an unobstructed view of the entire area of the premises to which any patron
is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager’s
stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight
from the manager’s station.
F.   It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any
agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the view area
specified in subsection E of this section remains unobstructed by any doors,
walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times and to ensure
that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises that has been
designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted, as designated in
the application filed pursuant to subsection A of this section.
G.   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
H.   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access at an illumination of not less than five foot-candle as measured at the
floor level.
I.   It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any
agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the illumination
described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the
premises.
J.   No licensee shall allow an opening of any kind to exist between viewing
rooms or booths.
K.   No person shall make any attempt to make an opening of any kind between
the viewing booths or rooms.
L.   The operator of the sexually oriented business shall, during each business
day, inspect the walls between the viewing rooms or booths to determine if any
openings or holes exist. No licensee or employee of a sexually oriented
business may permit a patron to occupy a viewing room or booth containing any
openings or holes allowing viewing between two or more booths.
M.   The operator of the sexually oriented business shall cause all floor
coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no
rugs or carpeting.
N.   The operator of the sexually oriented business shall cause all wall
surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or
permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood,
composition board or other porous material shall be used within 48 inches of
the floor.
9-7-22 Exterior portions of sexually oriented businesses
A.   An owner or operator of a sexually oriented business shall not allow the
merchandise or activities of the establishment to be visible from a point
outside the establishment.
B.   An owner or operator of a sexually oriented business shall abide by the
provisions of this chapter regulating the content of signs.
C.   An owner or operator of a sexually oriented business shall not allow
exterior portions of the establishment to be painted any color other than a
single achromatic color. This provision shall not apply to a sexually oriented
business if the following conditions are met:
   1.   The establishment is a part of a commercial multi unit center;
   2.   The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial multi
unit center, including the exterior portions of the business, are painted the
same color as one another or are painted as a component of the overall
architectural style or pattern of the commercial multi unit center; but
D.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the painting of an
otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a sexually oriented business.
Paragraph B was rewritten by Ordinance 2000.10
9-7-23 Signage
A.   Notwithstanding any other provision of the code, it shall be unlawful for
the operator of any sexually oriented business or any other person to erect,
construct, or maintain any sign for the sexually oriented business other than
the one primary sign and one secondary sign, as provided in this section. This
section is intended to augment the town sign code, not supplant it.
B.   Primary signs shall have no more than two display surfaces. Each display
surface shall:
   1.   Not contain any flashing lights;
   2.   Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
   3.   Not exceed 75 square feet in area; and
   4.   Not exceed ten feet in height or ten feet in length.
C.   Primary and secondary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes,
drawings or pictorial representations in any manner, and may contain only the
name of the enterprise.
D.   Each letter forming a word on a primary or secondary sign shall be of
solid color, and shall be the same print type, size and color. The background
behind the lettering on the display surface of a primary sign shall be of a
uniform and solid color.
E.   Secondary signs shall have only one display surface. The display surface
shall:
   1.   Not contain any flashing lights;
   2.   Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
   3.   Not exceed 20 square feet in area;
   4.   Not exceed five feet in height or five feet in width; and
   5.   Be affixed or attached to a wall or door of the enterprise.
9-7-24 Sale, use, or consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited
The sale, use, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of a
sexually oriented business is prohibited.
9-7-25 Persons younger than eighteen prohibited from entry; attendant required.
A.   An owner or operator of a sexually oriented business shall not allow a
person who is younger than 18 years of age to enter or be on the premises of a
sexually oriented business at any time the sexually oriented business is open
for business.
B.   It shall be the duty of the operator of each sexually oriented business to
ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the sexually
oriented business at all times during the sexually oriented business’ regular
business hours. It shall be the duty of the attendant to prohibit any person
under the age of 18 years from entering the sexually oriented business. It
shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of 18 years
unless the attendant asked for and was furnished: 
   1.   A valid operator’s, commercial operator’s, or chauffeur’s driver’s
license; or
   2.   A valid personal identification issued by the state reflecting that the
person is 18 years of age or older.
9-7-26 Hours of operation
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at
any time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and
Saturdays, and 1:00 a.m. and noon on Sundays.
9-7-27 Applicability to existing businesses
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the activities of all persons and
sexually oriented businesses described in this chapter, whether the business or
activities were established or commenced before, on or after the effective date
of this section, except that the requirements that sexually oriented businesses
be separated from certain types of land uses shall not apply to businesses
existing on the date of passage of this ordinance. For purposes of this
section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in
existence as of July 18, 2000.
Ordinance 2000.10 added section
9-6-27
9-7-28 Violations, penalty and abatement
A.   It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this chapter to
knowingly fail to fulfill that duty.
B.   A person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a class 1
misdemeanor.
C.   In addition to prosecution for a criminal violation of this chapter, the
operation of a sexually oriented business without a valid license shall
constitute a nuisance and the town attorney may file an action in a court of
competent jurisdiction against a person or entity operating or causing to be
operated the business for injunctive relief or to abate the nuisance arising
out of violation of this ordinance.
Ordinance 2000.10 added section
9-6-28
CHAPTER 9-8.
LIQUOR LICENSES
Ordinance 2014.021 deleted and replaced
chapter 9-7 in its entirety. For previous history, see Ordinances 93.02, 96.09,
and 2009.11.
9-8-1 Definition
For purposes of this chapter, “spirituous liquor” is defined as provided in
A.R.S. § 4-101.
9-8-2 License required; classification
No person shall manufacture, sell or deal in spirituous liquors within the town
without first obtaining and properly maintaining in force a liquor license
issued by the state under the procedures specified by state law.
Violation of this section is a class 2 misdemeanor.
9-8-3 License application; fees
Any person desiring a license to manufacture, sell, or deal in spirituous
liquor in the town shall file an application on forms prescribed and furnished
by the Arizona department of liquor licenses and control. Applications shall be
processed in accordance with the procedures specified by state law.
Every person filing an application under this chapter shall pay a nonrefundable
application fee to the town in an amount established by a fee schedule adopted
by the council and amended from time to time, except that no fee shall be
charged for an application for sampling privileges. The applicable fee shall be
due and payable to the town upon the town’s receipt of the application.
Ordinance 2019.013 adopted
chapter 9-9 (video service) and deleted the former chapter entitled “cable
television” in its entirety. For previous history, see Ordinances 87.09, 96.09,
2000.06, 2002.29, and 2005.22.
CHAPTER 9-9.
VIDEO SERVICE
9-9-1 Definitions and requirements
A.   Terms used in this chapter are defined in A.R.S. § 9-1401.
B.   This chapter supplements and carries out the provisions of Arizona revised
statutes title 9 chapter 13 (A.R.S. § 9-1401 et seq.), which sets forth the
regulations and requirements for providing video service and constructing and
operating a video service network in the town.
9-9-2 Video service license required
A person wishing to provide video service and to construct and operate a video
service network in any service area within the boundaries of the town shall do
all of the following:
A.   Submit a completed application and affidavit for uniform video service
license.
B.   Sign and comply with the terms of the uniform video service license
agreement.
C.   Comply with all applicable provisions of Arizona revised statutes title 9
chapter 13 (A.R.S. § 9-1401 et seq.).
9-9-3 License fee
A.   For the privilege of a video service provider to occupy or use, in whole
or in part, any highway within the boundaries of the town to provide video
service through a video service network, each video service provider shall pay
the town a license fee of 5% of the gross revenue the video service provider
receives from its subscribers located within the boundaries of the town.
B.   The license fee shall be paid quarterly, with the payment for each
calendar quarter due no more than 30 calendar days following the end of the
calendar quarter.
C.   If any license fee payment is not made on or before the its due date
agreement, the video service provider shall pay an interest charge, computed
from the due date, at an annual rate equal to the federal short-term rate
determined pursuant to 26 U.S.C. § 6621(b) plus 1½% during the period for which
payment was due.
9-9-4 Grant of authority
A.   The local government receipt section of the application and affidavit for
uniform video service license may be signed by or for the town clerk.
B.   The town engineer is authorized to sign the uniform video service license
agreement on behalf of the town.
CHAPTER 9-10.
SURFACE MINING AND LAND RECLAMATION
Ordinance 2002.08 added
chapter 9-10. A former chapter entitled “Penalty” that appeared here was
deleted by Ordinance 2019.012. For prior history, see Ordinances 2000.06 and
2014.014.
9-10-1 Purpose and intent
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish an effective and
comprehensive surface mining and reclamation policy including regulation of
surface mining operations so as to assure that:
A.   Adverse environmental effects are prevented or minimized and that mined
lands are reclaimed in a timely manner, to a usable condition which is readily
adapted for alternative land use.
B.   The production and conservation of minerals are encouraged, while giving
consideration to values relating to recreation, watershed, wildlife, range and
forage, and aesthetic enjoyment.
C.   Residual hazards to public health and safety are eliminated.
9-10-2 Definitions
For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
A.   “Financial assurance amount” means that amount of money necessary to
conduct a complete reclamation on the mined lands in accordance with the
approved reclamation plan, plus a reasonable estimate of the administrative
costs and expenses which would be incurred by the town.
B.   “Financial assurance” means a bond, instrument, fund or other form of
financial assurance acceptable to the town.
C.   “Government mine” means any surface mine owned and operated by federal,
state or local governmental entity.
D.   “Idle” means to curtail for a period of one year or more surface mining
operations by more than 90% of the operation’s previous maximum annual mineral
production, with the intent to resume those surface mining operations at a
future date.
E.   “Interim management plan” is the plan which the operator of an idle mine
shall submit and gain approval for, to assure that the site shall be maintained
in compliance with the approved reclamation plan, use permit, and applicable
conditions, until the mine operation is resumed or the mine is fully reclaimed
in accordance with the approved reclamation plan.
F.   “Mined lands” includes the surface, subsurface, and groundwater of an area
in which surface mining operations will be, are being, or have been conducted,
including private ways and roads appurtenant to any such area, land
excavations, workings, mining waste, and areas in which structures, facilities,
equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property which result from,
or are used in, surface mining operations are located.
G.   “Minerals” means any naturally occurring compound, or groups of elements
and compounds, formed from inorganic processes and organic substances,
including, but not limited to sand, gravel and rock.
H.   “Mining waste” includes the residual of soil, rock, mineral, liquid,
vegetation, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property directly
resulting from, or displaced by, surface mining operations, excluding
stockpiles as defined in this section.
I.   “Operator” means any person who is engaged in surface mining operations
himself, or who contracts with others to conduct operations on his behalf,
except a person who is engaged in surface mining operations as an employee with
wages as his sole compensation.
J.   “Overburden” means soil, rock, or other materials that lie above a natural
mineral deposit or in between deposits, before or after their removal by
surface mining operations.
K.   ”Pledge of revenue” means a financial assurance mechanism by which a
governmental entity proposes to make specific, identified future revenue
available to perform reclamation pursuant to the approved reclamation plan.
L.   “Reclamation” means the combined process of land treatment that minimizes
water degradation, air pollution, damage to aquatic or wildlife habitat,
flooding, erosion, or other adverse effects from mining operations, including
adverse surface effects incidental to underground mines, so that mined lands
are reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternate
land use and creates no danger to public health or safety. The process may
extend to affected lands surrounding mined lands, and may require backfilling,
grading, resoiling, revegetation, soil compaction, stabilization, restoration
of water bodies, and slope stability or other measures.
M.   “Reclamation plan” means the plan required by the town pursuant to this
chapter and adopted in accordance therewith and should include beginning and
estimated ending dates for each phase, all reclamation activities required,
criteria for measuring completion of activities and estimated costs for each
phase of reclamation.
N.   “Sand and gravel operation” means any operation the principal product of
which is sand, gravel, pumice or any other common variety of mineral.
O.   “Stockpile” means a volume of stored mined material which is residual or
secondary material extracted during a surface mining operation and which has a
demonstrated future economic value sufficient to warrant its protection and
preservation.
P.   “Surface mining operations” means all, or part of, the process involved in
the mining of minerals on mined lands by removing overburden and mining
directly from the mineral deposits, open-pit mining of minerals naturally
exposed, mining by auger methods, dredging, and quarrying. Surface mining
operations include, but are not limited to:
   1.   In place distillation, retorting or leaching.
   2.   The producing and disposal of mining wastes.
   3.   Prospecting and exploratory activities.
   4.   Borrow pitting, streambed skimming, segregation and stockpiling of
mined materials (and recovery of same).
Ordinance 2005.22 deleted a redundant definition of “person” (see section
1-3-2)
9-10-3 Scope
A.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all the incorporated areas
of the town.
B.   The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to:
   1.   Excavation or grading for farming, onsite construction, or restoration
of land following a flood or natural disaster or other activities separately
regulated by town ordinances.
   2.   Reclamation of lands mined prior to February 5, 2002, unless subject to
approved development agreements and zoning conditions enacted or agreed to
after February 5, 2002.
   3.   Surface mining operations that are required by federal law to protect a
mining claim, if those operations are conducted solely for that purpose.
   4.   Prospecting for, or the extraction of, minerals for commercial purpose
and the removal of overburden in total amounts of less than one thousand cubic
yards in any one location of one acre or less.
9-10-4 Reclamation plan requirements
A.   Any person who proposes to engage in a surface mining activity shall,
prior to the commencement of the operations, obtain approval of a permit to
mine, submit a reclamation plan, and have financial assurances in place
sufficient to implement the approved plan. Approval to mine and approval of the
reclamation plan, in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter,
shall be obtained from the Marana development services director.
B.   The reclamation plan shall be applicable to a specific piece of property
or properties, shall be based upon the character of the surrounding area and
such characteristics of the property as type of overburden, soil stability,
topography, geology, climate, stream characteristics, and principal mineral
commodities, and shall establish site-specific criteria for evaluating
compliance with the approved reclamation plan, including topography,
revegetation, sediment and erosion control, and current and proposed zoning.
The reclamation plan shall include a certification by the operator that all
public agencies having possible jurisdiction over the surface mining activity,
including but not limited to county, state and federal agencies, have reviewed
and approved the plan, and that all necessary permits have been obtained.
C.   Reclamation plans issued pursuant to this chapter shall be recorded with
the county recorder and shall run with the land affected thereby and shall be
binding on all successors, heirs, and assigns of the permittee.
D.   Applicants having a surface mining operation that involves separate,
noncontiguous parcels of land may file one reclamation plan for the entire
operation covering each parcel of land, provided that the type of operation is
the same on each parcel of land and each parcel of land is identified in the
reclamation plan. A separate phasing schedule shall be required for each
parcel.
9-10-5 Application
All applications for a reclamation plan for any mining operation shall be made
on forms provided by town development services department. The application
shall be filed in accordance with this chapter and procedures established by
the town.
9-10-6 Fees
A.   The fees for a reclamation plan, amendment to reclamation plan, and
interim management plan shall be as the same as those set forth in the town fee
schedule for development plans, and shall be paid to the development services
department at the time of filing of the reclamation plan amendment to
reclamation plan, or interim management plan.
B.   A business license fee shall be paid for a surface mining license in an
amount set forth in a fee schedule adopted by the council and amended from time
to time. An increased fee is necessary to:
   1.   Support town staff and other efforts to monitor, inspect, and enforce
the provisions of this chapter and
chapter 10-1, transportation and dumping of garbage or aggregate material as it
relates to aggregate material;
   2.   Ensure that surface mining operations are maintained to standards of
repair, orderliness, neatness, sanitation, and safety acceptable to industry
standards and the town; and
   3.   Ensure that surface mining operations carry out all mining operations
in an organized manner and in compliance with all federal and state laws and
the regulations of appropriate state and federal agencies, having due regard
for the health and safety of workers and other employees, including the
safeguarding with fences, barriers, fills, covers, or other effective devices,
any shafts, pits, tunnels, cuts, and other excavation which otherwise would
unduly imperil life, safety or property of other persons.
Ordinance 2019.012 rewrote paragraph B and added subparagraphs 1-3
9-10-7 Financial assurances
A.   To ensure that reclamation will proceed in accordance with the approved
reclamation plan, the town shall require as a condition of approval financial
assurances.
B.   Financial assurances may take the form of surety bonds, irrevocable
letters of credit, trust funds or other mechanisms acceptable to the town.
C.   Public agencies may satisfy financial assurance requirements by using
“pledges of revenue” or “budget set aside” as acceptable financial assurances
mechanisms.
D.   The financial assurances shall remain in effect for the duration of the
surface mining operation and any additional period until reclamation is
completed.
E.   The amount of the financial assurances shall be calculated by the
applicant based on the projected expense to complete the reclamation for the
intended future use as approved by the town engineer. Approval of the amount of
financial assurances will be subject to the review and approval of the town
engineer.
F.   The amount of financial assurances required of a surface mining operation
for any one year shall be adjusted annually to account for new lands disturbed
by surface mining operations, inflation, and reclamation of lands accomplished
in accordance with the approved reclamation plan.
G.   The financial assurances shall be made payable to the town. However, if a
surface mining operation has received approval of its financial assurances from
a public agency other than the town, the town shall review those financial
assurances to ascertain whether they are adequate for purposes of this section,
or shall credit them toward fulfillment of the financial assurances required by
this section, if they are made payable to the town.
H.   If a sand and gravel surface mining operation is sold or ownership is
transferred to another person, the existing financial assurances shall remain
in force and shall not be released by the town until new financial assurances
are secured from the new owner and have been approved by the town.
I.   The release of financial assurances shall be with the concurrence of all
agencies named on the financial assurance. The criteria for release of
financial assurances, or part of the financial assurances, shall be made part
of the reclamation plan. In no case shall the financial assurance be released
until reclamation has been completed.
L.   The amount of financial assurances shall be reviewed and adjusted, if
required, pursuant to section
9-10-10.
Ordinance 2005.22 inserted “town engineer” for “development services director”
in paragraph E
9-10-8 Public records
Reclamation plans, reports, applications and other documents submitted pursuant
to this chapter are public records unless it can be demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the town that the release of the information, or any part of
it, would reveal production, reserves, or rate of depletion entitled to
protection as proprietary information and is not required by law. The town
shall identify the proprietary information as a separate part of each
application. Proprietary Information shall be made available to persons other
than the mine operator or mine owner only when authorized by law or by the mine
operator and by the mine owner.
9-10-9 Procedures
Once all required and approved documents and other related materials and
requirements are submitted and approved as required under this chapter,
including the submittal of the financial assurances in the amount approved by
the town engineer, the town engineer shall expeditiously issue approval to
commence operation of the approved surface mining operation and reclamation
plan.
Ordinance 2005.22 inserted “town engineer” for “development services director”
in section
9-10-9
9-10-10 Periodic review and inspections
A.   The town shall monitor and inspect each surface mining operation on a
regular basis.
B.   The required financial assurances shall be reviewed annually by the town.
Financial assurances shall be adjusted to account for new lands disturbed by
surface mining operations, inflation, reclamation of lands accomplished in
accordance with the approved reclamation plan, or other factors related to the
cost of reclamation which have changed since the previous review.
C.   At the time of the annual inspection, the mine operator shall make
available to the town an updated reclamation cost estimate prepared by the
operator.
D.   The person in charge of the surface mining operation shall make the
surface mining operation open and available for monitoring and inspection
during regular town and operator business hours or at such other times as may
be mutually agreed upon by him or her and the development services department.
The provisions of this subsection shall be deemed to be a condition of the
reclamation plan.
E.   The development services department shall make a report of the results of
the inspection. This report shall be filed with the town engineer.
Ordinance 2005.22 inserted “town engineer” for “development services director”
in paragraph E
9-10-11 Idle mine – interim management plans
Within 90 days of a surface mining operation becoming idle, the operator shall
submit an interim management plan. The interim management plan shall be
developed in accordance with this chapter. Interim management plans shall be
sent to the town engineer for review in the same manner as amendments to
reclamation plans. Financial assurances as required shall remain in effect
during the period that the surface mining operation is idle.
Ordinance 2005.22 inserted “town engineer” for “development services director”
in section
9-10-11
9-10-12 Amendments to plan
Amendments to an approved reclamation plan may be submitted detailing proposed
changes from the original plan. Substantial deviations from the original plan
shall not be undertaken until the amendment has been filed and approved, in the
same manner as established in this chapter for original application. The
foregoing notwithstanding, in emergency situations where irreversible physical
damage to the environment may occur, an operator may take whatever action is
necessary to prevent irreversible physical damage and shall promptly report the
taking of the action to the development services department. Applications for
an amendment are subject to the fee in accordance with section
9-10-6.
9-10-13 Enforcement
A.   Where it appears to the development services department that a surface
mining operation is in violation of any condition of an approved reclamation
plan or applicable statute, regulation, or ordinance, the development services
department shall serve formal notice to the operator stating the nature of the
violation and the specified time frame to correct the violation before an order
is issued.
B.   The time within which the permittee must commence correction of the
violation shall be sooner than 60 days from the notice of violation.
C.   An order shall be issued if the operator fails to comply with the notice
within the specified time limit. Not sooner than 30 days after the date of the
order, a hearing shall be held by the town engineer or his or her designee, for
which at least ten days’ written notice has been given to the operator. The
order shall not take effect until the operator has been provided the hearing.
The date of issuance of the order is the date of receipt by the operator.
D.   Failure to comply with the order shall be subject to an order setting
administrative penalties. Penalties shall be assessed from date of original
non-compliance.
E.   In determining the amount of administrative penalty, the town shall take
into consideration the nature, circumstances, extent, and gravity of the
violation or violations, any prior history of violations, the degree of
culpability, economic savings, if any, resulting from the violation, and any
other matters justice may require.
F.   Orders setting administrative penalties shall become effective upon
issuance and payment shall be made to the development services department,
unless the operator files an appeal with the town manager within 30 days. The
town manager shall notify the operator by personal service or certified mail
whether it will review the order setting administrative penalties. If after
hearing, the town manager affirms the order, the operator shall pay the
administrative penalties set by the town manager’s order within 30 days of the
service of that order.
G.   The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the town engineer, the
assistant town manager, town manager, or a designated appointee.
H.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a violation of this chapter may be enforced
by the town by the use of any legal or equitable remedy the town may have.
Ordinance 2005.22 inserted “town engineer” for “development services director”
in paragraph C
Ordinance 2005.22 inserted “town engineer” for “development services director”
in paragraph G
9-10-14 Application fees
No application shall be accepted unless it is in full compliance with all
requirements of this chapter, and accompanied by the fee specified in section
9-10-6. No part of any required fee shall be returnable, and every such fee
shall be deposited with the town.
CHAPTER 9-11.
SALE OF PRODUCTS CONTAINING PSEUDOEPHEDRINE
Ordinance 2006.01 added
chapter 9-11
9-11-1 Definitions
A.   In this chapter:
   1.   “Pseudoephedrine product” means any product containing ephedrine or
pseudoephedrine and includes any compound, mixture or preparation that contains
any detectable quantity of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, norpseudoephedrine, or
phenylpropanolamine or their salts, optical isomers or salts of optical
isomers. Product packaging that lists ephedrine, pseudoephedrine,
norpseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine as an active ingredient shall
constitute prima facie evidence that the product is a pseudoephedrine product.
   2.   “Retail establishment” means any place of business that offers any
pseudoephedrine product for sale at retail.
9-11-2 Restrictions
A.   The operator of a retail establishment shall keep all products containing
pseudoephedrine behind a store counter or otherwise in a manner that is
inaccessible to customers without the assistance of the operator or an employee
of the establishment.
B.   The retail establishment employee making a retail sale of a product
containing pseudoephedrine shall require a government-issued photo
identification from the purchaser and shall record the purchaser’s name and
date of birth, the quantity of pseudoephedrine product purchased, the
transaction date and the initials of the retail establishment employee making
the sale.
C.   The information required to be obtained by paragraph B of this section
shall be retained by the retail establishment for a period of 90 days, and will
be considered a confidential document that will only be available to the
operator of the retail establishment and to law enforcement agency officers and
officials.
9-11-3 Penalty
A violation of this chapter is a class 1 misdemeanor.
CHAPTER 9-12.
COMMERCIAL FILMING AND PHOTOGRAPHY PERMITS
Ordinance 2019.001 added
chapter 9-12
9-12-1 Purpose and intent
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide rules and regulations governing
the issuance of permits for filming activities in locations within the town of
Marana. The intent of this chapter is to encourage still photographers, motion
picture, television, commercial, and nontheatrical companies to use locations
for filming activities within the town as long as said activities are
consistent with the general safety and welfare of the public and the protection
of property and resources.
9-12-2 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply throughout this chapter unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
A.   “Applicant” means the person who applies for a permit to film in the town
pursuant to this chapter.
B.   “Film permit” means the written authorization from the film permit officer
to conduct the filming described in the permit. A film permit does not
authorize a permittee to create or maintain a public or private nuisance; to
violate any law, statute or ordinance; or to endanger the public health,
safety, or welfare whether intentionally or negligently.
C.   “Film permit officer” means the town employee designated and authorized by
the town manager to coordinate filming activities and issue film permits in the
town.
D.   “Filming activity” means the staging, shooting, filming, videotaping,
photographing, or other similar process conducted for the making of still
photographs, motion pictures, television programs, commercials, or
nontheatrical film productions.
E.   “Filming for private and family use” means filming activities which are
conducted and intended for private, personal use and not for commercial use or
for the generation of profit or financial gain, whether or not the activity is
performed by a professional.
F.    “News purposes” means a filming activity conducted for the purposes of
reporting on persons, events, or scenes which are in the news for newspapers,
television news, and other news media. “News purposes” shall not include
advertising or publicity filming.
G.   “Permittee” means the person issued a film permit pursuant to this
chapter.
H.   “Person” means and individual, firm, organization, corporation,
association, or other entity.
I.   “Private road” means any street, road, or right-of-way owned, occupied, or
under the control of a private individual, individuals, or private corporation.
J.   “Public road” means any street, road, or right-of-way owned, occupied, or
under the control of the town and located within the town limits.
K.   “Still photography” means and includes all activities attendant to
shooting or staging commercial still photographs without use of motion picture
or video equipment.
9-12-3 Permit required; non-transferable
A.   It is unlawful for any person to conduct filming activity for commercial
purposes on town property, including public right-of-way, without first
obtaining and maintaining a valid film permit for such activity from the film
permit officer.
B.   The permit must be in the possession of the permittee at all times while
on location.
C.   A film permit does not constitute or grant permission to use or occupy
private property or a private road.
D.   All film permits issued pursuant to this chapter are non-transferable.
9-12-4 Permit exemptions
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following
activities when lawfully conducted and not detrimental to the peace and
enjoyment of the area affected:
A.   Filming activities conducted on private property.
B.   Filming activities conducted for news purposes.
C.   Filming activities conducted for use in a criminal investigation or civil
or criminal court proceeding.
D.   Filming activities conducted solely for private or family use.
E.   Filming of the proceedings of a court, tribunal or governing body.
F.   Filming activities conducted by town employees for the benefit of the
town.
G.   Filming activities by students for the purpose of fulfilling classwork
assignments.
H.   Filming activities conducted by public or private schools.
I.   Filming activities by individuals or entities solely intended for
noncommercial purposes and not intended for the generation of financial profit.
9-12-5 Cumulative regulation
The permit required by this chapter is in addition to any other permits or
licenses required by this code.
9-12-6 Application process
A.   The applicant or the applicant’s authorized representative shall submit a
written film permit application to the film permit officer on the form provided
by the town for that purpose.
B.   Applications for film permits shall be submitted to the film permit
officer a minimum of five business days prior to the date the filming activity
is to begin, except that applications for film permits which include road
closures for traffic safety, stunts, or special effects involving electrical
devices or pyrotechnics, shall be filed a minimum of ten business days prior to
the date the filming activity is to begin.
   1.   The film permit officer may accept film permit applications after the
deadline if it is determined by the film permit officer that sufficient time to
review and process the application by affected town departments is available.
C.   Upon receipt of the application, the film permit officer shall circulate
the application for review by the appropriate town departments and by the fire
department. The departments shall review the application and may require
reasonable supplementation of the information in the application if necessary.
The departments may impose permit conditions consistent with the general safety
and welfare of the public and the protection of property and resources.
9-12-7 Notice to adjacent property owners
A.   When deemed necessary by the film permit officer, the permittee shall
provide written notice of the filming activity to adjacent property owners as
part of the permit application process. The permittee shall provide proof of
the written notice to the film permit officer.
B.   The notice required by paragraph A of this section shall be given to all
occupants and owners of real property located within a minimum of 300 feet of
the site of the proposed filming activity, as determined by the most recent
assessor's tax roll, or as otherwise specified by the film permit officer.
C.   For unusual filming conditions where the sensitivity of the area may
warrant it, the film permit officer may require signed acknowledgments from the
residents acknowledging notification.
D.   Any notice required by this section shall include the following
information relating to the proposed filming activity:
   1.   Time and date(s) of proposed filming activity.
   2.   Specific location or address.
   3.   Brief description of activity and any special equipment usage.
   4.   Aircraft or other vehicles involved and parking locations.
   5.   Name and office telephone number of the film permit officer.
   6.   Local contact or agent of the permittee.
E.   The notice shall be given in advance of the proposed activity as specified
by the film permit officer to assure timely notice to affected property owners
and/or occupants. The film permit officer may prescribe a minimum time for
advance notice in each case as necessary.
F.   In all cases, the film permit officer shall consider any comments and
protests received from affected occupants and owners within 72 hours of notice,
before issuing any permit under this chapter. The issuance of any permit shall
include conditions reasonably necessary to address any protests and comments
received pursuant to this section.
9-12-8 Permit issuance or denial; review by town manager
A.   The film permit shall be approved or denied within three business days of
acceptance of the complete application by the film permit officer unless the
proposed filming activity requires extensive notice or review by other town
departments due to fire, traffic safety, environmental quality, or other
concerns.
B.   The film permit shall be approved unless the film permit officer
determines that any of the following conditions exist:
   1.   The filming activity will substantially disrupt the use of a public or
private road at a time when it is usually subject to traffic congestion, or
will interfere with the use of emergency vehicles in the proposed permit area.
   2.   The location of the filming activity will substantially interfere with
road maintenance work or a previously authorized excavation permit or other
valid permit.
   3.   The filming activity will substantially interfere with other previously
authorized activities or contracts, or with the safety of the public or town
employees.
   4.   The filming activity will substantially interfere with the conduct of
town business or the scheduled maintenance of town buildings, roads, or
grounds.
   5.   The filming activity presents a substantial risk of injury to persons
or damage to property or a significant degradation of the environment.
   6.   The filming activity will result in an undue impact on the town’s
property, operations, resources, or staff.
   7.   The filming activity is not an appropriate or desired use of the town
property in question, based on the size and scope of the filming activity, the
length of the filming activity, the nature of the filming activity, or any
other relevant factors.
   8.   The filming activity will unreasonably interfere with or detract from
the general public enjoyment of the property, or cause annoyance or the
disturbance of any other person's reasonable use of the property, or cause
annoyance or disturb the peace of persons residing near the property, or
interfere with the maintenance of the property or its facilities.
   9.   The applicant has previously engaged in filming activity in the town
that resulted in complaints or disturbances.
   10.   The applicant failed to complete the application after being requested
to do so, or the information contained in the application is found to be false
or misleading in any detail.
   11.   The particular filming activity will violate any federal, state, or
local law.
C.   Notwithstanding paragraph B of this section, the town reserves the right
to deny any permit application to film inside of town buildings and facilities,
as the town’s buildings and facilities are primarily intended and designed for
town of Marana government business and municipal office purposes.
D.   If the permit is denied, the film permit officer shall provide written
notice of the denial to the applicant. The notice shall include a statement of
the reasons the application was denied and may be delivered by first class mail
or electronic mail.
E.   If the applicant disagrees with a decision to deny a permit, the applicant
may file a request for reconsideration with the town manager within ten days of
denial of the permit.
   1.   The town manager or designee shall issue a written decision to the
applicant within five days of the receipt of the request for reconsideration.
   2.   The decision of the town manager or designee is final and not subject
to any further administrative review.
9-12-9 Permit conditions
The film permit officer shall condition the issuance of a film permit by
imposing requirements concerning the time, place, manner, and duration of
filming activities, including, but not limited to, the following:
A.   Requirements for the presence of employees or agents of the town at the
applicant's expense when required for the particular filming activity.
B.   Requirements concerning posting of signs, placement of traffic control
devices, and employment of traffic and crowd control monitors, including, but
not limited to, Marana police department officers, at the applicant's expense.
C.   Requirements providing for identification of the filming activity area
boundaries, providing advance notice to affected residents, property owners,
homeowners associations, and business owners.
D.   Requirements concerning the posting of bonds or deposits to secure
restoration or performance of any other condition, such as the cleanup,
restoration, and repair of town roads and other town property used in the
filming activity.
E.   Restrictions concerning the use of town employee services, vehicles, and
other equipment in the filming activity.
F.   Requirements that the applicant pay all fees, and obtain all permits and
licenses required for the filming activity under local, state, and federal law.
G.   Restrictions on the use of aircraft, firearms, pyrotechnics, explosives,
amplified sound sources, lighting and other noise-creating devices, or devices
which may tend to be hazardous or disturb the peace.
H.   Restrictions on activity involving open flames, vehicle crashes, or
hazardous materials.
I.   Requirements concerning cover-up of police, fire, and other official
uniforms worn by actors when the actors are not on the set.
J.   Restrictions concerning the use of town logos, seals, insignias, badges,
or decals for filming purposes.
K.   Restrictions on the daily hours of the filming activity, including all
setup and teardown of equipment.
9-12-10 Road closures
A.   An applicant for a film permit may request in the permit application that
the town authorize an intermittent interruption in traffic flow on public roads
at the site of the filming activity. All road closure requests are subject to
the town engineer’s or designee’s approval. All street barricading and signage
placement must be completed by a licensed barricade company and set up
according to the manual of uniform traffic control.
B.   Road closures shall in no way interfere with emergency vehicles and shall
not present a detriment to the area affected or to the peace, enjoyment, and
safety of the public consistent with applicable law.
C.   Road closures may be supervised by a law enforcement or traffic
enforcement officer as determined by the film permit officer at the permittee’s
expense.
Pursuant to the authority granted by section
1-4-5, on February 19, 2019, the town attorney corrected a scrivener’s error in
paragraph B, changing “affected ot” to “affected or”
9-12-11 Fees
A.   The permittee shall pay any fees applicable to the filming activity as
those fees are set forth in the fee schedule approved by the council and
amended from time to time.
B.   Fees may include, without limitation, fees associated with the use or
rental of town property, or fees for town staff to be present during filming
activity, including off-duty police officers for security.
C.   Final determination of the need for town personnel at the filming site
will be determined by the affected department and the film permit officer.
9-12-12 Insurance; indemnification
A.   A certificate of insurance and additional insured endorsement, evidencing
insurance in the amounts and types determined by the town and naming the town
of Marana as additional insured, are required for all film permits.
   1.   The amount and type of insurance required for a film permit shall be
determined by the town on a case by case basis.
   2.   At a minimum, the permittee shall provide proof of commercial general
liability of $1,000,000 per occurrence.
   3.   Insurance certificates and endorsements must be provided to the film
permit officer prior to the date filming activity begins.
B.   Prior to the issuance of the film permit, the permittee shall sign an
insurance and indemnification agreement, provided by the film permit officer,
which holds the town, its officers, agents, and employees harmless for any
actions of the permittee, its agents, or employees.
9-12-13 Permit revocation; effect of revocation on prosecution
A.   The film permit may be revoked by the film permit officer or designee, by
any law enforcement officer, or by any fire department official for any of the
following reasons:
   1.   If the permittee, its agents, employees or contractors fail to comply
with the requirements set forth in this chapter, or with the conditions imposed
on filming by the film permit officer.
   2.   If the film permit officer determines that the permit was issued based
on false or misleading information.
   3.   If the person revoking the film permit determines that the public
safety or welfare is being imperiled by the filming activity.
B.   Except for activities necessary to close down the location and remove
equipment and other property of the permittee, no permittee shall allow any
filming activity to continue after the revocation of a film permit.
C.   Revocation of a film permit shall not be a defense against prosecution.
CHAPTER 9-13.
MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
Ordinance 2019.012 added
chapter 9-13
9-13-1 Purpose
This chapter is adopted to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
citizens of the town by enacting reasonable regulations for mobile food
vendors, their employees, agents, lessees, or independent contractors by
requiring compliance with minimum standards for safety and security.
9-13-2 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply throughout this chapter unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
A.    “Legal parking space”:
   1.   Means an area designated for vehicle parking in the town right-of-way
that may be paved or unpaved and may be delineated by road surface markings.
   2.   Does not include a parking space in a parking lot on property owned by
the town.
B.   “Mobile food unit” means a food establishment that is licensed by this
state, that is readily movable, and that dispenses food or beverages for
immediate service and consumption, and other incidental retail items, from any
vehicle, as defined in A.R.S. § 28-101.
C.   “Mobile food vendor” means any person who owns, controls, manages, or
leases a mobile food unit or contracts with a person to prepare foods and vend
from, drive, or operate a mobile food unit.
D.   “Right-of-way” means the entire width between boundary lines of every way
set apart for public travel when any part of it is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
E.   “Semi-permanent structure” means equipment, or any dining area, including,
but not limited to, tables, chairs, booths, bar stools, benches, and standup
counters.
9-13-3 Compliance with state licensing requirements
It is unlawful for any person to operate a mobile food unit or act as a mobile
food vendor without first obtaining and maintaining in effect a valid license
from the state of Arizona department of health services pursuant to A.R.S. §
36-1761.
9-13-4 License required
It is unlawful for any person to operate a mobile food unit in the town without
first obtaining and maintaining a valid business license issued pursuant to and
subject to the provisions of
chapter 9-2.
9-13-5 Additional application requirements
In addition to the application requirements set forth in section
9-2-5, any person desiring to obtain a license to conduct business as a mobile
food unit shall submit all of the following supplemental information:
A.   A description, license plate number, and photograph of the mobile food
unit;
B.    A general description of the goods to be sold by the mobile food unit;
C.   A valid driver’s license;
D.   A copy of required certificate(s) issued by the county health services
department.
Ordinance 2019.016 deleted a former paragraph E, which required a copy of the
state-issued license
9-13-6 Display of license
Any mobile food unit required to be licensed under this chapter shall keep the
license posted in a conspicuous place upon the mobile food unit.
9-13-7 Operational requirements
   A.   Fire safety and inspection.
      1.   A mobile food vendor must ensure that all mobile food units comply
with the version of the international fire code in effect at the time when the
license is issued, state law, and the town code relating to fire and explosion
safety standards.
      2.   A mobile food unit shall be inspected by the fire department, or the
mobile food vendor shall provide evidence that the mobile food unit passed a
fire inspection by another city or town fire department in this state within
the preceding 12 months.
   B.   Refuse, trash, and litter maintenance. A mobile food vendor shall:
      1.   Provide a minimum of one 15 gallon trash receptacle within 15 feet
of each individual mobile food unit for customers and employees;
      2.   Maintain an area around the mobile unit clear of litter, garbage,
rubble and debris; and
      3.   Transport the trash from the area of operation to an authorized
waste disposal location.
   C.   Noise restrictions. A mobile food vendor shall not use, play, or cause
to be used or played any amplifier, loudspeaker, microphone, amplified music,
or any other amplified instrument or device used for the production of sound in
a vending area when the mobile food unit from which mobile food vendor is
vending is stationary or mobile upon any right-of-way, park, or other public
place. For purposes of this paragraph, the factors for determining whether a
sound is amplified include, but are not limited to, the following:
      1.   The proximity of the sound to sleeping facilities, whether
residential or commercial;
      2.   The land use, nature, and zoning of the area from which the sound
emanates and the area where it is received or perceived;
      3.   The time of day or night when the sound occurs; it shall be presumed
that any amplified noise between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. is reasonably
disturbing;
      4.   The duration of the sound; and
      5.   Whether the sound is recurrent, intermittent, or constant.
   D.   Security.
      1.   The mobile food unit and the surrounding vending area shall be
maintained in a safe and clean manner at all times.
      2.   A mobile food unit shall have adequate lighting to ensure customer
safety in the vending area. Lighting shall be directed downwards and away from
rights-of-way and adjacent properties.
      3.   The mobile food unit and its customers shall not obstruct the
movement of pedestrians or other vehicles using the sidewalk, street, alley, or
other public right-of-way.
   E.   Insurance.
      1.   If the mobile food unit operates at an event sponsored by the town
or operates on public property, including rights-of-way or property owned by
the town, the mobile food vendor shall obtain insurance naming the town as an
additional insured in amounts as required by the town and in accordance with
the requirements of A.R.S. title 9, chapter 4, article 7.2.
      2.   The insurance company issuing the policy shall be authorized to
issue commercial liability policies in Arizona by the Arizona department of
insurance.
      3.   The policy shall designate by manufacturer's serial or
identification number all mobile food units for which coverage is granted.
      4.   The policy shall insure the person named in the policy and any other
person using the mobile food unit with the express or implied permission of the
named insured against any liability arising out of the ownership, maintenance
or use of the mobile food unit in Arizona.
   F.   Location.
      1.   Approved areas. Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, a
mobile food vendor shall operate a mobile food unit only in commercial,
industrial, and mixed-use zoning districts in accordance with the land
development code.
      2.   Residential areas. A mobile food vendor shall not operate in an area
zoned for residential use or within 250 feet of an area zoned for residential
use, except:
         a.   A mobile food vendor selling only ice cream or shaved ice may
operate on public rights-of-way in areas zoned for residential use.
         b.   Subject to applicable laws, a mobile food vendor may operate on
private property in a residential area if the mobile food vendor obtains a
separate agreement with the property owner to operate a mobile food unit for a
maximum of six hours within a 24-hour period on the private property.
      3.   Town-owned property. A mobile food vendor shall only operate in a
legal parking space, as defined in this chapter. If the mobile food vendor
desires to operate on town property other than a legal parking space, the
mobile food vendor shall obtain from the town:
         a.   A separate license for use, services contract, or similar
agreement, which will be entered into at the town's sole discretion and
applicable law; or
         b.   A special event permit or similar permission in accordance with
the town code.
      4.   Private property: A mobile food vendor shall obtain written
permission to use any private property where a mobile food unit is operating
and shall provide proof of such written permission on demand by the town.
   G.   Parking. When parking in the right-of-way, a mobile food unit shall
comply with this paragraph and any other applicable law governing parking in
the right-of-way.
      1.   A mobile food unit shall only park and operate in a legal parking
space.
      2.   A mobile food unit, including any semi-permanent structure used or
associated with the mobile food unit, may use no more than one legal parking
space, unless the mobile food vendor has a separate agreement with the town to
use additional legal parking spaces or parking spaces on town property other
than right-of-way.
      3.   No mobile food unit exceeding 24 feet in length may park diagonally
in a diagonal parking space or park in any manner that occupies more than one
diagonal parking space.
      4.   No mobile food unit shall operate with the serving window facing
street traffic.
      5.   A mobile food unit shall abide by all parking regulations, including
posted time limits. If there are no other time restrictions on the use of a
legal parking space, a mobile food unit shall not occupy a legal parking space
for more than six hours in a 24-hour period. "Occupy" within this subparagraph
means within 100 feet of the location in which the mobile food unit was
initially parked.
      6.   A mobile food unit shall not occupy a legal parking space with
insufficient parking capacity as prescribed by the land development code and
applicable law. The behavior prohibited by this subparagraph includes occupying
a legal parking space that reduces the number of available parking spaces
surrounding the area which is required for the principal use or uses of the
property associated with the parking spaces as set forth in A.R.S. title 9,
chapter 4, article 7.2.
      7.   A mobile food vendor shall not claim or attempt to establish any
exclusive right to park at a particular street location, unless the parking
space is part of a permitted event.
   H.   Signs. A mobile food vendor shall comply with all land development code
provisions regarding signs.
Ordinance 2022.018 amended section 9-13-7 to authorize mobile food vendors
selling shaved ice to operate on public rights-of-way in areas zoned for
residential use.
Ordinance 2024.016 amended section 9-13-7 to clarify that the parking
requirements provided in paragraph G apply only to mobile food vendors parking
in the right-of-way.
CHAPTER 9-14.
SHORT-TERM AND VACATION RENTALS
Ordinance 2023.009 added chapter 9-14
9-14-1 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
the community by enacting reasonable regulations for short-term rentals and
vacation rentals. These regulations are in addition to other codes of the town.
9-14-2 Definitions
In this chapter, unless the context or definitions in A.R.S. §9-500.39 indicate
otherwise, the following terms or phrases are defined as follows:
A.   “Advertisement” means any method of soliciting the use of property for
vacation rental purposes.
B.   “Online lodging marketplace” has the same meaning prescribed in A.R.S.
§42-5076.
C.   “Days” means calendar days unless stated otherwise.
D.   “Designee” and “agent” are interchangeable for purposes of this chapter
and mean any person or persons with the charge, care, or control of any
property, dwelling unit, or portion thereof. “Designee” includes the “emergency
point of contact.”
E.   “Emergency point of contact” means the owner or individual designated by
the owner to:
   1.   Serve as the local 24-hour emergency point of contact for the vacation
rental; and
   2.   Respond to complaints and emergencies relating to the vacation rental
in a timely manner as required by this chapter.
F.   “License” means authorization by the town to operate a vacation rental in
accordance with this chapter.
G.   “Nonresidential use” means any use that is not permitted in a residential
zoning district pursuant to a town zoning ordinance.
H.   “ Owner” means any person who, alone or with others, has title or interest
in a property, dwelling unit, or portion thereof, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof, and includes any person who as agent, executor,
administrator, trustee, or guardian has charge, care, or control of any
property, dwelling unit, or portion thereof.
I.   “Person” means an individual, public entity, firm, corporation,
partnership, limited liability company, trust, association, or any other
business entity or juridical person, whether operating on a for-profit or
nonprofit basis.
J.   “Short-term rental” and “vacation rental” are interchangeable for purposes
of this chapter and have the same meaning as prescribed in A.R.S. §9-500.39.
K.   “Transaction privilege tax license” is the license issued by the State of
Arizona pursuant to A.R.S., Title 42.
L.   “Transient” has the same meaning prescribed in A.R.S. §42-5070.
M.   “Verified violation” has the same meaning as prescribed in A.R.S. §9-
500.39.
9-14-3 License required; license non-transferable
A.   It is unlawful for any person to use or offer to use a property as a
short-term or vacation rental in the town without first obtaining and
maintaining a short term rental license issued pursuant to this chapter.
B.   A separate license is required for each short-term rental.
C.   All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are non-transferable as to
location and as to person. Attempted transfer will void the license and all
fees paid will be forfeited.
9-14-4 Application; fees
A.   The owner of a proposed vacation rental shall submit to the town a license
application on a form furnished by the town. The application shall be signed by
the applicant and shall contain the following information, which shall be made
publicly available:
   1.   The physical address of the residential property proposed to be used as
a vacation rental.
   2.   The name, address, and telephone number of the owner for which the
vacation rental license is to be issued. If the property owner is an entity,
the legal name of the entity and its statutory agent.
   3.   The name, address, and telephone number of each designee of the owner,
if any.
   4.   The full name, address, and 24-hour telephone number of the individual
who will serve as the emergency point of contact.
   5.   Proof of a valid transaction privilege tax license.
   6.   Acknowledgment by the owner of an agreement to comply with all
applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances, including the requirement that
the owner and each designee shall not be a registered sex offender, been
convicted of any felony act that resulted in death or serious physical injury,
or been convicted of any felony use of a deadly weapon within the past five
years.
   7.   Evidence of liability insurance appropriate to cover the vacation
rental in the aggregate of at least $500,000, or evidence that each vacation
rental transaction will be provided through a platform that provides equal or
greater primary liability insurance coverage for the vacation rental.
   8.   Evidence the vacation rental is registered with county assessor’s
office in accordance with A.R.S. §33-1902.
B.   Each application shall be accompanied by the applicable fee as set forth
in a fee schedule approved by the Council and amended from time to time. The
license inspector will not process an application until the applicant has paid
the applicable fee.
9-14-5 Issuance of license; term of license
A.   The town shall issue or deny the license within seven business days after
receipt of a complete application.
B.   The license shall remain in effect for one year, unless sooner suspended
by the license inspector.
9-14-6 Maintenance of accurate information
All applicants and persons holding licenses issued pursuant to this chapter
shall give prior written notice to the license inspector of any change in
information submitted in connection with an application for a license or
renewal of a license. The notice shall be provided to the license inspector not
less than ten days prior to the effective date of the change.
9-14-7 License renewal
A.   Within one year of the issue date for the previously effective license,
all licensees under this chapter wishing to remain licensed shall submit the
applicable license renewal fee to the license inspector.
B.   If the renewal fee is submitted more than 15 days after the expiration of
the license, the licensee will also be assessed a late license renewal fee as
set forth in the fee schedule approved by the Council and amended from time to
time.
C.   The license inspector will not renew a license until the licensee has paid
all applicable fees.
D.   The licensee shall also submit proof of continuing compliance with all
regulations, if any, of the business being operated, including but not limited
to, continued possession of any required certification, permit, or similar
documentation.
E.   No license shall be renewed unless the licensee complies with all
provisions of this chapter.
9-14-8 Grounds for denial of license; notice
A.   The town may deny issuance or renewal of a license for any of the
following reasons:
   1.   The applicant failed to provide the information required under section
9-14-4.
   2.   The applicant failed to pay the required license fee.
   3.   The applicant provided false information.
   4.   The owner or designee of the owner:
      a.   Is a registered sex offender; or
      b.   Has been convicted of any felony act that resulted in death or
serious physical injury; or
      c.   Has been convicted of any felony use of a deadly weapon within five
years of submitting the application; or
      d.   At the time of application, has a suspended license for the same
vacation rental.
B.   The license inspector shall give written notice of the denial of an
application to the applicant as described in section
9-14-16
9-14-9 Compliance with laws; prohibited uses; accessory dwelling units
A.   The operation of a vacation rental shall be in compliance with all
federal, state, and local laws, including this chapter.
B.   The use of a vacation rental property for any of the following uses or
purposes is strictly prohibited:
   1.   Any nonresidential use.
   2.   Holding a special event that requires a permit or license pursuant to a
town ordinance or state law or rule.
   3.   Operating a retail business, restaurant, event center, banquet hall or
similar use.
   4.   Housing sex offenders.
   5.   Operating or maintaining a sober living home.
   6.   Selling or offering for sale, consideration, or entrance fee, liquor or
illegal drugs.
   7.   Commercial display or production of pornography.
   8.   Obscenity as prohibited by A.R.S. Title 13, Chapter 35.
   9.   Operating or maintaining an adult-oriented business including nude or
topless dancing.
   10.   Any other use prohibited by A.R.S. § 9-500.39 or the town code.
C.   A vacation rental lacking a valid transaction privilege tax license issued
by the State of Arizona shall not be rented or offered for rent.
D.   No person or entity may receive payment or accept a fee, directly or
indirectly, for facilitating the rental of a vacation rental operating in
violation of this code or other law.
E.   The failure of any designee to comply with this chapter shall not relieve
the owner of liability under this chapter.
F.   An accessory dwelling unit constructed on or after September 14, 2024 may
be used as a short-term rental only if and while an owner resides on the
property that contains the accessory dwelling unit. For purposes of this
paragraph “accessory dwelling unit” has the same meaning as prescribed in
A.R.S. § 9-461.18.
Ordinance 2024.023 amended section 9-14-9 to provide that accessory dwelling
units may only be used for short- term rentals if and while the owner resides
on the property that contains the accessory dwelling unit.
9-14-10 Emergency point of contact requirements
A.   When requested by a police officer in an emergency, the owner or emergency
point of contact whose name appears on the license application must be on the
vacation rental premises, or be available over the phone or text, within 60
minutes of the request.
B.   The owner or emergency point of contact shall respond to all other non-
emergency complaints relating to the vacation rental in person, over the phone,
by email, or by text within 24 hours of the request.
C.   All applicants and persons holding licenses issued pursuant to this
chapter shall give prior written notice to the license inspector of any change
to the contact information provided to the town for the emergency point of
contact. The notice shall be provided to the license inspector not less than
ten days prior to the effective date of the change.
9-14-11 Neighbor notification requirements
A.   Prior to offering for rent or renting a short-term rental within the town,
the owner or owner’s designee must provide notice in writing that the property
will be used as a short-term rental as follows:
   1.   If the short-term rental is a single-family residential unit, notice
shall be provided to the owners or residents of all single-family residential
units and lots located (a) adjacent to the lot on which the short-term rental
is located, (b) directly across the street from the lot on which the short-term
rental is located, and (c) diagonally across the street from the lot on which
the short-term rental is located. The requirements of this subsection may be
met by providing notice to all owners or residents of single-family residential
units and lots located within 200 feet of the property line of the lot on which
the short-term rental is located.
   2.   If the short-term rental is a multi-family residential unit, notice
shall be provided to the owners or residents of all residential units located
on the same floor of the same building as the short-term rental.
B.   The neighbor notification shall be provided in writing and shall include,
at a minimum, all of the following information:
   1.   The license number issued by the town
   2.   The physical address of the vacation rental
   3.   The name, physical address, email address, and 24-hour telephone number
of the emergency point of contact.
C.   The owner or designee shall provide additional neighbor notification of
any change to the information provided under paragraph A of this section not
later than five days prior to each change. The additional notification shall be
provided in the manner required by paragraph A.
D.   Prior to offering a vacation rental for rent for the first time, the owner
or designee shall provide to the town an attestation of compliance with the
neighbor notification required by this section. The attestation shall include,
at a minimum, all the following:
   1.   The license number for the short-term rental.
   2.   The address of each property notified.
   3.   A description of the manner in which the owner or owner’s designee
provided written notice to each property requiring notification.
   4.   The name and contact information of the person attesting to compliance.
9-14-12 Advertisement requirements
To protect the peace, health, safety, and general welfare of the town’s
residents and visitors, the owner or owner’s designee shall be responsible for
displaying the license number issued by the town on each advertisement for the
vacation rental.
9-14-13 Posting requirements
The owner of the vacation rental must display the name, phone number, and email
address of the owner, designee, and emergency point of contact in a conspicuous
place within five feet of the primary entrance of the vacation rental.
9-14-14 Background check requirements
A.   No sex offender shall be permitted to rent or occupy the vacation rental.
B.   The owner or the online lodging marketplace on which the vacation rental
is advertised shall conduct a sex offender background check on each guest
within 24 hours of every booking. The owner shall demonstrate compliance with
this requirement by retaining a full copy of each background check for a
minimum of 12 months after the booking date and providing the copy to the town
upon a request by a police officer.
9-14-15 Grounds for suspension of license; notice
A.   The town may initiate an administrative process to suspend a vacation
rental license for a period of up to 12 months for any of the following:
   1.   Three verified violations of this chapter within a 12-month period, not
including any verified violation based on an aesthetic, solid waste disposal,
or vehicle parking violation that is not also a serious threat to public health
and safety.
   2.   One verified violation that results in or constitutes any of the
following:
      a.   A felony offense committed at or in the vicinity of a vacation
rental by the owner of the vacation rental or by the owner’s designee.
      b.   A serious physical injury or wrongful death at or related to a
vacation rental resulting from the knowing, intentional or reckless conduct of
the owner of the vacation rental or the owner’s designee.
      c.   The owner of the vacation rental or the owner’s designee knowingly
or intentionally housing a sex offender, allowing offenses related to adult-
oriented businesses, sexual offenses, or prostitution, or operating or
maintaining a sober living home.
      d.   The owner of the vacation rental or the owner’s designee knowingly
or intentionally allowing the use of a vacation rental for a special event that
would otherwise require a permit or license pursuant to the town code or a
state law or rule or for a retail, restaurant, banquet space or other similar
use.
B.   If a license is suspended pursuant to this chapter, the short-term rental
is prohibited from operating during the suspension period and, if the
suspension is for a period beyond the term of the license, then, to operate the
short-term rental, the owner will be required to obtain a new license after
completion of the suspension period. A person may not apply for a new license
for a short-term rental until the suspension period is over.
C.   The license inspector shall give written notice of a license suspension to
the owner as described in section
9-14-16 below.
9-14-16 Notice of license denial or suspension
A.   If the license inspector determines that grounds exist to deny an initial
or renewal vacation rental license or to suspend a vacation rental license, the
license inspector shall notify the applicant or owner in writing of the denial
or suspension.
B.   The notice shall include justification for the denial or suspension with
references to the statutes, ordinances, codes or substantive policy statements
on which the denial or suspension is based.
C.   The notice shall be either:
   1.   Personally served upon the applicant or owner, or upon any responsible
person at a business address on file with the license inspector; or
   2.   Mailed by certified mail or other method for which proof of receipt may
be obtained by the license inspector to the address of the applicant or owner
listed in the current year’s license application or renewal application or to
the business address of the applicant or owner.
D.   The effective date of the notice shall be the date the notice is actually
received.
E.   The notice shall advise the applicant or owner that he or she may submit a
written request for an appeal hearing to the license inspector within ten
calendar days of receipt of the notice.
9-14-17 Appeals
A.   If an applicant or owner requests a hearing pursuant to the procedure
described in section
9-14-16, the hearing shall be scheduled within 30 calendar days of the license
inspector’s receipt of the request, and the applicant or owner shall receive
notice of the date, time and place of the hearing delivered in the manner
described in section
9-14-16(C).
   1.   The hearing shall be before the Town Manager or his or her designee to
determine whether the license should have been denied, suspended, or denied
renewal.
   2.   The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner and the rules of
evidence shall not apply.
B.   If applicable, the applicant or owner may take remedial action while
awaiting the review hearing, and apply to the license inspector to have the
license issued or fully restored.
C.   The decision of the Town Manager or designee is final and not subject to
any further administrative review.
9-14-18 Civil violations and penalties
A.   The remedies in this chapter are cumulative and the town may proceed under
one or more remedies:
B.   No person shall operate, offer for rent, rent, occupy, or use a short-term
rental in violation of any provision of this chapter or other applicable law,
rule, or regulation.
C.   The owner shall be subject to the suspensions, civil violations, and
penalties set forth in this chapter for the owner’s designee’s violation of any
provision of this chapter or failure to perform any act or duty required by
this chapter.
D.   Any person who violates a provision of this chapter will be subject to a
civil code violation case in accordance with
Chapter 5-7 of this code.
E.   In addition to any other penalty pursuant to the town code, and
notwithstanding any other law, the town may impose civil penalties of the
following amounts against an owner if the owner causes, allows, facilitates,
aides, or abets in the commission of a verified violation or fails to perform
any act or duty required by this chapter, related to the same vacation rental
property within the same 12-month period. If multiple violations arise out of
the same response to an incident at a vacation rental, those violations are
considered one violation for the purpose of assessing civil penalties.
   1.   Up to $500 or up to an amount equal to one night’s rent for the
vacation rental as advertised, whichever is greater, for the first violation.
   2.   Up to $1,000 or up to an amount equal to two nights’ rent for the
vacation rental as advertised, whichever is greater, for the second violation.
   3.   Up to $3,500 or up to an amount equal to three nights’ rent for the
vacation rental as advertised, whichever is greater, for a third and any
subsequent violation.
F.   In addition to any other penalty, any property that operates as a vacation
rental and fails to apply for a vacation rental license in accordance with this
chapter within 30 days of the application process being made available by the
town, must cease operations immediately. In addition to any fines imposed
pursuant paragraph E above, the town may impose a civil penalty of up to $1,000
per month against the owner if the owner or owner’s designee fails to apply for
a license within 30 days of receiving written notice from the town of the
failure to comply.
G.   In addition to any other penalty, the town may impose a civil penalty of
up to 1,000 for every 30 days the owner fails to provide contact information
for an emergency point of contact to the town as required by this chapter.
Before imposing the initial civil penalty, the town shall provide 30 days’
notice to the owner by emailing a notice of violation to the owner' s email
address that was provided to the town. Notwithstanding the date of the notice
of violation, the date for calculating the penalties shall be the first day the
vacation rental is occupied following the owner’s failure to provide the
information to the town.
9-14-19 Judicial relief
A.   Notwithstanding section
9-14-15, any one attempted or completed felony act arising from the occupancy
or use of a vacation rental that results in a death, or actual or attempted
serious physical injury, shall be grounds for judicial relief in the form of a
suspension of the property’s use as a vacation rental for a period that shall
not exceed 12 months.
B.   The town attorney or designee may initiate proceedings in the Marana
Municipal Court or other court of competent jurisdiction to enforce this
section.
CHAPTER 9-15.
SOLICITING IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS
Ordinance 2023.040 added Chapter 9-15.
9-15-1 Applicability
   This chapter applies to employees of businesses that are licensed under
chapter 9-2. The regulation of individual, natural persons operating as
peddlers is addressed in
chapter 9- 3.
9-15-2 Definition
   The following definitions shall apply throughout this chapter unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise.
   A.   " Residential area" means an area in which housing uses predominate
over commercial, industrial, or other non-housing uses. Housing uses may
include, but are not limited to, single-family housing, multi-family housing,
or mobile homes.
   B.   " Solicit"
      1.   Means traveling door to door, from place to place, from house to
house, or from street to street as an employee of a business licensed under
chapter 9-2 and engaging in any of the following activities:
         a.   Carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise,
edible foodstuffs, or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or
making sales and delivering articles to purchasers;
         b.   Taking, attempting to take, or soliciting orders for sale of
goods, wares and merchandise, or edible foodstuffs or provisions for future
delivery;
         c.   Taking, attempting to take, or soliciting orders for services to
be furnished or performed in the future; or
         d.   Promoting or advertising any product or service where no sales or
orders are taking place at the time of promotion or advertisement.
      2.   " Solicit" does not mean the delivery of products previously
purchased.
9-15-3 License required
   It is unlawful to solicit in a residential area in the town without first
obtaining and maintaining a valid business license issued pursuant to and
subject to the provisions of
chapter 9-2.
9-15-4 Unlawful activities
   An employee of a business soliciting in a residential area shall not:
   A.   Transact or carry on business without having a copy of the business
license available for inspection;
   B.   Make exclusive use of any location on any street, alley, sidewalk or
right-of-way for the purpose of selling, delivering, or exhibiting goods or
merchandise;
   C.   Operate in a congested area where the operation may impede or
inconvenience the public use of the street, alley, sidewalk, or right of-way.
For the purpose of this chapter, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in
good faith, is conclusive as to whether the area is congested and the public
impeded or inconvenienced;
   D.   Operate from door to door, from place to place, from house to house, or
from street to street earlier than 9:00 a.m. or later than 7:00 p.m. on any
day.
   E.   Come upon any premises posted with a sign exposed to public view
bearing the words " no peddlers" or " no canvassers" or " no solicitors" or any
combination of those or similar terms, or remain on any premises after having
been requested to leave by the owner or occupant of the premises whether they
are posted as specified above or not; or
   F.   Enter or remain unlawfully on any real property after reasonable notice
prohibiting entry.
TITLE 10
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Ordinance 96.15 adopted title 10
CHAPTER 10-1.   TRANSPORTATION AND DUMPING OF GARBAGE OR AGGREGATE MATERIAL
CHAPTER 10-2.   [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 10-3.   SEWAGE SLUDGE
CHAPTER 10-4.   TRAVEL REDUCTION CODE
CHAPTER 10-5.   FIREWORKS
CHAPTER 10-6.   SPECIAL EVENTS
CHAPTER 10-1.
TRANSPORTATION AND DUMPING OF GARBAGE OR AGGREGATE MATERIAL
Ordinance 2002.06 adopted section
10-1-1. Ordinance 2012.07 amended section
10-1-1 by adding the unnumbered introductory paragraph, inserting the “disposal
facility” definition, and amending the “garbage” definition. See Ordinance
96.15 for prior text.
10-1-1 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply throughout this chapter unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise.
A.   “Aggregate material” means any rock fragments, pebbles, sand, gravel,
cobbles, crushed base, asphalt, dirt or similar material.
B.   “Closed container” means a container designed for transporting loose
material such as garbage, refuse or aggregate material, with sides, top and
bottom made of solid and durable material, such as metal or plastic, which will
resist normal wear and tear, and without any holes, cracks or openings through
which materials may escape, regardless of the degree to which the container is
filled.
C.   “Disposal facility” means any active landfill, inactive landfill, debris
fill, transfer station, temporary drop off site for any solid waste, waste
storage site, or waste processing facility.
D.   “Enclosed cargo area” means a part of a vehicle designed for carrying
objects or materials, with all of the following characteristics:
   1.   Bottom and vertical sides made of solid and durable material, such as
metal or plastic, which will resist normal wear and tear, and without any
holes, cracks or openings through which materials may escape, regardless of the
degree to which the cargo area is filled;
   2.   A tailgate or equivalent device;
   3.   Seals on any opening used to empty a load from the cargo area,
including bottom dump gates and tailgates, sufficient to prevent material from
escaping; and
   4.   A cover, tarpaulin or other device which prevents the load from
becoming loose, detached or in any manner a hazard to other users of the
roadway, public thoroughfare or right-of-way.
   “Enclosed cargo area” shall not include any part of a vehicle’s cab or
passenger compartment, nor shall it include frame rails, fenders or decks of
low beds or flat beds.
E.   “Garbage” means any litter, refuse, rubbish, trash, weeds, filth or debris
which constitutes a hazard to public health and safety, and includes, but is
not limited to, all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes including
garbage, trash, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles,
vehicle parts and solid market and industrial waste, filthy or odoriferous
objects or substances, any clippings of brush, grass, or weeds, and any debris,
rubbish or other unsightly or unsanitary matter of any kind whatsoever.
Ordinance 2002.30 adopted paragraph 4. See Ordinance 2002.06 for prior text.
10-1-2 Transportation of garbage or aggregate material; classification;
enforcement
A.   No person shall transport garbage or aggregate material within the town
limits in an open vehicle unless the garbage or aggregate material is in a
closed container or in an enclosed cargo area.
B.   Vehicles transporting the following materials are not required to be
equipped with a cover or tarpaulin:
   1.   Loads composed solely of asphalt.
   2.   Loads composed solely of petroleum coke, if loaded with a chemical
surfactant (surface active agent) designed to prevent blowing, spilling or
escaping.
   3.   Aggregate materials loaded so that no portion of the load contacts the
sides of the cargo area closer than six inches from the top of the sides and no
portion of the load crowns or peaks above the top of the sides of the cargo
area.
   4.   Equipment employed in agricultural or husbandry activities.
C.   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any roadway within the town limits
unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load
from dropping, shifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping from it, except that
sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other
substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining the
roadway.
D.   Vehicles transporting aggregate material within the town limits shall be
equipped with the following equipment:
   1.   Splash flaps shall be maintained behind every tire or set of tires.
   2.   Fenders on commercial trailers shall not be removed or disabled.
E.   Vehicles transporting garbage, refuse or aggregate material within the
town limits and equipped with a bottom dump gate shall be equipped with the
following equipment:
   1.   Shed boards designed to prevent material deposit on the vehicle body
during top loading.
   2.   A center flap behind the bottom dump gate, which may be located either
directly behind the gate, or to the rear of the rear axle and in line with the
splash flaps. The outside edge of the center flap shall not extend more than
one inch from the sidewall of the adjacent tire. The center flap shall be a
minimum of 24 inches in height and shall be within five inches of the roadway
surface.
F.   Vehicles with cargo areas comprised of full rigid enclosures are exempt
from the requirements of subsection E of this section.
G.   Violation of this section is a civil infraction and shall be enforced
pursuant to
chapter 5-7 of this code.
Section 10-1-2 was adopted by Ordinance 2002.06 and modified by Ordinance
2012.07
Ordinance 2002.30 added paragraph 4
Ordinance 2002.30 amended paragraph D
10-1-3 Spilled garbage or aggregate materials; classification
A.   Any person transporting any garbage or aggregate materials along the
streets of the town shall immediately replace in the conveyance used for the
hauling any garbage or aggregate materials which may fall upon any street.
B.   Violation of this section is a civil infraction and shall be enforced
pursuant to
chapter 5-7 of this code.
Ordinance 2012.07 added section
10-1-3.
10-1-4 [Reserved]
Section
10-1-4 was added by Ordinance 2012.07 and deleted by Ordinance 2021.025. See
Ordinance 2005.22 for prior text.
CHAPTER 10-2.
[RESERVED]
Ordinance 2012.07 added chapter 10-2. Ordinance 2021.025 repealed chapter 10-2.
See Ordinance 96.15, 98.14, and 2005.22 for prior text.
CHAPTER 10-3.
SEWAGE SLUDGE
See Ordinance 83.04 and 85.06 for prior history of sewage sludge regulations
10-3-1 Residential areas
The use of land within the town that is within one quarter mile of a human
residence that is also within the town for the application of or injection of
sewage sludge to the surface or within eight inches of the surface shall be
prohibited, except where the residence is owned by the owner of the land where
sludge is to be applied or injected or where a written waiver has been obtained
from the resident or owner of the residence and where the waiver has been filed
with the town clerk.
10-3-2 Flood plain areas
The use of land within the designated flood plain of the Santa Cruz River as
defined by the town zoning ordinance or development code for the application of
or injection of sewage sludge within eight inches of the surface shall be
prohibited.
10-3-3 Other areas
The use of any other land within the town for the application of or injection
of sewage sludge to the surface or within eight inches of the surface shall be
in accordance with standards and regulations of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency, the Arizona Department of Health Services and the Pima
County Health Department for the protection of those who may work on the land
and for those who may use the land at a later time for purposes other than the
growing of crops or other agricultural purposes, including residential,
commercial, industrial and public land uses.
10-3-4 Reporting requirements
Any use of land within the town for the application or injection of sewage
sludge shall be reported to the town clerk upon the initiation of that land use
at each site approved by the Arizona Department of Health Services, in
accordance with the regulations of the state and the Pima County Department of
Wastewater Management.
Ordinance 2012.07 amended Section 10-3-5 by modifying the title, adding
paragraph A, and numbering and modifying paragraph B
10-3-5 Classification; enforcement
A.   Violation of this chapter is a civil infraction and shall be enforced
pursuant to
chapter 5-7 of this code.
B.   Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the town
planning and zoning administrator, but other law enforcement officers and code
compliance officers of the town may be called upon to enforce its provisions
from time to time.
CHAPTER 10-4.
TRAVEL REDUCTION CODE
See Ordinance 88.06 for prior history of travel reduction regulations
10-4-1 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter, recognizing that motor vehicles are the single
greatest contributor to air pollution, is to improve air quality and reduce
traffic congestion within the incorporated and unincorporated areas of Pima
County by increasing alternate mode usage and reducing overall motor vehicle
travel for commute trips. This chapter shall establish a basis for a
cooperative effort of the local jurisdictions to achieve a uniform program for
reduction of work related trips by employees working for major employers
subject to this regulation.
10-4-2 Definitions
A.   The following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-28.png]
   1.   ”Airshed” means that area delineated with a black “planning area” line
on the map entitled “Eastern Pima County Tucson Air Planning Area” reproduced
on this page.
   2.   “Alternate mode” means any mode of commuter transportation other than
the single occupancy motor vehicle.
   3.   “Approvable travel reduction plan” means a plan submitted by a major
employer that meets the requirements as set forth in section
10-4-5.
   4.   “Carpool” or “vanpool” means two or more persons traveling in a light
duty vehicle (car, truck or van) to or from work.
   5.   “Commuter trip” means a trip taken by an employee to or from work
within the airshed.
   6.   “Commuter matching service” means any system, whether it uses computer
or manual methods, which assists in matching employees for the purpose of
sharing rides to reduce drive alone travel.
   7.   “Employer” means a sole proprietor, partnership, cooperation,
unincorporated association, cooperative, joint venture, agency, department,
district or other individual or entity, either public or private, that employs
workers. See also “major employer” and “voluntary employer”.
   8.   “Full time equivalent (FTE) employees” means the number of employees an
employer would have if the employer’s work needs were satisfied by employees
working forty hour work weeks. The number of full time equivalent employees for
any employer is calculated by dividing the total number of annual work hours
paid by the employer, by 2080 work hours in a year.
   9.   “Local jurisdictions” includes Pima County, city of Tucson, town of
Marana, town of Oro Valley, town of Sahuarita and city of South Tucson.
   10.   “Major employer” means an employer who employs one hundred or more
full time equivalent employees at a work site during a twenty-four hour period
for at least 6 months during the year.
   11.   “Mode” means the type of conveyance used in transportation including
single occupancy motor vehicle, rideshare vehicle (carpool or vanpool),
transit, bicycle, and walking.
   12.   “Motor vehicle” means any vehicle propelled by a motor; including car,
van, bus, motorcycle, and all other motorized vehicles.
   13.   “Public agency” means any political subdivision of this state and any
board, commission or agency of it.
   14.   “Public interest group” means any nonprofit group whose purpose is to
further the welfare of the community.
   15.   “Regional program” means the combination of all implemented plans
within the airshed combination.
   16.   “Ridesharing” means transportation of more than one person for commute
purposes, in a motor vehicle, with or without the assistance of a commuter
matching service.
   17.   “Transit” means a bus or other public conveyance system.
   18.   “Transportation coordinator” means a person designated by an employer,
property manager, or transportation management association as the lead person
in developing and implementing a travel reduction plan.
   19.   “Transportation management association” (TMA) means a group of
employers or associations formally organized to seek solutions for
transportation problems experienced by the group.
   20.   “Travel reduction plan” means a written report outlining travel
reduction measures which will be submitted annually by each major employer.
   21.   “Travel reduction program” means a program, implementing a travel
reduction plan by an employer, designed to achieve a predetermined level of
travel reduction though various incentives and disincentives.
   22.   “Travel reduction program regional task force” means that task force
established pursuant to the intergovernmental agreement to be entered into by
the local jurisdictions.
   23.   “Vanpool” see “carpool”.
   24.   “Vehicle occupancy” means the number of occupants in a motor vehicle
including the driver.
   25.   “Vehicle miles traveled” (VMT) means the number of miles traveled by a
motor vehicle for commute trips.
   26.   “Work site” means a building or any grouping of buildings located
within the town which are on physically contiguous parcels of land or on
parcels separated solely by private or public roadways or rights-of-way, and
which are owned or operated by the same employer.
B.   As utilized in this chapter, the following shall have the indicated
meanings.
   1.   PAG - Pima Association of Governments
   2.   TMA - transportation management association
   3.   TRO - travel reduction ordinance and code
   4.   TRP - travel reduction program
   5.   VMT - vehicle miles traveled
10-4-3 Jurisdiction/lead agency
A.   The council shall evaluate major employers’ TRP plans received from the
TRP task force. The lead agency shall have 45 days to object to the plan;
otherwise the plan is automatically approved. Any objection shall be based upon
the criteria set forth in section
10-4-5. If the lead agency objects, the plan is not approved and shall be
returned to the TRP task force with appropriate comments for review and
revision in consultation with the employer.
B.   The lead agency shall receive recommendations for enforcement from the TRP
task force. The lead agency shall take whatever action it deems necessary.
10-4-4 Applicability; voluntary participation
A.   The provisions of this code shall apply to all major employers.
B.   Employers or groups of employers with less than 100 full time equivalent
employees at a single work site are encouraged to participate in data
collection and information dissemination efforts and in the preparation of
their own travel reduction plans on a voluntary basis. These groups shall be
assisted by the TRP task force, the TRP technical advisory committee and TRP
staff, and shall be eligible for participation in all programs and services.
Groups of employers are encouraged to form transportation management
associations.
10-4-5 Requirements for employers
In each year of the regional program each major employer shall:
A.   Provide each regular employee with information on alternate mode options
and travel reduction measures including, but not limited to: Sun Tran bus
routes and schedules, the RideShare program, and bicycle routes. This
information shall also be provided to new employees at the time of hiring.
B.   Participate in a survey and reporting effort, forms for which will be
provided by the TRP task force. The results of this survey shall form a
baseline against which attainment of the targets in this section shall be
measured as follows:
   1.   The baseline for participation in alternative modes of transportation
shall be based on the total number of employees.
   2.   The baseline for VMT shall be the average VMT per employee for
employees not residing on the work site.
C.   Prepare and submit a travel reduction plan for submittal to TRP staff and
presentation to the TRP task force. TRP staff will assist in preparing the
plan. Major employers shall submit plans within nine weeks after they receive
survey data results. The Plan shall contain the following elements.
   1.   The name of the designated transportation coordinator.
   2.   A description of employee information programs and other travel
reduction measures which have been completed in the previous year.
   3.   A description of travel reduction measures to be undertaken by the
major employer in the coming year. The following measures may be included:
      a.   A commuter matching service, in addition to or coordinated with
PAG’s RideShare program, to facilitate employee ridesharing for work trips.
      b.   Provision of vans for vanpooling.
      c.   Subsidized carpooling or vanpooling which may include payment for
fuel, insurance or parking.
      d.   Use of company vehicles for carpooling.
      e.   Provision of preferential parking for carpool or vanpool users which
may include close in parking or covered parking facilities.
      f.   Cooperation with Sun Tran or other transportation providers to
provide additional regular or express service buses to the work site.
      g.   Subsidized bus fares.
      h.   Construction of special loading and unloading facilities for transit
and carpool and vanpool users.
      i.   Cooperation with local jurisdictions to construct walkways or
bicycle routes to the work site.
      j.   Provision of bicycle racks, lockers, and showers for employees who
walk or bicycle to and from work.
      k.   Provisions of special information center where information on
alternate modes and other travel reduction measures will be available.
      l.   Establishment of a work-at-home program, full or part time, for
employees.
      m.   Establishment of a program of adjusted work hours which may include
compressed work weeks and employee-selected starting and stopping hours. Work
hour adjustments should not interfere with or discourage the use of ridesharing
and transit.
      n.   Establishment of a program of parking incentives and disincentives;
such as a fee for parking and/or a “rebate” for employees who do not use the
parking facility.
      o.   Incentives to encourage employees to live closer to work.
      p.   Implementation of other measures designed to reduce commute trips
such as the provision of day care facilities or emergency taxi services.
D.   An approvable travel reduction plan shall meet all of the following
criteria:
   1.   The plan shall designate a transportation coordinator.
   2.   The plan shall describe a mechanism for regular distribution of
alternate mode transportation information to employees.
   3.   For employers who in any year, meet or exceed annual regional targets
for travel reduction, the plan shall accurately and completely describe current
and planned travel reduction measures.
   4.   For employers who, in any year, fall below the regional targets for
travel reduction, the plan shall include commitments to implement:
      a.   At least two specific travel reduction measures (such as those
described in section
10-4-5C.3 of this chapter) in the first year of the regional program.
      b.   At least three specific alternate modes incentives programs (such as
those described in section
10-4-5C.3 of this chapter) in the second year of the regional program.
   5.   After the second year, the travel reduction program task force shall
review the travel reduction programs for employers not meeting regional targets
and may recommend additional measures.
E.   Employers shall implement all travel reduction measures considered
necessary by the task force to attain the following target employee
participation in alternate modes or commuter trip VMT Reductions per regulated
work site:
   1.   15% of the total employee pool in the first year of the regional
program.
   2.   20% of the total employee pool in the second year of the regional
program.
   3.   25% of the total employee pool in the third year of the regional
program.
F.   After the third year of the regional program, either:
   1.   An increase in employee participation in alternate modes of 1% per year
for each subsequent year until 40% of all commute trips are made by alternate
modes; or:
   2.   Alternatively, a reduction in average annual VMT per employee of 1.5%
per year can be selected by a major employer after a 25% alternate mode or
commuter trip VMT reduction usage is achieved.
Ordinance 2005.22 corrected the cross-reference in subparagraphs (D)(4)(a) and
(b)
10-4-6 Variance and appeals
A.   Variances
   1.   The TRP task force shall serve as a hearing board for major employers
requesting variances from all or part of TRP ordinance requirements and/or
travel reduction plan scheduling.
   2.   Any major employer wishing a variance form any of the requirements of
this title shall make written application to the TRP task force which will
determine whether to recommend the variance. The recommendation will be
forwarded within forty-five days to lead Agency which will or will not
authorize the variance. Request for variances shall be finally approved or
disapproved within 90 days of the filing of a request by an employer.
B.   Appeals
   1.   Any affected major employer may appeal a decision of the lead agency to
authorize or withhold variances or a decision of the lead agency regarding
enforcement or other provision of this chapter.
   2.   The town council will hear and decide the appeal. If the decision is to
disapprove the plan, the plan shall be returned to the TRP task force for
review and revision or to the lead agency for appropriate action.
10-4-7 Classification; enforcement
A.   Violation of this chapter is a petty offense punishable as provided by the
Arizona revised statutes.
B.   The lead agency, upon determining a substantial violation of this code,
shall request the town attorney to take appropriate legal action.
C.   Violations of any of the following requirements may subject a major
employer to enforcement actions.
   1.   Failure to collect or supply information requested by the TRP task
force.
   2.   Failure to disseminate information on alternate modes and other travel
reduction measures as specified in this chapter.
   3.   Failure to designate a transportation coordinator.
   4.   Failure to submit an approvable travel reduction plan.
   5.   Failure to implement an approved plan within the time schedule provided
or failure to perform a revision of a plan as required by the TRP task force.
D.   Failure by a major employer to meet travel reduction goals as defined in
sections
10-4-5 E and F shall not constitute a violation provided that the major
employer is attempting in good faith to meet the goals.
Ordinance 2012.07 amended Section 10-4-7 by modifying the title, adding
paragraph A, and renumbering the remaining paragraphs
Ordinance 2005.22 corrected the cross-references in paragraph D
CHAPTER 10-5.
FIREWORKS
Ordinance 2011.09 Chapter 10-5 renamed
chapter 10-5 from “Fireworks permits” to “Fireworks.” See Ordinance 89.29 for
prior history of fireworks regulations.
10-5-1 Definitions
In this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
A.   “Display firework,” “fireworks” and “permissible consumer fireworks” are
defined as provided in A.R.S. § 36-1601 or any successor provision.
B.   “Public display of fireworks” means a performance of display fireworks
open to the public and authorized by a permit issued by the town.
Ordinance 2011.09 added section
10-5-1 and deleted former section
10-5-1 (“Issuance of permits”)
10-5-2 Prohibited conduct; exceptions
A.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to:
   1.   Sell, use or possess any fireworks within the town limits.
   2.   Put on a public display of fireworks without first obtaining a permit
for a public display of fireworks from the town.
B.   This chapter does not prohibit:
   1.   The sale of permissible consumer fireworks by a retail establishment if
the retail establishment complies with the rules adopted pursuant to A.R.S. §
36-1609.
   2.   The use or possession of permissible consumer fireworks by the general
public.
   3.   A public display of fireworks authorized by a permit issued by the town
pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter.
Ordinance 2011.09 added section
10-5-2 and renumbered former section
10-5-2
10-5-3 Application for permit
Any person wishing to have a public display of fireworks within the town limits
must make written application for a fireworks permit to the town clerk, on a
form to be prescribed by the town clerk, not less than 15 days prior to the
date of the fireworks display.
Ordinance 2011.09 renumbered section
10-5-3
10-5-4 Permit fee
All applications for fireworks permits must include a non-refundable permit fee
in an amount established by a fee schedule adopted by the council and amended
from time to time to cover the cost of investigating the application and
processing of permits. This fee may be waived in the sole discretion of the
town clerk for non profit corporations whose principal place of business is
located within the town.
Ordinance 2011.09 renumbered section
10-5-4, which Ordinance 2009.11 amended by replacing the specific fireworks
permit fee with a reference to the comprehensive fee schedule
10-5-5 Required information in application
A.   Each application for a fireworks permit shall include the following
information:
   1.   The name, address, phone number and date of birth of the applicant.
   2.   The occupation, business address and business phone number of the
applicant.
   3.   The date or dates that the public display of fireworks will be held,
the times during which the public display of fireworks will be held, and the
location from which the public display of fireworks will be held.
   4.   A complete description of the method, manner and handling of all
fireworks, including but not limited to the storage prior to the public
display, and the manner in which the public display will be held.
   5.   The name, address and phone number of the operator of the public
display of fireworks, together with a full description of all of the operator’s
qualifications and experience to operate a public display of fireworks.
   6.   The exact type and number of fireworks to be utilized at the public
display.
Ordinance 2011.09 renumbered section
10-5-5
10-5-6 Investigation; issuance of permit
A.   Upon receipt of an application for a permit for a public display of
fireworks, the town clerk shall forward the application to the fire chief for
investigation. The fire chief shall conduct an investigation to determine,
among other things, that the display is being handled by a competent operator,
and that the display of fireworks is of such character and located in such an
area that when the fireworks are discharged they will not be hazardous to
property or endanger any person.
B.   If the fire chief approves the public display of fireworks after
investigation and the applicant is otherwise in compliance with the provisions
of this chapter, the town clerk is hereby authorized to issue a permit for the
public display of fireworks within the town limits.
Ordinance 2011.09 renamed, renumbered, and amended section
10-5-6
10-5-7 Bond and insurance requirements
A.   After considering the potential danger to property and the proximity of
the display to existing structures, the town clerk shall require an applicant
for a permit for a public display of fireworks to furnish a cash bond or surety
bond issued by an insurance carrier licensed in the state in the sum of not
less than $500 or more than $5,000, the bond to be issued to insure that
payment be made for all damages which may be caused to persons or property by
reason of the display.
B.   In addition to any bond required by paragraph A, the applicant shall also
furnish insurance in a form and in amounts satisfactory to the town.
Ordinance 2011.09 renamed, renumbered, and amended section
10-5-7
10-5-8 Permit non-transferable
Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter is not transferable or assignable,
and shall be issued in the name of the applicant, with the competent operator
of the fireworks display to be designated on it, and shall specify and be
limited to the specific location, times, number and types of fireworks as
contained in the permit.
Ordinance 2011.09 renumbered section
10-5-8
10-5-9 Classification; continuing violations
A.   Whenever in this chapter any act is prohibited or declared to be unlawful
or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to
be unlawful, the violation of that provision is a class 3 misdemeanor.
B.   Each day any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Ordinance 2011.09 added section
10-5-9
CHAPTER 10-6.
SPECIAL EVENTS
Ordinance 2007.18 added
chapter 10-6, “Special Events Permit.” Ordinance 2014.008 renamed it “Special
Events.” Former Chapter 10-6 (“Smoking”) was added by Ordinance 2006.04 and
repealed by Ordinance 2007.04. The repeal was effective on the effective date
of the smoke-free Arizona initiative, which was approved by the voters at the
2006 Arizona general election and became effective May 1, 2007.
10-6-1 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a process for permitting and
regulating certain temporary activities conducted on public property or private
property when public safety is potentially impacted. This chapter is adopted
pursuant to the authority of A.R.S. § 9-240, as amended, and is intended to
provide fair and reasonable regulations governing the time, place, and manner
in which a special event may take place, and in doing so, to provide for the
health, safety and welfare of the public and to assist the town and its
appropriate officers in enforcing the applicable provisions of A.R.S. title 9
and title 36.
Ordinance 2014.008 deleted former paragraph B, which listed various
definitions, and deleted “definitions” from the section’s title.
10-6-2 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply throughout this chapter unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
A.   “Major special event” means any special event where 1,000 or more
customers, spectators, participants, or other persons are intended, calculated,
or expected to be in attendance at the event for each day it is conducted.
B.   “Minor special event” means any special event where less than 1,000
customers, spectators, participants, or other persons are intended, calculated,
or expected to be in attendance at the event for each day it is conducted.
C.   “Permit clerk” means the town employee designated and authorized by the
town manager to accept and process applications for special events permits.
D.   “Person” means a corporation, firm, association, organization, and any
other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual.
E.   “Special event” means any of the following:
   1.   Any indoor or outdoor public gathering or celebration that uses town-
owned property, including public right-of-way, for any of the following
activities:
      a.   Entertainment
      b.   Dancing
      c.   Music
      d.   Dramatic productions
      e.   Amusements, festivals or carnivals
      f.   Sale of merchandise, food, or alcohol, including sidewalk sales
      g.   Parades, walks, bicycle rides, runs, block parties or other events
that will not comply with normal or usual traffic regulations or controls, or
are likely to impede, obstruct, impair or interfere with the free flow of
traffic
   2.   Any activity taking place on private or town-owned property that
requires a state-issued special event liquor license or temporary extension of
premises/patio permit.
   3.   Any activity taking place on private or town-owned property that, in
the opinion of the town manager or designee requires town services to a degree
significantly over and above that routinely provided under ordinary
circumstances.
   4.   Any activity taking place on private or town-owned property that, in
the opinion of the planning administrator, involves a substantial deviation
from the current legal land use or legal nonconforming use.
Ordinance 2014.008 added section 10-6-2.
Ordinance 2021.009 added “or temporary extension of premises/patio permit” to
subparagraph (C)(2).
Ordinance 2023.015 adds a major/minor event distinction to the definition of
“special event.”
10-6-3 Exemptions
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following
activities:
A.   School functions at school facilities.
B.   Ordinary and customary events at a venue designed to accommodate them.
C.   Events produced by the town. For purposes of this section, “events
produced by the town” means events organized primarily by the town, and does
not include events that the town merely supports, sponsors or promotes.
Ordinance 2014.008 added section
10-6-3.
10-6-4 Permit required; non-transferable
   A.   In addition to any other permits, licenses, taxes or requirements
imposed by the town, any person wishing to operate, maintain or conduct a
special event within the town must first obtain a permit to do so. No permit
shall be issued until all conditions required pursuant to this chapter have
been met and fulfilled. Any person issued a permit must comply with all
conditions of the permit at all times. The maximum number of people permitted
at any event will be based upon the nature of the event and the physical
capacity of the site where the event will take place.
   B.   All special event permits issued pursuant to this chapter are non-
transferable.
Ordinance 2014.008 renumbered section 10-6-4, added “non-transferable” to its
title, added the first clause of paragraph A, and added paragraph B.
Ordinance 2024.019 amended section 10-6-4 to add language clarifying that
compliance with all conditions set forth in an issued special event permit is
required.
10-6-5 Application process; fees
A.   The applicant or the applicant’s authorized representative shall submit
written application to the permit clerk on the form provided by the town for
that purpose. The applicant must submit the application with enough advance
time to allow the town to complete its review process prior to the event. The
town reserves the right to reject an application if the town determines there
is insufficient time to complete the review process.
B.   Each application shall be accompanied by any applicable fees as set forth
in the fee schedule approved by the council and amended from time to time.
Applications submitted less than seven days before the event, if accepted for
processing by the town, shall be subject to an expedited review fee as set
forth in the fee schedule.
C.   The application shall contain the following facts and information:
   1.   The name, telephone number and mailing address of the person making the
application. If the person making the application is acting on behalf of an
organization, the person shall also include the name of the organization and
the title of the person making the application. The applicant may provide the
organization’s mailing address and telephone number in lieu of the applicant’s
own address and telephone number.
   2.   The address or legal description of the place or premises where the
proposed event is to be conducted, operated or carried on.
   3.   A description of the event, including activities, anticipated
attendance, entertainment, and type of retail sales if applicable.
   4.   The dates and times for which the permit is sought.
   5.   An estimate of the number of customers, spectators, participants and
other persons intended, calculated or expected to attend the event for each day
it is conducted.
   6.   A site map or sketch showing the location of the property in relation
to surrounding properties, the area to be used, the access to the property and
the location of any proposed facilities, parking areas, vending areas, stages
and other principal features of the venue.
   7.   Information regarding the factors listed in section
10-6-6.
   8.   Any other information the permit clerk may reasonably require.
Ordinance 2014.008 renumbered and substantially rewrote section
10-6-5
10-6-6 Application review
A.   Procedure. Upon receipt of the application, the permit clerk shall
circulate the application for review by the appropriate town departments and by
the Northwest Fire District. The departments shall review the application and
may require reasonable supplementation of the information in the application if
necessary. The departments shall consider the factors listed in this section
and may impose permit conditions related to these factors or to the potential
impact of the event upon town resources.
B.   Noise impacts. The town shall evaluate noise impacts related to the event
and may impose conditions related to minimizing those impacts.
C.   Sanitation. Adequate toilet and hand washing facilities and trash
receptacles shall be maintained at all times during the event. The town may
require the applicant to provide facilities or receptacles in addition to those
existing at the event site due to the anticipated maximum attendance and event
duration.
D.   Security. The applicant may be required, at the applicant’s expense, to
provide security services, and/or extra-duty law enforcement officers for event
security, as determined by the chief of police.
   1.   In making the determination of the need for security services, the
chief of police shall consider the event nature, anticipated attendance, access
to alcohol, ticket or money handling and any other factors deemed relevant.
   2.   If private security services are to be used, the chief of police must
approve the security service provider and the security plan for the event.
   3.   If extra-duty law enforcement will be used, the town will coordinate
the hiring of officers and the security plan preparation.
E.   Medical services. The applicant may be required, at the applicant’s
expense, to furnish medical services to the event, as determined by Northwest
Fire District.
   1.   Conditions which may warrant this requirement include the expected
temperatures during the event, the nature of the event, expected attendance,
age of the expected attendees, and accessibility of the event venue to
emergency vehicles.
   2.   If medical services are used at the event, the medical services plan
shall be approved by the chief of police and Northwest Fire District.
F.   Lighting. Event areas, sanitation facilities, parking areas and areas of
pedestrian travel must be adequately illuminated at all times during the event
by existing or additional lighting. The town may require the applicant to
submit a lighting plan.
G.   Parking. Adequate parking shall be provided for all special events.
   1.   If temporary parking areas are to be used, the applicant must prepare
and submit a parking layout and circulation plan for approval by the town’s
traffic engineering division.
   2.   In temporary parking areas, all parking spaces shall be adequately
marked and dust control measures shall be undertaken.
H.   Traffic control. The applicant must provide adequate vehicular access to
the event venue for the general public and emergency vehicles.
   1.   If the access points to the event venue may present safety or capacity
concerns based on the expected ingress/egress traffic volumes, temporary
traffic control measures will be required.
   2.   Where temporary traffic control measures are to be employed, a traffic
control plan must be submitted for approval by the town’s traffic engineering
division.
I.   Sales. All event vendors shall hold a current Marana business license,
including the applicant if tickets to the event are to be sold.
   1.   All merchandise and ticket sales are taxable in accordance with the
laws of the state of Arizona.
   2.   Tickets to an event shall not be sold prior to approval of the special
event permit.
   3.   All food vendors shall also hold a current county health department
permit for food handling and sales, if required by applicable county
regulations.
J.   Insurance. A certificate of insurance and additional insured endorsement,
evidencing insurance in the amounts and types determined by the town and naming
the town of Marana as additional insured, shall be required if the event is
being held on town property, such as a town park or town right-of-way.
   1.   The amount and type of insurance required for a special event shall be
determined by the town on a case by case basis.
   2.   At a minimum, the applicant shall provide proof of commercial general
liability of $1,000,000 per occurrence.
   3.   Insurance certificates and endorsements must be provided to the permit
clerk prior to the event date.
K.   Other requirements. Applicants may be required to meet any other
requirements necessary to ensure that the special event is conducted in a safe
and appropriate manner.
Ordinance 2014.008 renumbered, renamed, and substantially rewrote section
10-6-6
Ordinance 2017.001 amended the insurance requirement in subparagraph (J)(2)
10-6-7 Permit issuance or denial; request for additional information; review by
town manager
A.   The permit clerk shall respond to the applicant within ten business days
of the submission of a completed application. The permit clerk shall either
issue the requested permit, with or without imposed conditions, request
additional information from the applicant, or deny the permit.
B.   The applicant shall provide additional information within five business
days of receipt of a request for additional information from the permit clerk.
C.   If the permit is denied, the permit clerk shall provide written notice of
the denial to the applicant. The notice shall include a statement of the
reasons the application was denied and may be delivered by first class mail or
electronic mail.
D.   If the applicant disagrees with a decision to deny a permit, the applicant
may file a request for reconsideration with the town manager within ten days of
denial of the permit.
   1.   The town manager or designee shall issue a written decision to the
applicant within five days of the receipt of the request for reconsideration.
   2.   The decision of the town manager or designee is final and not subject
to any further administrative review.
Ordinance 2014.008 added section
10-6-7
10-6-8 Grounds for denial
The permit clerk may deny a special event permit for any of the following
reasons:
   A.   The applicant has violated this chapter or failed to meet the
conditions imposed pursuant to this chapter, including without limitation,
failure to comply with any condition(s) of a previously-issued special event
permit and failure to provide requested additional information regarding the
event or application within the time period set forth in this chapter.
   B.   The proposed event is intended to be conducted in a manner or location
not meeting the health, zoning, fire or safety standards established by rules
or regulations of the town, the laws of the state of Arizona, or rules and
regulations adopted by any of its agencies, or the town finds that that the
intended activity would otherwise be detrimental to the health, safety or
welfare of either the general public or of nearby residents or owners of nearby
property.
   C.   The applicant has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of
material fact in the application for permit or in any other document required
pursuant to this chapter.
   D.   The applicant, his or her employee, agent or any person associated with
the applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder, associate or manager,
has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction, by final judgment, of
an offense:
      1.   Involving the presentation, exhibition or performance of an obscene
production, motion picture or play, or of selling obscene matter;
      2.   Involving lewd conduct;
      3.   Involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another;
      4.   Involving misconduct with children; or
      5.   An offense against the provisions of Arizona law respecting
narcotics and dangerous drugs, or of any equivalent offense under the law of
any other state which if committed in Arizona would have been a violation of
the Arizona statutory provisions.
   E.   The scheduled date of the event conflicts with other previously
scheduled events.
   F.   The applicant is delinquent in payment to the town of taxes, fees,
fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant in relation
to or arising out of any business activity or previous special event of the
applicant.
   G.   The applicant has failed to apply for or obtain all other necessary
permits or licenses for the special event.
   H.   The proposed event will result in an undue impact on the town’s
property, operations, resources or staff.
   I.   The applicant has held other events in the town that resulted in
complaints or disturbances.
   J.   If the proposed event is to be held on town property, the town
determines that the event is not an appropriate or desired use of the town
property in question, based on the size and scope of the event, the length of
the event, the nature of the event, or any other relevant factors.
   K.   If the proposed event is to be held on town property, the town
determines that the proposed use of the town’s property will unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the property or
cause annoyance or the disturbance of any other person’s reasonable use of the
property, or cause annoyance or disturb the peace of persons residing near the
property, or interfere with the maintenance of the property or its facilities.
   L.   The proposed event is reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime
or disorderly conduct.
Ordinance 2014.008 renumbered and revised section 10-6-8
Ordinance 2017.001 amended subparagraph E and added subparagraphs H through L
Ordinance 2024.019 amended subparagraph A to add language clarifying that
failure to meet a condition set forth in a previously-issued special event
permit constitutes grounds for denial.
10-6-9 Waivers
At the discretion of the town manager, application submittal requirements or
permit conditions may be waived.
Ordinance 2014.008 renumbered section
10-6-9 and deleted “or designee”
10-6-10 Classification; enforcement; continuing violations
A.   Whenever in this chapter any act is prohibited or declared to be unlawful,
or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared
to be unlawful, the violation of that provision is a civil infraction.
B.   This chapter may be enforced in any manner provided for by town ordinances
and state laws.
C.   Each day any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Ordinance 2014.008 renumbered, renamed, and substantially rewrote section
10-6-10
10-6-11 Permit revocation; effect of revocation on prosecution
A.   In addition to any other remedy available as a matter of law, violations
of this chapter or of any permit conditions may result in revocation of a
special event permit and the discontinuation or closing of any special event.
B.   Revocation of a special event permit shall not be a defense against
prosecution.
Ordinance 2014.008 added section
10-6-11
Former
chapter 10-7 (penalties) was deleted by Ordinance 2012.07, and its provisions
were placed into the respective sections of this title. For prior history, see
Ordinance 96.15, 98.14, 2006.04, and 2007.04.
TITLE 11
OFFENSES
Ordinance 96.16 adopted title 11
CHAPTER 11-1.   DRIVING OR PARKING ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER
CHAPTER 11-2.   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
CHAPTER 11-3.   GRAFFITI
CHAPTER 11-4.   MINORS; LOITERING AND CURFEW
CHAPTER 11-5.   NOISE
CHAPTER 11-6.   PUBLIC URINATION OR DEFECATION
CHAPTER 11-7.   [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 11-8.   UNATTENDED CHILD IN MOTOR VEHICLE; CLASSIFICATION; PENALTY
CHAPTER 11-9.   RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA
CHAPTER 11-10.   PENALTIES
CHAPTER 11-11.   UNRULY RESIDENTIAL ACTIVITIES
CHAPTER 11-1.
DRIVING OR PARKING ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER
11-1-1 Driving or parking on another’s property unlawful
It is unlawful for a person to loiter, drive or park in or upon the property of
another during those hours when the person legally entitled to the possession
of the property is not present, or, if the property is a business, for any
purpose other than the normal conduct of trade with that business, or, if the
property is that of a government, for any purpose other than the normal conduct
of business with that government agency, without having in his or her
possession the written permission of the person legally entitled to the
possession of the property.
11-1-2 Exceptions
No person charged with violating this section shall be convicted, and any
charge against him or her shall be dismissed if he or she subsequently produces
in court the written permission.
CHAPTER 11-2.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
11-2-1 Unlawful possession
It is unlawful for any person to keep or exhibit any box pipe, cup, hypodermic
needle, thing or apparatus used for unlawfully smoking, eating, inhaling,
injecting or consuming any substance defined as a narcotic in A.R.S. § 13-3401
et seq., or any subsequent amendments to them.
11-2-2 Unlawful activities
It is unlawful for any person to act as a lookout or tender at any place where
the acts as set forth in section
11-2-1 are practiced or carried on.
11-2-3 Duty of police to seize unlawful paraphernalia
It is the duty of all police officers of the town to seize and safely keep all
cups, pipes, apparatus, boxes, hypodermic needles and things used for the
purpose of unlawfully eating, smoking, inhaling, injecting or otherwise
consuming any substance defined as a narcotic under A.R.S. § 13-3401 et seq.,
as it may be amended, and to produce them in court. The articles shall be
retained until a final disposition of any case in which they may be required as
evidence, and may be destroyed after final disposition of the case. Nothing
contained in this section shall prevent the destruction of the articles at any
time when the magistrate deems the articles no longer required to be retained
as evidence, or when they may be otherwise destroyed pursuant to any applicable
Arizona Revised Statute.
CHAPTER 11-3.
GRAFFITI
Ordinance 98.21 adopted
chapter 11-3 and renumbered the later chapters to conform
11-3-1 Definitions
A.   In this section, the following words and phrases shall be construed as
defined in this section unless in context it appears that a different meaning
is intended:
   1.   “Graffiti” means the unauthorized etching, spraying of paint or
application of paint, ink, chalk, dye or other similar substance on buildings,
fences, structures or similar places.
   2.   “Graffiti abatement officer” means the town official designated by the
town manager to interpret and enforce the provisions of this section.
   3.   ”Retailer” means any person, business or governmental entity that owns,
operates or manages a store, stand, booth, concession, mobile unit or other
place where sales of spray paint are made to purchasers for consumption or use.
   4.   “Spray paint” means any paint or paint like coating substance which is
dispensed by the use of an aerosol spray device whether or not containing a
toxic substance.
   5.   “Unauthorized” means without the permission of the property owner or
otherwise in violation of the provisions in this section.
Ordinance 2005.22 deleted a redundant definition of “person” (see section
1-3-2)
11-3-2 Purpose and intent
A.   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide a procedure for
the prevention, prohibition, and removal of graffiti from walls, structures, or
surfaces on public and private property to reduce blight and deterioration
within the town and to protect the public health and safety.
B.   The mayor and council finds that graffiti contributes to neighborhood
deterioration, provides a communication system for gangs and other vandals,
damages property, constitutes a public nuisance, and must be abated immediately
to avoid the detrimental impact of the graffiti and prevent the further spread
of graffiti.
C.   The mayor and council further find that graffiti is most frequently spread
by youth under the age of 18 years and that measures to limit youth access to
spray paint containers are critical to the town’s prevention efforts.
11-3-3 [Reserved]
Section
11-3-3 was deleted by Ordinance 2021.025.
11-3-4 Prohibited conduct; penalties
A,   No person may write, paint, or draw any inscription, figure, or mark of
any type on any public or private building or other real or personal property,
owned, operated, or maintained by a governmental entity, agency or
instrumentality or by any person, firm, or corporation, unless permission of
the owner or operator of the property has been obtained.
B.   No person may possess an aerosol spray paint container on any private
property unless the owner, agent, manager, or other person having control of
the property consented to the presence of the aerosol spray paint container.
C.   No person under the age of 18 years may possess an aerosol spray paint
container on any public property unless accompanied by a parent, guardian,
teacher or other person in a similar relationship over the age of 18 years and
the possession is for a lawful purpose.
D.   No person under the age of 18 years may buy any aerosol spray paint
container from any person or firm.
E.   Penalties. Violations of this section shall constitute a class 1
misdemeanor and shall be punished as follows:
   1.   A person convicted of violating subsection A shall be punished by a
term of not less than 48 hours in jail, a fine not less than $250 and not less
than 40 hours community service involving participation in the removal of
graffiti. In addition to any other punishment, the court shall order
restitution to the victim for damage or loss caused directly or indirectly by
the defendant’s offense in an amount to be determined by the court. Persons
under the age of 18 years will be punished as provided for in title 8 of the
Arizona revised statutes.
   2.   A person convicted of violating subsection B or C shall be punished by
a term of not less than 24 hours in jail, a fine not less than $100 dollars and
40 hours of community service involving participation in the removal of
graffiti. Persons under the age of 18 years will be punished as provided for in
title 8 of the Arizona revised statutes.
   3.   A person convicted of violating subsection D shall be punished as
provided for in title 8 of the Arizona revised statutes.
   4.   No judge shall suspend the imposition of any of the mandatory minimum
penalties required by this section.
11-3-5 Prohibited sale or transfer to minors; regulation of sale;
classification; penalty
A.   Spray paint containers shall not be sold, delivered, transferred or given
to persons under age 18 years. Evidence that a person demanded and was shown
acceptable evidence of age and acted upon that evidence in a transaction or
sale shall be a defense to any prosecution under this subsection. This
subsection does not apply to the transfer of an aerosol spray paint container
from a parent to child, guardian to ward, employer to employee, teacher to
student or in any other similar relationship when the transfer is for a lawful
purpose.
B.   Spray paint containers sold at retail establishments shall be stored or
displayed either A) in an area that is inaccessible to the public without
employee assistance in the regular course of business pending legal sale or
other disposition or B) within 15 feet of a cash register and within the line
of sight of a cashier at all times.
C.   Identification shall be required of purchasers of spray paint containers
appearing to be under the age of 26 years. A retailer shall not be found
responsible for a violation of this subsection unless the failure to require
identification resulted in a sale of spray paint to a person under age 18
years.
D.   Spray paint containers shall not be displayed or sold at swap meets, yard
sales, garage sales, or other like events.
E.   A retailer shall be responsible for the violation of any provision of this
section by its employees.
F.   Any violation of any provision of this section constitutes a civil
infraction. No magistrate, special magistrate or limited special magistrate may
suspend the imposition of the minimum fines prescribed in this section.
G.   A person found responsible for a violation of any provision of this
section shall be fined not less than $200. The fine amount for each subsequent
violation of any provision of this section within a consecutive 365-day period
shall increase by increments of $300 for each violation.
CHAPTER 11-4.
MINORS; LOITERING AND CURFEW
Ordinance 97.35 adopted
chapter 11-4. See Ordinance 96.16 and 98.21 for prior history.
11-4-1 Definitions
A.   In this section, unless the context otherwise requires:
   1.   “Curfew hours” means the following:
      a.   For juveniles under 16 years of age, between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 5:00 a.m. of the following day.
      b.   For juveniles on or after the sixteenth birthday, but prior to the
eighteenth birthday, between the hours of midnight and 5:00 a.m. of the
following morning.
   2.   “Custodian” means any person, not a juvenile, who is in loco parentis
to a juvenile.
   3.   “Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term also includes, but is
not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any
situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss
of life.
   4.   “Establishment” is defined as any privately owned place of business
operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited
to any place of amusement or entertainment.
   5.   “Guardian” means a person who, under court order, is the guardian of
the person of a minor; or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been
placed by an authorized agency or court; or any person other than a parent, who
has legal guardianship of the person of a juvenile; or a person at least 21
years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and
custody of a minor.
   6.   “Insufficient control” means failure to exercise reasonable care and
diligence in the supervision of the juvenile.
   7.   “Juvenile” or “minor” means any person who has not yet reached eighteen
years of age.
   8.   “Operator” means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or
corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term
includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the
officers of a corporation.
   9.   “Parent” means a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of
another person.
   10.   “Public place” is any place to which the public or a substantial group
of the public has access, and includes streets, highways, and the common areas
of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport
facilities, and shops.
   11.   “Remain” means to linger or stay or fail to leave premises when
requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person
in control of the premises.
   12.   “Serious bodily injury” means bodily injury that creates a substantial
risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or
protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
11-4-2 Offenses
A.   A minor commits an offense if the minor remains in any public place or on
the premises of any establishment within the town, away from the property where
the minor resides, during curfew hours.
B.   A parent, guardian or person having responsibility of a minor commits an
offense if the parent, guardian or person having responsibility for the minor
knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in
any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the town, away
from the property where the minor resides, during curfew hours. It shall not
constitute a defense that the parent, guardian or other person having
responsibility for the minor did not have actual knowledge that the minor was
violating the provisions of this chapter if the parent, guardian or other
person having responsibility for the minor, in the exercise of reasonable care
and diligence, should have known of the violation.
C.   A parent, guardian or other person having the care, custody or supervision
of the minor commits an offense by refusing to take custody of the minor after
the demand is made upon the parent, guardian or other person having the care,
custody or supervision of the minor, by a law officer who arrests the minor for
violations of this chapter.
D.   The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an
offense if the owner, operator, or any employee of the establishment knowingly
allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew
hours.
11-4-3 Defenses/exceptions
A.   It is a defense to prosecution under section
11-4-2 of this chapter that:
   1.   The minor was accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
   2.   The minor was on an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or
guardian without any detour or stop;
   3.   With prior permission of the parent or guardian, the minor was in a
vehicle involved in interstate travel;
   4.   The minor was engaged in an employment activity, or going to or
returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop by the
most direct route;
   5.   The minor was involved in an emergency;
   6.   The minor was on the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or
abutting the residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain
to the police department about the minor’s presence;
   7.   With prior permission of the parent or guardian, the minor was engaged
in a reasonable, legitimate, and specific business and/or activity. Examples
include, but are not limited to, attending an official school, religious, or
other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the town, a
civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an
official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults
and sponsored by the town, a civic organization, or another similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor;
   8.   With permission of the parent or guardian the minor was exercising
First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as
free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or
   9.   The minor is emancipated, whether emancipation be through marriage,
military service, or other legally sufficient grounds in accordance with
Arizona law.
B.   It is a defense to prosecution under section 11-4-2 D that the owner,
operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police
department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during
curfew hours and refused to leave.
11-4-4 Enforcement
Before taking any enforcement action under this chapter, a police officer shall
ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place. The
officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless
the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on
any response and other circumstances, no defense in section
11-4-3 exists.
11-4-5 Penalties
A.   Each violation of the provisions of section
11-4-2 shall constitute a separate offense.
B.   A person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a
class 1 misdemeanor, punishable according to the laws of the state.
CHAPTER 11-5.
NOISE
Ordinance 98.21 renumbered
chapter 11-5
11-5-1 Unlawful activities
A.   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and it is unlawful for any
person, to play or permit to be played any music or musical instruments whether
played by individuals, orchestra, radio, phonograph, music box or other
mechanical device or means in such a loud or unusual manner as to be offensive
to the senses, or so as to disturb the slumber, peace and quiet, or otherwise
interfere with or annoy the comfortable enjoyment of life or property of any
person and is no less a nuisance because the extent of the annoyance inflicted
is unequal.
B.   It is unlawful to play, operate or use any device known as a sound truck,
loud speaker or sound amplifier, radio or any instrument of any kind or
character which emits loud and raucous noises and is attached to and upon any
vehicle unless the person in charge of the vehicle shall have first applied to
and received permission from the chief of police to operate the vehicle so
equipped.
11-5-2 False alarms
A.   It shall be unlawful to allow or cause a false alarm within the town. A
violation of this section shall be punishable as provided in section
11-10-2 below.
B.   In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
   1.   “Alarm” means any mechanical or electrical device or assembly of
equipment designed or arranged to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or
other activity requiring urgent attention and to which the police are expected
to respond, or designed or arranged to signal the occurrence of a fire or
excessive smoke requiring urgent attention and to which a fire department is
expected to respond.
   2.   “Alarm company” means any firm, person, partnership, corporation or
entity which has servicing, maintenance or monitoring duties or
responsibilities under the terms of any agreement or arrangement with any alarm
user within the corporate limits of the town.
   3.   “Alarm user” means any person, firm, corporation or entity of any kind
in control of any building, premises, structure or facility in which or upon
which an alarm is maintained.
   4.   “False alarm” means an alarm signal to which police or fire department
personnel respond with any emergency personnel or equipment when a situation
requiring a response by the police or applicable fire department does not in
fact exist, and which signal is caused by the inadvertence, negligence or
intentional act or omission of an alarm company or alarm user or a malfunction
of the alarm.
C.   The following shall not be considered false alarms:
   1.   Alarms caused by the testing, repair or malfunction of telephone
equipment or lines.
   2.   Alarms caused by an act of God, including earthquakes, floods,
windstorms, thunder or lightning.
   3.   Alarms caused by an attempted illegal entry of which there is visible
evidence.
   4.   Alarms caused by the testing, repair or malfunction of electrical
utility equipment or lines.
The town attorney revised the cross-reference in 11-5-2, paragraph A as a
scrivener’s error on April 30, 2009, pursuant to the authority granted by
section
1-4-5
11-5-3 Noise standards in the resort and recreation zone
A.   Applicability; policy. The town has come to understand that certain
allowable activities within the resort and recreation zone may be disruptive to
the public health, safety and general welfare, the satisfaction, and the
feeling of well being to the surrounding residents. To control unnecessary,
excessive and annoying noise being generated from properties with the resort
and recreation (RR) zoning designation, it is the policy of the town to
maintain the standards identified in this section to protect the public health,
safety and general welfare of the surrounding residentially zoned properties.
All uses established or placed into operation after the effective date of this
section shall comply at all times hereafter with the following limitations or
performance standards.
B.   Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall be defined
as follows:
   1.   A weighted sound level. The sound pressure level in decibels as
measured on a sound level meter using the A weighted filter network. The A
weighted filter network is designed to simulate the response of the human ear.
The A weighted sound level is expressed by the symbol dBA.
   2.   Ambient noise. The composite of noise from all existing sources near
and far. The ambient noise level constitutes the normal or existing level of
environmental noise at a given location, excluding any alleged offensive noise.
   3.   Decibel (dB). A unit for measuring the amplitude of a sound, equal to
20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound
measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals.
   4.   Impulsive noise. A noise of short duration, usually less than one
second, and of high intensity, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay.
   5.   Noise study. An acoustical analysis performed by a qualified noise
engineer which determines the potential noise impacts of a roadway, land use or
operation of equipment. The noise study will generate noise contours and
recommend mitigation for noise impacts which exceed the city’s noise standards.
   6.   Sound level meter. A sound level meter shall mean an instrument meeting
at a minimum the American National Standards Institute’s Types 1 or 2
Standards, or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing
equipment which will provide equivalent data.
C.   Amplified noise standards. This section identifies stationary types of
noise sources. The type of noise standard contained in this section is for
amplified noise, which may be intrusive to a neighboring residential property.
The noise standards shown in table 1 are for regulating the impact of
stationary noise sources to a neighboring property.
D.   Exterior noise. It shall be unlawful for any person, entity or operation
at any location within the RR zone of the town to create any amplified noise,
or to allow the creation of any amplified noise on property owned, leased,
occupied or otherwise controlled by the person, which causes the noise level
when measured at the property line to exceed the noise standards found in table
1, and these amplified noise standards are hereby established and declared to
be reasonable and acceptable during the times stated in table 1.
 
TABLE 1
STATIONARY NOISE
SOURCE STANDARDS
Maximum noise levels measured at property line
7:00 a.m. to 10:30 p.m.—Not to exceed 55dBA
10:30 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.—Not to exceed 50dBA
 
E.   Exemptions. The following activities shall be exempt from these noise
standards:
   1.   Special events pursuant to an approved special event permit. Noise
impacts shall be evaluated and conditioned as part of the special event permit
process as set forth in
chapter 10-6.
   2.   Filming pursuant to a film permit. Noise impacts shall be evaluated and
conditioned as part of the film permit.
   3.   Activities conducted on public parks, public playgrounds and public or
private school grounds including school athletic and entertainment events that
are conducted under the sanction of the school or under a license or permit
duly issued pursuant to any provision of town code.
   4.   Noise sources associated with the maintenance of real property,
provided the activities take place between the hours of 7 a.m. to 8 p.m. on any
day except Sunday or between the hours of 9 a.m. to 8 p.m. on Sunday.
   5.   Any activity to the extent regulation of it has been preempted by state
or federal law.
F.   Noise level measurements. All noise shall be measured in accordance with
the following standards. Measurements shall be made with a Type 1 or Type 2
calibrated sound level meter utilizing the A weighting scale and the slow meter
response as specified by the American National Standards Institute (A.N.S.I.).
Noise levels shall be measured in decibels and A weighted. Meters shall be
maintained in calibration and in good working order. The measurement location
is at the property line between the RR Zone and the residentially zoned
property.
G.   Measurement procedure. The sound level meter shall be operated in
accordance with the instrument manufacturer’s instructions and as follows:
   1.   Microphone orientation. The microphone shall be pointed towards the
allegedly offensive noise source, unless the manufacturer’s instructions
specifically indicate otherwise.
   2.   Meter setting. The meter shall be set for the A weighted network and
“slow” response mode.
   3.   Calibration. An internal or external calibration check shall be made
before and after each use.
   4.   Sound levels shall be measured at the approximate location of the
property line, at a height of at least three feet above the immediate
surrounding surface.
   5.   Windscreens shall be used whenever appropriate.
H.   To implement and enforce this section effectively, the chief of police
shall, within a reasonable time after the effective date of this section,
develop and promulgate standards and procedures for testing and validating
sound level meters used in enforcement of this section.
I.   A law enforcement agent shall command any person violating this section to
abate his or her violation. It is unlawful for any person to fail to comply
with an order of a law enforcement agent regarding a noise violation. Each
violation of the order of a law enforcement agent under this subsection shall
constitute a separate offense of this section.
J.   Noise studies required.
   1.   Pre-development noise studies. A pre development noise study is
performed prior to development and is designed to project future noise levels
and recommend mitigation measures to be implemented in project development. A
registered noise engineer as approved by the town shall prepare all noise
studies. Noise studies may be required when a noise generating use, such as an
amphitheater, arena, etc., is proposed in the RR zoning district. The need for
a noise study will be determined at the time of development review. Pre-
development noise studies shall project future noise levels based on proposed
uses, traffic volumes and other relevant future conditions. Existing and
projected noise shall be evaluated pursuant to the noise standards within this
section. Mitigation measures shall be proposed to bring noise levels into
compliance with these standards. Mitigation measures may consist of walls,
berms, setbacks, landscaping, building materials, construction methods and any
other means whereby noise can be reduced to the levels within this section.
K.   Enforcement.
   1.   It shall be unlawful for any person in the RR zoning district, within
the town, to create any exterior noise, or to allow the creation of any noise
on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by the person,
which causes the noise level when measured according to this section, to exceed
the maximum allowable noise levels in Table 1 of this section.
   2.   No person shall interfere with, oppose or resist any authorized person
charged with the enforcement of this section while the authorized person is
engaged in the performance of his or her duty.
   3.   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed
responsible of a civil infraction. A law enforcement agent shall command any
person violating this section to abate his or her violation. It is unlawful for
any person to fail to comply with an order of a law enforcement agent regarding
a noise violation. Each violation of the order of a law enforcement agent under
this subsection shall constitute a separate offense of this section.
   4.   The operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, or machinery in
violation of any noise standard identified in this section is hereby declared
to be a public nuisance and may be abated pursuant to the nuisance abatement
procedure in the town code.
   5.   Pursuant to this section, each person shall be deemed responsible of a
separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any
violation of any provision of this section is committed, continued, or
permitted by the person and shall be punished accordingly.
   6.   Even though compliance with performance standards or procedures in
obtaining any permit is not required for a particular use, initial and
continued compliance with performance standards is required of every use and
the provisions for enforcement of continued compliance with performance
standards shall be invoked by the police and planning departments against any
use if there are reasonable grounds to believe that performance standards are
being violated by that use.
   7.   The designee of the police and planning departments shall investigate
any purported violation of noise standards and, if there is reasonable ground
for same, shall commence proceedings to abate the violation. The town, to
assist in the abatement proceedings, may employ qualified expert consultants.
Action by the town to abate the violation may include, but shall not be limited
to, commencing proceedings for revocation of permits or commencing enforcement
proceedings pursuant to this code or other remedies available by law or equity.
.   Jurisdiction. The town magistrate shall have authority to adjudicate
violations of this section. Violations shall be charged via the short form
Arizona Traffic Ticket and Complaint or via the long form summons and complaint
submitted by the town attorney. Pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-500.21(A)(3), the town
magistrate, in adjudicating violations of this section, shall use the same
procedures used for adjudicating civil traffic offenses.
Ordinance 2002.12 adopted section
11-5-3
Ordinance 2014.009 revised subparagraph E.1 by changing “special use permit” to
“special event permit” in two places, and by adding the reference to
chapter 10-6
11-5-4 Construction noise; extended work permits
A.   It shall be unlawful to allow or cause site construction activities that
result in construction noise in any of the following circumstances. For
purposes of this section, distances shall be determined by measuring from all
property lines of the construction site.
   1.   Between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays, between the
hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Saturdays, and between the hours of 7:00
p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Sundays on any construction site located within 500 feet
of any residential zone district.
   2.   Between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on any construction site
located more than 500 feet from any residential zone district.
B.   A contractor may apply to the building official for an extended work
permit to perform site construction work earlier or later than allowed by
paragraph A of this section by submitting an application in the form required
by the building official at least ten business days prior to the requested
start date for the extended work. At a minimum, the application shall include
all of the following information:
   1.   The address or location where the site construction work is to be
performed.
   2.   The proposed start and stop dates for the extended work hours.
   3.   The proposed extended work start and stop times.
   4.   The name of the contractor performing the work and a name and phone
number for an on site contact person.
   5.   A site plan showing property lines and location of work to be performed
during extended work hours.
   6.   A description of the circumstances that justify the issuance of the
extended work permit. An extended work permit will not be issued if economic
hardship is the primary justification given by the applicant. Relevant
circumstances may include, but are not limited to, one or more of the
following:
      a.   Weather or other environmental conditions that interfere with
completing the necessary work during allowed construction hours;
      b.   Obstruction or interference with traffic is less objectionable at
night than during the daytime, or traffic safety is improved with nighttime
work;
      c.   Construction noise in the vicinity of the proposed work site is less
objectionable at off hours than during the allowed hours because of different
population levels or different neighboring activities; or
      d.   The proposed construction activities need to be executed in a
continuous, uninterrupted manner to ensure satisfactory completion.
   7.   An explanation of any mitigation measures that contractor will take to
reduce the impact of the off-hours construction work, such as but not limited
to, noise or lighting mitigation efforts.
   8.   Additional information requested upon review.
   9.   A list of the addresses of all properties located within 500 feet of
the construction site, including any properties for which only a portion of the
property falls with the 500-foot radius.
   10.   A copy of a proposed written notification from the contractor to the
property owners identified in subparagraph B(9) above regarding the extended
work permit. The written notification shall include all of the information
listed in subparagraphs 1 through 4 of this paragraph B. The notice shall also
include the contact information for the appropriate town staff for property
owners to contact if they have a noise complaint.
C.   The building official will evaluate the application and may issue the
extended work permit for site construction work if the building official finds
the request to be reasonable in his or her sole discretion.
D.   The permit holder shall provide the written notification described in
paragraph B(10) above to all properties located within 500 feet of the
construction site, including any properties for which only a portion of the
property falls with the 500-foot radius, no less than 48 hours prior to when
extended work construction is due to begin. The permit holder may provide the
written notification through the use of door tags, letters, or any written
means of notification.
E.   Grading and roadway construction is permitted to begin at 6:00 a.m. and
end no later than 7:00 p.m. in any zoning district. If a contractor wishes to
perform road work or grading, outside these hours, the contractor shall make an
application to the town’s development engineering division or capital
improvement projects division, as applicable, for an extended work permit. Town
staff shall consider whether construction noise in the vicinity of the proposed
work site is less objectionable at night than during the day due to population
levels or activities or interference with traffic, and whether the noise will
cause significant disturbance in residential areas. Emergency work or repairs
may be authorized by the appropriate division manager regardless of the time of
day. The town may use any factor or reasoning to allow work during extended
hours if there exists a community benefit.
F.   The holder of an extended work permit for site construction or grading and
roadway construction is required to have the extended work permit on site for
inspection by town staff, including police personnel, at all times during the
extended work time.
G.   The building official or the development engineering division or capital
improvement projects division, as applicable, may revoke an extended work
permit if the town receives a complaint that cannot be resolved.
H.   Service trucks may work on equipment stored on site until 9:00 p.m.
Maintenance during other hours will be allowed if no objectionable noise is
generated.
I.   Sand and gravel operations (mining) and agricultural operations are exempt
from this section.
J.   If emergency conditions require that work be completed at times outside
the hours allowed by this section and the contractor does not already possess
an extended work permit, the contractor must notify the building official for
site construction work, or the development engineering division or capital
improvement projects division, as applicable, for grading or roadway
construction, as soon as practicable. If the contractor is unable to contact
the building official or development engineering division or capital
improvement projects division, the contractor shall notify the police
department.
K.   Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs A and E of this section,
between May 1 and October 15 of each year, site construction activities that
result in construction noise pursuant to paragraph A and grading and roadway
construction pursuant to paragraph E may occur between the hours of 5:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m. each weekday in any zoning district without an extended work
permit, if the site construction is being performed pursuant to a validly
issued permit. In addition, concrete may be poured at a construction site one
hour before site construction is regularly scheduled to begin.
L.   For purposes of this section:
   1.   “Site construction” means the work relating to site improvements
including, but not limited to, installation of utilities, including storm drain
infrastructure, on site curbs, asphalt placement, on site sidewalks, and all
structures such as buildings, walls, signs and light poles.
   2.   “Construction noise” means any noise that is generated from site
construction, including associated delivery of materials, and that disturbs the
peace or quiet of any residence or that causes discomfort or annoyance to any
reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing within 500 feet of the
construction site.
   3.   “Construction site” means the parcel(s) or property where the site
construction is taking place.
Ordinance 2002.14 adopted section 11-5-4, which was renumbered to conform to
Ordinance 2002.12
Ordinance 2005.22 amended paragraph H by adding “For purposes of this section”
to the introduction and deleting it from the definition of “Site construction”
The town attorney made a scrivener’s error correction to the chapter 11-10
cross-reference in paragraph I on January 5, 2010, pursuant to the authority in
section
1-4-5
Ordinance 2023.018 revised procedures for obtaining a special permit for
extended work hours and making other various revisions
Ordinance 2025.011 added paragraph K regarding extended hours for construction
activities and relettered existing paragraph K as L
CHAPTER 11-6.
PUBLIC URINATION OR DEFECATION
It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in a public place, or in
any place exposed to public view, except in an established lavatory or toilet.
Ordinance 98.21 renumbered
chapter 11-6
Ordinance 2012.06 rewrote
chapter 11-7. See Ordinance 98.21 for prior text.
CHAPTER 11-7.
[RESERVED]
Ordinance 2012.06 rewrote chapter 11-7. Ordinance 2021.025 repealed chapter 11-
7. See Ordinance 98.21 for prior text.
CHAPTER 11-8.
UNATTENDED CHILD IN MOTOR VEHICLE; CLASSIFICATION; PENALTY
Ordinance 2009.04 adopted
chapter 11-8 and renumbered the following chapters to conform
11-8-1 Prohibited conduct
It is unlawful to leave a child who is under eight years of age unattended in a
motor vehicle without supervision by another person who is at least 12 years of
age if either of the following applies:
A.   The conditions tend to present a risk to the child’s health, safety or
welfare; or
B.   The motor vehicle engine is running or the key to the motor vehicle is
located in the passenger compartment of the motor vehicle.
11-8-2 Protection of children by town
A.   Any peace officer is authorized to use whatever force is reasonable and
necessary to remove any child from a motor vehicle whenever it appears that the
child’s life or health is endangered by extreme temperatures, lack of
ventilation or any other condition existing within the motor vehicle.
B.   No peace officer shall be liable for damages to property caused by the use
of reasonable force to remove a child from a motor vehicle as described in this
section.
11-8-3 Diversion
In any case involving a person’s first violation of this chapter, the
prosecutor may offer the person the opportunity to complete a diversion program
in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-500.22. Successful completion of the diversion
program requirements shall result in the dismissal of the charge.
11-8-4 Violation; penalty
A violation of this chapter is a class 1 misdemeanor.
CHAPTER 11-9.
RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA
Ordinance 2020.019 adopted chapter 11-9 and renumbered the following chapters
to conform
11-9-1 Purpose and intent
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
the community. Except as allowed by law for personal, private use, the town
prohibits the retail sale, cultivation, and manufacturing of marijuana or
marijuana products in Marana. Nothing in this article is intended to promote or
condone the sale, cultivation, manufacture, transport, production,
distribution, possession, or use of marijuana or marijuana products in
violation of any applicable law.
11-9-2 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply throughout this chapter unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
A.   “Consume,” “consuming,” and “consumption” mean the act of ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body.
B.   “Consumer” means an individual who is at least 21 years old and who
purchases marijuana or marijuana products.
C.   “Cultivate” and “cultivation” mean to propagate, breed, grow, prepare and
package marijuana.
D.   “Department” means the Arizona department of health services or its
successor agency.
E.   “Dual licensee” means an entity that holds both a nonprofit medical
marijuana dispensary registration and a marijuana establishment license.
F.   “Manufacture” and “manufacturing” mean to compound, blend, extract, infuse
or otherwise make or prepare a marijuana product.
G.   “Marijuana” means:
   1.   All parts of the plant of the genus cannabis, whether growing or not,
as well as the seeds from the plant, the resin extracted from any part of the
plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or
preparation of the plant or its seeds or resin.
   2.   Includes cannabis as defined in A.R.S. § 13-3401.
   3.   Does not include industrial hemp, the fiber produced from the stalks of
the plant of the genus cannabis, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant,
sterilized seeds of the plant that are incapable of germination, or the weight
of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral
administrations, food, drink or other products.
H.   “Marijuana concentrate” means:
   1.   Resin extracted from any part of a plant of the genus cannabis and
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of that
resin or tetrahydrocannabinol.
   2.   Does not include industrial hemp or the weight of any other ingredient
combined with cannabis to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink
or other products.
I.   “Marijuana establishment” means an entity licensed by the department to
operate all of the following:
   1.   A single retail location at which the licensee may sell marijuana and
marijuana products to consumers, cultivate marijuana, and manufacture marijuana
products.
   2.   A single off-site cultivation location at which the licensee may
cultivate marijuana, process marijuana, and manufacture marijuana products, but
from which marijuana and marijuana products may not be transferred or sold to
consumers.
   3.   A single off-site location at which the licensee may manufacture
marijuana products and package and store marijuana and marijuana products, but
from which marijuana and marijuana products may not be transferred or sold to
consumers.
J.   “Marijuana products” means marijuana concentrate and products that are
composed of marijuana and other ingredients and that are intended for use or
consumption, including edible products, ointments, and tinctures.
K.   “Marijuana testing facility” means the department or another entity that
is licensed by the department to analyze the potency of marijuana and test
marijuana for harmful contaminants.
L.   “Nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary” or “medical marijuana dispensary”
means a nonprofit entity as defined in A.R.S. § 36-2801(12).
M.   “Open space” means a public park, public sidewalk, public walkway, or
public pedestrian thoroughfare.
N.   “Person” means an individual, partnership, corporation, association, or
any other entity of whatever kind or nature.
O.   “Process” and “processing” means to harvest, dry, cure, trim or separate
parts of the marijuana plant.
P.   “Public place” has the same meaning prescribed in the smoke-free-Arizona
act, A.R.S. § 36-601.01.
Q.   “Smoke” means to inhale, exhale, burn, carry or possess any lighted
marijuana or lighted marijuana products, whether natural or synthetic.
11-9-3 Smoking marijuana prohibited in public places and open spaces;
classification
A.   It is unlawful for a person to smoke marijuana in a public place or open
space in the town.
B.   Any person who fails to comply with this section is guilty of a petty
offense.
11-9-4 Marijuana prohibited on town property
The use, sale, cultivation, manufacture, production or distribution of
marijuana or marijuana products is prohibited on property that is occupied,
owned, controlled or operated by the town.
11-9-5 Marijuana establishment prohibited; dual licensee exception
A.   To the fullest extent allowable by law, the operation of a marijuana
establishment is prohibited in the town, except where authorized for a dual
licensee who:
   1.   Operates both a nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary and marijuana
establishment cooperatively in a shared location, subject to the provisions and
regulations of section
17-6-8; and
   2.   Has not forfeited or terminated the nonprofit medical marijuana
dispensary registration from the department.
The cross-reference in subparagraph A.1 was corrected on July 13, 2022 to
reflect the renumbering of Chapter 17-6 by Ordinance 2021.010.
11-9-6 Marijuana testing facility prohibited
To the fullest extent allowable by law, the operation of a marijuana testing
facility is prohibited in the town.
CHAPTER 11-10.
PENALTIES
Ordinances 2020.019, 2009.04 and 98.21 renumbered chapter 11-10
11-10-1 General
Except as otherwise provided in this title, any violation of this title is a
class 1 misdemeanor.
Ordinance 2012.06 revised section 11-10-1
11-10-2 False alarms
Any violation of section
11-5-2 shall have the following penalties:
A.   A civil sanction in an amount of not more than $250 may be assessed
against an alarm user for each false alarm which occurs in any building,
premises, structure or facility owned or controlled by the alarm user;
B.   A civil sanction in an amount of not more than $250 may be assessed
against the responsible alarm company for each false alarm which occurs if the
false alarm was occasioned due to the manner of installation of the alarm by
the responsible alarm company;
C.   A civil sanction in an amount of not more than $250 may be assessed
against the responsible alarm company for each false alarm which is occasioned
by the failure of the responsible alarm company to properly service, maintain
or monitor any alarm within the town.
11-10-3 Violation of section 11-5-3
   A.   A person found responsible for a first-time offense prohibited by
section
11-5-3 shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500 or more than $1,000.
   B.   A person found responsible for a second offense prohibited by section
11-5-3 shall be punished by a fine or not less than $1,200 or more than $1,500.
   C.   A person found responsible of a third offense prohibited by section
11-5-3 shall be punished by a fine of not less than $2,000 or more than $2,500.
Ordinance 2002.12 adopted section 11-8-3
11-10-4 Violations of section 11-5-4; classification; enforcement; continuing
violations
   A.   Whenever in section
11-5-4 any act is prohibited or declared to be unlawful, or the doing of any
act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the
violation of that provision is a civil infraction.
   B.   Violations of section
11-5-4 may be enforced in any manner provided for by town ordinances and state
laws.
   C.   Each day any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Ordinance 2024.018 added section 11-10-4
CHAPTER 11-11.
UNRULY RESIDENTIAL ACTIVITIES
Ordinance 2020.019 renumbered chapter 11-11
11-11-1 Unruly residential activities unlawful
An unruly residential activity is an activity on property used for residential
purposes which causes a disturbance of the quiet enjoyment of private or public
property by any person or persons, and shall be unlawful. Disturbances include,
but are not limited to, excessive noise or traffic, obstruction of public
streets by crowds or vehicles, drinking in public, the service of alcohol to
minors or consumption of alcohol by minors, fighting, disturbing the peace, and
littering. An unruly residential activity may be abated by reasonable means
including, but not limited to, citation or arrest of violators under applicable
ordinances or state statutes.
11-11-2 Notice of unruly residential activity – posting
A.   The premises where the unruly residential activity occurs shall be posted
with a notice stating that an unruly residential activity has occurred at the
premises. The notice shall state the date of the unruly residential activity,
and that any subsequent unruly activity on the same premises within a 120-day
period shall result in liability for the penalties provided in this chapter.
Parties liable include any persons in attendance causing the unruly activity,
or any owner, occupant or tenant of the premises where the unruly activity
occurred, or any sponsor of the event constituting the unruly activity. For
purposes of this chapter, the premises means the dwelling unit or units where
the unruly residential activity occurs.
B.   Premises shall be posted with a notice as provided in this section each
time an unruly residential activity occurs. If premises are already posted at
the time of a subsequent posting, the 120-day period from the date of the
existing posting shall be extended to 120 days from the date of the subsequent
posting. Once premises are initially posted as a result of an unruly
residential activity and the unruly activity has ceased, a resumption of unruly
activity on the premises resulting in another police response shall constitute
a new and separate unruly residential activity for purposes of this chapter.
C.   The owner, occupant, or tenant of the posted premises shall be responsible
for ensuring that the notice is not removed, defaced, or concealed. The
removal, defacement, or concealment of a posted notice shall be a civil
infraction carrying a penalty of a minimum, mandatory $100 fine, in addition to
any other penalties which may be imposed under this chapter. The owner,
occupant or tenant of the premises or sponsor of the unruly residential
activity, if present, shall be consulted about the location where the notice is
posted to achieve both the security of the notice and its prominent display.
D.   An owner, occupant, or tenant of the posted premises may contest the
posting of the notice by filing a written application for a hearing with the
Marana municipal court requesting that the court determine whether
justification existed for posting of the notice under the provisions of this
chapter. The application shall be filed within ten days after the posting of
the notice or, if the notice is given by mail, within ten days after mailing of
the notice, and not thereafter. The court shall set a time and date for a
hearing to be held no later than 15 days after receipt of the written
application for a hearing and shall notify both the applicant and the town’s
prosecutor of the hearing date. At the hearing, the town shall prove by a
preponderance of evidence that the posting of the notice was justified pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter.
E.   The term “owner” as used throughout this chapter includes any agent of
owner acting on behalf of the owner to control or otherwise regulate the
occupancy or use of the property.
11-11-3 Notification of property owner
Notification of the posting of the notice of unruly residential activity shall
be mailed to any property owner at the address shown on the Pima County
property tax assessment records. The notification shall advise the property
owner that any subsequent unruly activity within 120 days on the same premises
shall result in liability of the property owner for all applicable penalties as
provided in this chapter. Notification shall be made by certified mail. The
return receipt shall be prima facia evidence of service.
11-11-4 Subsequent unruly residential activity a civil infraction; parties
liable
A.   The occurrence of an unruly residential activity on the same premises more
than once in any 120-day period shall be a civil infraction. The following
parties, if found responsible for the infraction, shall be liable for the
penalties provided in section
11-11-5.
   1.   The owner of the property where the unruly residential activity
occurred, provided that notification of posting was mailed to the owner of the
property as provided in section
11-11-3 and that the unruly residential activity occurred not less than two
weeks after the mailing of the notification.
   2.   The owner, occupant, or tenant of the property where the unruly
residential activity occurred.
   3.   The person or persons who organized or sponsored the event constituting
the unruly residential activity.
   4.   Any person in attendance at the unruly residential activity who engaged
in any conduct causing the activity to be unruly.
B.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to impose liability on the
owner, occupant, or tenant of the premises or sponsor of the event constituting
the unruly residential activity, for the conduct of persons who are in
attendance without the express or implied consent of the owner, occupant,
tenant, or sponsor, as long as the owner, occupant, tenant or sponsor has taken
all steps reasonably necessary to exclude the uninvited persons from the
premises, including owners who are actively attempting to evict a tenant from
the premises. Where an invited person engages in unlawful conduct which the
owner, occupant, tenant or sponsor could not reasonably foresee and could not
reasonably control without the intervention of the police, the unlawful conduct
of the person shall not be attributable to the owner, occupant, tenant or
sponsor for the purposes of determining liability under this section.
The town attorney corrected the cross-reference in section
11-11-4 paragraphs A and A.1 on May 17, 2010 as a scrivener’s error under
authority of section
1-4-5
11-11-5 Penalties
A.   The penalty for a party found responsible for the occurrence of a
subsequent unruly residential activity, as provided in section
11-11-4, shall be a minimum mandatory fine of $500 for a first violation, a
minimum mandatory fine of $1,000 for a second violation, and minimum mandatory
fines of $1,500 for each third or subsequent violation.
B.   The civil fines provided in this section shall be in addition to any other
penalties imposed by law for particular violations of law committed during the
course of an unruly residential activity.
C.   The court may also enter an order of abatement against a party found
responsible for a violation of this chapter.
The town attorney corrected the cross-reference in section
11-11-5 paragraph A on May 17, 2010 as a scrivener’s error under the authority
of section
1-4-5
11-11-6 Enforcement
The police department is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter
provided that enforcement is initiated by a complaint from a member of the
public. The complaining member of the public shall not necessarily be required
to appear in court before a violator may be found responsible.
TITLE 12
TRAFFIC AND HIGHWAYS
Ordinance 96.17 adopted title 12 (“Traffic”), renamed “Traffic and Highways” by
Ordinance 2008.04
CHAPTER 12-1.   ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 12-2.   TRAFFIC CONTROL
CHAPTER 12-3.   PARKING
CHAPTER 12-4.   OFF-ROAD MOTOR VEHICLE USE
CHAPTER 12-5.   IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES
CHAPTER 12-6.   BICYCLE HELMETS FOR MINORS
CHAPTER 12-7.   CONSTRUCTION IN TOWN RIGHTS-OF-WAY
CHAPTER 12-8.   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY
CHAPTER 12-9.   OVERDIMENSIONAL VEHICLES
CHAPTER 12-10.   OTHER PENALTIES
CHAPTER 12-1.
ADMINISTRATION
12-1-1 Duty of police department
A.   It shall be the duty of the police department to provide for the
enforcement of the street traffic regulations of the town and all of the state
vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the town, to make arrests for
traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to assist in developing ways
and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out all duties specially
imposed upon the police department by this title.
B.   Any peace officer or duly authorized agent of the town may stop and detain
a person as is reasonably necessary to investigate an actual or suspected
violation of this title and to serve a copy of the traffic complaint for any
alleged civil or criminal violation of this title.
12-1-2 Records of traffic violations
A.   The police department shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic
laws of the town or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been
charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all alleged
offenses. The record shall accumulate during at least a five year period and
from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most
recent five year period.
B.   All forms for records of violations and notices shall be serially
numbered. For each month and year, a written record shall be maintained
complete for at least the most recent five year period.
12-1-3 Police department to investigate accidents
It shall be the duty of the police department to investigate traffic accidents
and to arrest and assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with
violations of law causing or contributing to those accidents.
12-1-4 Traffic accident studies
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the police
department shall conduct studies of those accidents and determine remedial
measures.
CHAPTER 12-2.
TRAFFIC CONTROL
12-2-1 Directing traffic
A.   The police department is hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice,
hand or signal.
B.   Officers of authorized fire departments, when at the scene of an
emergency, may direct or assist the police department in directing traffic
thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
12-2-2 Traffic control devices
A.   The town shall place and maintain traffic control devices, signs and
signals when and as required under the traffic regulations of the town to make
effective the provisions of the regulations, and may place and maintain such
additional traffic control devices as necessary to regulate traffic under the
traffic laws of the town or under state law or to guide or warn traffic.
B.   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic control device placed in accordance with the traffic regulations of the
town unless otherwise directed by the chief of police or member of the police
department, subject to the exceptions granted in this title or by state law.
12-2-3 Traffic preemptor devices
It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the town engineer to
utilize, alter or interfere with any preemptor device to control an official
traffic control device within the town limits.
12-2-4 Crosswalks; safety zones; traffic lanes
A.   The town engineer or his or her designee is hereby authorized:
   1.   To designate by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of
the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in his or her opinion, there is
particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at any other places
as he or she may deem necessary;
   2.   To establish safety zones of the kind and character and at the places
as he or she deems necessary for the protection of pedestrians;
   3.   To mark lanes for traffic on street pavement at any place he or she
deems advisable, consistent with the traffic laws of the town and the state;
   4.   The council may adopt further rules and regulations from time to time
as they deem necessary for the safety and efficient use of the town roads by
the public.
12-2-5 Authority to place and obedience to turning markers
A.   The town engineer or his or her designee is authorized to place markers,
buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to
be traveled by vehicles turning at those intersections, and the course to be
traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.
B.   When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an
intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat,
no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of those indications.
12-2-6 Authority to place and obedience to restricted turn signs
A.   The town engineer or his or her designee is hereby authorized to determine
those intersections where drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or u
turn and shall have proper signs placed at those intersections. The making of
those turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at
other hours, if the limitations are clearly indicated on the signs or if the
signs are removed when the turns are permitted.
B.   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or
U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of the
sign.
Ordinance 2005.22 rewrote the last sentence of paragraph A
12-2-7 One-way streets and alleys
A.   The council shall by resolution designate any streets or alleys which are
to be limited to one-way traffic.
B.   When any resolution of the council designates any one-way street or alley,
the town shall place and maintain signs giving notice of it, and no such
regulation shall be effective unless the signs are in place. Signs indicating
the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection
where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
12-2-8 Regulation of traffic at intersections
A.   The council shall by resolution designate through streets, intersections
where stops are required, and intersections where vehicles shall yield the
right of way.
B.   When any resolution of the council shall designate any through street or
intersection where vehicles are to stop or yield the right of way, the town
engineer or his designee shall erect and maintain the appropriate signs at
every location where a vehicle must stop or yield the right of way.
C.   Whenever any laws of the town designate and describe a through street, it
shall be the duty of the town to place and maintain a stop sign on each and
every street intersecting the through street or intersecting that portion of it
described and designated as such by the laws of the town.
12-2-9 Drivers to obey signs
Whenever traffic signs are erected as provided in this title, every driver of a
vehicle shall obey the signs unless directed to proceed by the chief of police,
a member of the police department or a traffic control signal. No driver shall
drive upon or through any private property such as a gas station, vacant lot or
similar property to avoid obedience to any regulation included in this title.
12-2-10 Processions
A.   No procession or parade, except funeral processions, shall be held without
first securing a permit from the chief of police, and all requests for permits
shall state the time, place of formation, proposed line of march, destination
and any other regulations the chief of police sets forth in the permit.
B.   A funeral procession composed of a procession of vehicles shall be
identified by the methods determined and designated by the chief of police.
C.   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a
funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when the
vehicles are conspicuously a part of the procession.
D.   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the
right hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead
as close as is practical and safe.
12-2-11 Speed limits
A.   Reasonable and prudent maximum speed limits on roadways located within the
town limits are set forth on the town speed zone map and accompanying table,
adopted and amended from time to time by resolution of the council, upon
recommendation by the town engineer and based on nationally-accepted traffic
engineering standards.
B.   Any peace officer or duly authorized agent of the town may stop and detain
a person as is necessary to investigate an actual or suspected violation of
title 28, Arizona revised statutes, or this section, and to serve a copy of the
traffic complaint for any alleged civil or criminal violation of this title.
Ordinance 2006.31 amended paragraph A. Click on the following hyperlinks to see
the current speed zone map and table. (Note: These may take a moment to
download.)
12-2-12 Speed limits in areas undergoing roadway construction
A.   It shall be unlawful for a person to drive at a speed greater than the
speed posted in an area undergoing roadway construction.
B.   As used in this section, “roadway construction” means the construction,
reconstruction or maintenance of any road by town employees or any contractor
or subcontractor performing such construction, reconstruction or maintenance at
the direction of the town.
C.   The town engineer or the town engineer’s authorized representative is
hereby authorized to establish temporary reduced speed limits in areas
undergoing roadway construction. The temporary reduced speed limits shall be
implemented when the town engineer or the town engineer’s authorized
representative determines, based on an engineering and traffic investigation,
that the permanent speed limits in the area under construction are not
reasonable and safe while the roadway construction is taking place.
D.   Any temporary reduced speed limit established by the town engineer or the
town engineer’s authorized representative shall be effective only for the
duration of the roadway construction.
E.   The temporary reduced speed limits shall be effective when all of the
following has taken place:
   1.   A work order authorizing a temporary construction zone speed limit is
signed by the town engineer or the town engineer’s authorized representative
and filed in the town clerk’s office.
   2.   Speed limit signs with the temporary reduced speed limit are erected in
a clearly visible manner in the area undergoing construction.
   3.   The permanent speed limit signs in the area undergoing construction are
temporarily removed, covered or turned.
F.   Any person found responsible for speeding in excess of a posted temporary
reduced speed limit shall be fined $250 for each violation. No judge may
suspend any portion of the fine prescribed in this paragraph.
G.   Any person found responsible for speeding in excess of the permanent
posted speed limit in an area undergoing roadway construction where a temporary
reduced speed limit has not been posted shall be fined $250 for each violation.
No judge may suspend any portion of the fine prescribed in this paragraph.
Ordinance 2008.08 added section
12-2-12
12-2-13 School crossings
School crossings shall be established and marked in front of each school
building and grounds in conformity with the provisions of A.R.S. § 28-797.
Ordinance 2008.08 renumbered section
12-2-13
12-2-14 Railroad crossings
A.   No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle or other vehicle
within a railroad grade crossing, even if the stop is temporary in nature or
caused by traffic congestion.
B.   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while the gate or barrier is
closed, or is in the process of opening or closing, to any degree.
C.   As used in this section, the term “railroad grade crossing” shall be
defined as follows. Where railroad crossing gates exist, the “railroad grade
crossing” shall be that area between the two gates, whether the gates are
raised or lowered. Where no railroad crossing gates exist, the “railroad grade
crossing” shall be that area within ten feet of the railroad tracks, on each
side of the tracks.
Ordinance 2001.07 adopted section
12-2-14, which was renumbered by Ordinance 2008.08
12-2-15 Violations –
chapter 12-2; penalty
A.   Any violation of
chapter 12-2 shall be a civil traffic violation unless otherwise designated in
this title or under state law.
B.   Any person found responsible for a civil violation of
chapter 12-2 shall be fined not more than $250 for each violation.
A person convicted of violating section
12-2-14 is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor.
Ordinance 2006.31 added section
12-2-15, which was revised and renumbered by Ordinance 2008.08. The town
attorney corrected the cross-reference in paragraph C on September 4, 2008 as a
scrivener’s error under the authority of section
1-4-5.
CHAPTER 12-3.
PARKING
See Ordinance 94.12 for prior history of
chapter 12-3
12-3-1 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply throughout this chapter:
A.   “Handicap parking space” means any specially designated and marked parking
space provided in accordance with section
12-3-6 for physically disabled persons.
B.   “Parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.
Parking does not include a temporary stop for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading.
C.   “Right-of-way” means the entire width between boundary lines of every way
set apart for public travel when any part of it is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
D.   “Sale” means any transfer of title or possession or both, for
consideration. Sale includes any exchange, or barter, conditional or otherwise,
in any manner or by any means whatsoever, including consignment transaction and
auctions of property.
E.   “Vehicle” means every device by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn on a street or highway.
Ordinance 2006.31 added section
12-3-1
12-3-2 Method of parking
A.   Except as otherwise authorized by posted regulatory signs, every vehicle
stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be
stopped or parked with the right hand wheels of the vehicle parallel to and
within 18 inches of the right hand curb.
B.   Where authorized by posted regulatory signs, vehicles may be parked with
the left-hand wheels adjacent to and within eighteen inches of the left-hand
curb of a one-way roadway.
C.   Where authorized by posted regulatory signs, angle parking is permitted on
any roadway. This paragraph shall not apply on any federal aid highway or state
highway unless the director of the Arizona department of transportation has
determined by resolution or order that the roadway is of sufficient width to
permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic.
Ordinance 2006.31 renumbered section
12-3-2, added paragraphs B and C, and modified paragraph A
12-3-3 Blocking traffic
A.   It shall be a civil infraction for any person to stop, stand or park any
motor vehicle or other vehicle on the paved or main traveled part of a public
roadway so as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the public
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
B.   On a public roadway with yellow centerline markings, it shall be a civil
infraction for any person to stop, stand or park any motor vehicle or other
vehicle on the paved or main traveled part of a public roadway so as to leave
available less than ten feet of the width of roadway between the yellow
centerline markings and the curb on the same side of the centerline markings as
the parked vehicle for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
C.   It shall be a civil infraction for any person to stop, stand or park any
motor vehicle or other vehicle on the paved or main traveled part of a public
roadway outside of a business or residence district unless the vehicle is
clearly visible from a distance of 200 feet in each direction on the roadway.
D.   This section does not apply to:
   1.   The driver of a vehicle that is stopped temporarily when loading or
unloading passengers or in the observance of traffic signs or police officer
instructions.
   2.   The driver of a vehicle that is disabled while on the paved or main
traveled portion of a highway in a manner and to an extent that it is
impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in
that position.
   3.   A vehicle or the driver of a vehicle engaged in the official delivery
of the United States mail that stops on the right-hand side of the highway for
the purpose of picking up or delivering mail if the following conditions are
met:
      a.   A clear view of the vehicle is available from a distance of 300 feet
in each direction on the roadway or a flashing amber light at least four inches
in diameter with the letters “stop” printed on the light is attached to the
rear of the vehicle.
      b.   The vehicle has a uniform sign that:
         i.   Is at least fourteen inches in diameter.
         ii.   Is approved by the Arizona department of transportation.
         iii.   Has the words “U.S. Mail” printed on the sign.
         iv.   Is attached to the rear of the vehicle.
Ordinance 2006.31 renumbered and substantially modified section
12-3-3
12-3-4 Stopping, standing or parking prohibitions
Except if necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or if in compliance
with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, it
shall be a civil infraction for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle in
any of the following places:
A.   On a sidewalk.
B.   In front of a public or private driveway, except that this paragraph does
not apply to a vehicle or the driver of a vehicle in the following situations:
   1.   When loading or unloading materials in a way that does not block the
driveway to the free movement of vehicular traffic.
   2.   When engaged in the official delivery of the United States mail if both
of the following apply:
      a.   The driver does not leave the vehicle.
      b.   The vehicle is stopped only momentarily.
C.   Within an intersection.
D.   Within fifteen feet of a fire hydrant.
E.   On or within 20 feet of a crosswalk.
F.   Within 30 feet on the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign, yield
sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
G.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on
the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless otherwise
authorized by posted regulatory signs.
H.   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail or a railroad crossing or within eight
feet six inches of the center of any railroad track, except while a motor
vehicle with motive power attached is loading or unloading railroad cars.
I.   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to a fire station.
J.   Alongside or opposite a street excavation or obstruction when stopping,
standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
K.   On the roadway side of a vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of
a street.
L.   On a bridge or other elevated structure on a public road or within a
tunnel.
M.   At any place where official signs prohibit parking, standing or stopping.
N.   On a controlled access highway except for emergency reasons or except in
areas specifically designated for parking such as rest areas.
O.   Within an alley except when loading or unloading materials in a way that
does not block the alley to the free movement of vehicular traffic.
P.   Within 50 feet of a public transit bus stop.
Ordinance 2006.31 adopted section
12-3-4 and deleted former section
12-3-4 (“Parking vehicles on sidewalks”)
12-3-5 Authority to erect signs restricting parking
The town engineer may erect signs requiring parking at an angle to the curb,
allowing parking on the left hand curb on one-way streets, notifying drivers
that parking is prohibited and restricting parking in any way that may be
necessary. No parking restrictions authorized by this section shall become
effective until signs have been erected. Signs need not be erected before
enforcement of parking restrictions adopted by other sections of this chapter.
It shall be a civil infraction for any person to stop or park a vehicle in
disobedience to the parking restrictions.
Ordinance 2006.31 renumbered and substantially modified section
12-3-5
12-3-6 Stopping, standing or parking in handicap parking space
A.   Except as provided in subsection D of this section, no person may stop,
stand or park a motor vehicle within a handicap parking space unless the motor
vehicle is transporting a person eligible for the distinguishing insignia
placard or number plates bearing the international wheelchair symbol, and
either:
   1.   The motor vehicle displays the distinguishing insignia placard; or
   2.   The motor vehicle displays number plates bearing the international
wheelchair symbol.
B.   In any prosecution charging a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, the person in whose
name the vehicle is registered shall be prima facie responsible for the
violation and subject to the penalty for it.
C.   If a law enforcement officer employed by the town finds a motor vehicle in
violation of this section, the officer shall issue a complaint which shall be
attached or placed upon the vehicle which is unlawfully parked.
D.   Any person who is chauffeuring a physically disabled person shall be
allowed, without a distinguishing insignia placard or number plates bearing the
international wheelchair symbol, to park momentarily in a handicap parking
space for the purpose of loading or unloading the physically disabled person.
No complaint shall be issued to the driver for that momentary parking.
E.   Handicap parking spaces shall be designated on privately owned property as
provided by the town land development code. Each handicap parking space shall
be prominently outlined with paint and posted with a permanent sign located not
less than three feet or more than six feet above the grade and of a color and
design approved by the Arizona department of transportation bearing the
internationally accepted wheelchair symbol and the caption “reserved parking”.
The designation of handicap parking spaces as provided in this chapter or as
required pursuant to the town land development code shall authorize police
officers, and other duly authorized agents, to enforce the provisions of this
section and shall constitute a waiver of any objection by the owner or person
in possession of the property to the enforcement of this section, and the owner
or person in possession shall be deemed to have consented by that designation.
F.   The chief of police is authorized to institute a volunteer handicap
parking enforcement specialist program in which special volunteers are
authorized to issue citations only to persons who violate this section.
Ordinance 2006.31 renumbered and slightly modified section
12-3-6
12-3-7 Law enforcement exception
The stopping, standing or parking restrictions provided in this chapter do not
apply to a police or peace officer when the stopping, standing or parking is
for the purpose of actual performance of a law enforcement duty.
Ordinance 2006.31 added section
12-3-7
12-3-8 Unarmed police parking enforcement aides
The police department may employ unarmed police parking enforcement aides
empowered to commence an action or proceeding pursuant to
chapter 5-7 of the town code for any violation of vehicle standing or parking
regulations. The authority of the unarmed police parking enforcement aide shall
be strictly limited to the enforcement of vehicle standing or parking
regulations. They are not granted any other powers or benefits to which peace
officers of the town are entitled.
Ordinance 2006.31 renumbered and modified section
12-3-8
12-3-9 Parking within right-of-way to display vehicle or goods for sale
It shall be a civil infraction to park a vehicle within any Town of Marana
right-of-way for the purpose of:
A.   Displaying the vehicle for sale; or
B.   Displaying advertising; or
C.   Displaying goods for sale.
Ordinance 2006.31 added section
12-3-9
12-3-10 Parking on public land to display vehicle for sale
It shall be a civil infraction to park a vehicle upon land owned by the town or
by any other government agency for the purpose of displaying the vehicle for
sale.
Ordinance 2006.31 added section
12-3-10
12-3-11 Presumption of liability
A.   The display of any signs or other markings indicating that a vehicle is
for sale shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle has been parked for the
purpose of sale.
B.   Whenever a vehicle is parked in violation of this chapter, the registered
owner of the vehicle and the person who parked the vehicle where the violation
occurred are jointly and severally responsible for the violation.
Ordinance 2006.31 added section
12-3-11
12-3-12 Truck, trailer and recreational vehicle parking restrictions
A.   Commercial trucks and oversized vehicles shall not be parked on a
residential-area public street at any time, except while actively carrying on
the activity for which the truck or vehicle is designed, including by way of
example and not limitation:
   1.   A moving truck while loading or unloading.
   2.   A tradesman’s work truck while the trade is being undertaken.
   3.   Construction vehicles during construction.
B.   The following shall not be parked on a residential-area public street for
more than 72 consecutive hours:
   1.   Vehicles with a trailer attached.
   2.   Trailers unattached from vehicles.
   3.   Recreational vehicles 20 feet or more in length.
C.   For purposes of this section, the term “residential-area public street”
shall mean any street within or contiguous to land zoned or used primarily for
single family or multi-family residential uses.
Ordinance 2006.31 added section
12-3-12
12-3-13 Violations –
chapter 12-3; penalty
A.   Any violation of
chapter 12-3 shall be a civil traffic violation.
B.   Any person found responsible for violating any provision of
chapter 12-3 shall be fined not more than $250 for each violation.
Ordinance 2006.31 renumbered and modified section
12-3-13
CHAPTER 12-4.
OFF-ROAD MOTOR VEHICLE USE
Ordinance 2003.09 modified the title of
chapter 12-4 from “Off-road recreational motor vehicles”
12-4-1 Definitions
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
A.   “Off-road recreational vehicle” means two-, three- and four-wheel motor
vehicles manufactured or converted for recreational non highway all terrain
travel.
B.   “Operate” means driving or having actual physical control over the vehicle
or off-road recreational vehicle.
C.   “Private lands” or “privately owned” lands means any land other than
public lands.
D.   “Public lands” or “publicly owned” lands means any land owned by any
government entity or agency, including federal, state and local governments.
E.   “Vehicle” means any motor vehicle other than an off-road recreational
vehicle.
F.   “Wash” or “riverbed” means a water course having beds, banks, sides and
channels through which either waters currently flow or through which flood
waters flow periodically, and its adjoining floodplain terraces.
Ordinance 2003.09 rewrote section
12-4-1
12-4-2 Prohibited uses
A.   No person shall operate an off-road recreational vehicle:
   1.   Upon any portion of any publicly owned wash or riverbed within the town
except to cross the wash or riverbed from one bank to another within the
boundaries of an existing, clearly defined highway, street, road, primitive
roadway, trail or traveled way; or
   2.   Upon privately owned lands without notarized written consent of the
owner, the owner’s agent or the person in lawful possession of the property.
The written consent shall be kept in a person’s possession while operating an
off-road recreational vehicle and shall be shown upon the request of a peace
officer; or
   3.   So as to knowingly cause or contribute to visible dust emissions which
then cross property lines into a residential, recreational, institutional,
educational, retail sales, hotel or business premises; or
   4.   At a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the
circumstances, conditions and actual and potential hazards then existing. In
every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid
colliding with any object, person, animal life or other off-road recreational
vehicle so as to comply with the duty of all persons to exercise reasonable
care for the protection of others; or
   5.   So as to damage landscaping on public or private lands, or to create
significant erosion on those lands; or
   6.   In a way that causes excessive noise that disturbs the peace and quiet
of a residential area to the extent that a noise complaint is made to the
police department; or
   7.   Unless all persons under the age of 17 years riding in or upon the off-
road recreational vehicle shall wear adequate protective headgear; or
   8.   On any property owned or leased by the town other than a public
roadway, unless specifically authorized in writing by the town or expressly
allowed by this chapter.
B.   No person shall operate a vehicle:
   1.   Upon any portion of any publicly owned wash or riverbed within the town
except to cross the wash or riverbed from one bank to another within the
boundaries of an existing, clearly defined highway, street, road, primitive
roadway, trail or traveled way; or
   2.   Upon privately owned lands without notarized written consent of the
owner, the owner’s agent or the person in lawful possession of the property.
The written consent shall be kept in a person’s possession while operating a
vehicle and shall be shown upon the request of a peace officer. This provision
shall not apply to vehicles traveling upon driveways leading from a public
street or highway to a private residence; or
   3.   So as to knowingly cause or contribute to visible dust emissions which
then cross property lines into a residential, recreational, institutional,
educational, retail sales, hotel or business premises; or
   4.   So as to damage landscaping on public or private lands, or to create
significant erosion on those lands; or
   5.   On any property owned or leased by the town other than a public
roadway, unless specifically authorized in writing by the town or expressly
allowed by this chapter.
Ordinance 2003.09 added subparagraph (A)(8) and paragraph B and made other
minor revisions to section
12-4-2 
12-4-3 Identification and proof of ownership
A.   All operators of off-road recreational vehicles shall carry proof of
ownership, or a rental agreement and a driver’s license while operating off-
road recreational vehicles and shall show those documents upon the request of a
peace officer. If an operator is unlicensed, then recent picture identification
shall be carried.
B.   For the purposes of this section, identification for minors may include a
school picture identification with school or home address or a notarized
statement consisting of the minor’s physical description and home address which
is signed by a parent or guardian.
12-4-4 Exempt uses
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a vehicle or an off-road
recreational vehicle being used for:
A.   Ranching or agricultural purposes;
B.   Grading, construction or building trade purposes;
C.   Mining purposes;
D.   Licensed off-road business operations such as land surveying, public
utility companies, sand and gravel operations and other similar enterprises;
E.   Authorized emergency vehicle including towing services;
F.   Governmental purposes by a government employee;
G.   Golf carts on golf courses.
Ordinance 2003.09 amended the introductory paragraph of section
12-4-1 to add “or an off-road recreational vehicle”
12-4-5 Exempt locations
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply:
A.   To vehicle or off-road recreational vehicle operators on their own
property, except when creating dust emissions as set forth in section
12-4-2A.3 or section
12-4-2B.3.
B.   On any dedicated public highway, street, road, alley or parking lot
generally open to the public for the purpose of vehicular travel if properly
licensed to use the roadway.
Ordinance 2003.09 amended paragraph A to add “or section
12-4-2(B)(3)”
12-4-6 Violations –
chapter 12-4; penalty
A.   Any violation of
chapter 12-4 shall be a civil traffic violation.
B.   Any person found responsible for violating any provision of
chapter 12-4 shall be fined not more than $250 for each violation.
Ordinance 2006.31 renumbered and modified section
12-4-6
CHAPTER 12-5.
IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES
12-5-1 Police authorization to impound vehicles
A.   The police department may take in charge, remove and keep in its custody
under the direction of the chief of police or cause to be towed to and stored
in a public storage facility, vehicles in the following circumstances:
   1.   Any unoccupied vehicle of any kind or description found violating any
town ordinances, this code or the laws of the state regulating the standing or
parking of vehicles;
   2.   When any person is arrested and taken into custody while in possession
of a motor vehicle;
   3.   Pending forfeiture action as prescribed by A.R.S. § 3-3413, § 13-2301
or § 13-4305 or other applicable statutes;
   4.   When a vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct or crossway,
or in any tube or tunnel where the vehicle constitutes an obstruction of
traffic;
   5.   When a vehicle upon a highway or street is so disabled as to constitute
an obstruction to traffic and the person in charge of the vehicle is by reason
of physical injury incapacitated so as to be unable to provide for its custody
or removal;
   6.   When the vehicle is left unattended upon a street or alley and is
parked illegally or constitutes a hazard or obstruction to the normal movement
of traffic;
   7.   When the vehicle is left unattended upon a public street, highway or
other public property for a period in excess of forty-eight hours;
   8.   When any person is cited for a violation of A.R.S. § 28-692, § 28-411,
§ 28-422.01, § 28-471, § 28-473 or § 28-1075, and the person cited does not
have a licensed driver capable of safely driving the vehicle available and
gives permission for it.
12-5-2 Notice of impoundment
A.   Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from the street and the officer
knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle the
name and address of the vehicle owner, the officer shall immediately give or
cause to be given notice telephonically, in person or in writing to the owner
of the fact of the removal and the reasons for it, and of the place where
vehicle has been taken.
B.   Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from the street and does not know
and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner, or for any other reason is
unable to give the notice to the owner as provided in subsection A of this
section, and the vehicle is not claimed by the owner within a period of three
days, the officer shall send or cause to be sent a written report of the
removal by mail to the Motor Vehicle Division of the State Department of
Transportation and shall file a copy of the notice with the proprietor of the
public garage in which the vehicle is stored, in accordance with the police
department’s rules and regulations. The notice shall include a complete
description of the vehicle, the date, time and place from which removed, the
reasons for the removal, and the name of the garage or place where the vehicle
is stored.
12-5-3 Return of impounded vehicle
A.   Unless the vehicle is being held for forfeiture proceedings or unless the
vehicle is being held as evidence in a pending criminal case, the police
department shall allow the return to the owner of the impounded vehicle when
the owner has furnished evidence of identity and ownership and signed a
receipt. The owner shall be required to pay any towing and storage fees which
have accrued. Payment of any towing and storage fees shall not release the
owner or driver of the vehicle of any other penalty which may be imposed for
any violation of town ordinances, this code, state or federal laws.
B.   If forfeiture proceedings are initiated and later discontinued, the
vehicle will be released to the vehicle owner upon payment of the towing and
storage fees as set forth in subsection A of this section.
C.   If a vehicle is being held as evidence in a pending criminal case, at the
final conclusion of that criminal case (together with the conclusion of all
available appeals) the vehicle shall be returned to the owner of the vehicle,
subject to the payment of all towing and storage fees as set forth in
subsection A of this section.
Ordinance 2009.11 amended section
12-5-3(A) by adding reference to the comprehensive fee schedule and deleting
specific storage fee amounts for impounded vehicles. Ordinance 2019.008 amended
paragraph A by deleting a sentence about vehicle storage on town property.
12-5-4 Sale of impounded vehicles
If an impounded vehicle is not redeemed by its owner or agent within thirty
days after it is subject to be released, it shall be sold for the charges and
costs set forth section
12-5-3A, in the manner provided by A.R.S. § 28-1401 et seq. This remedy is
cumulative of all other penalties provided by this chapter.
CHAPTER 12-6.
BICYCLE HELMETS FOR MINORS
Ordinance 96.33 adopted
chapter 12-6 and renumbered
chapter 12-7 to conform
12-6-1 Requirements for helmet use
A.   General: no person under 18 years of age shall ride a bicycle or be a
passenger on a bicycle, ride in a restraining seat attached to a bicycle, or
ride in a device towed by a bicycle without wearing a helmet which meets the
current standards of the American National Standards Institute for protective
headgear.
B.   Bicycle renters and sellers: it shall be unlawful for any person to rent
or lease any bicycle to or for the use of a person under the age of 18 years
unless:
   1.   The person is in possession of a protective helmet meeting the
standards set out in section
12-6-1A at the time of the rental or lease; or
   2.   The rental or lease includes a protective bicycle helmet meeting the
standards set out in section
12-6-1A and the person agrees to wear the helmet at all times while operating
or riding as a passenger on the bicycle.
C,   Written explanation of provisions: a person regularly engaged in the
business of selling bicycles shall provide any purchaser of a bicycle with a
written explanation of the provisions set forth in section
12-6-1A.
12-6-2 Violations –
chapter 12-6; penalty
A.   Any violation of
chapter 12-6 shall be a civil traffic violation.
B.   Any person found responsible for violating any provision of
chapter 12-6 shall pay a maximum fine of $250.
C.   The penalties for a violation of section 12-6-1 A may be waived if the
offender presents suitable proof that an approved helmet has been purchased or
otherwise obtained since the time of the violation and that the minor uses or
intends to use the helmet whenever required to do so.
Ordinance 2006.31 renumbered and modified section
12-6-2
CHAPTER 12-7.
CONSTRUCTION IN TOWN RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Ordinance 2008.04 added
chapter 12-7 and replaced un-codified Ordinance 91.21
12-7-1 Definitions
A.   The following definitions shall apply throughout this chapter unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise.
   1.   “Applicant” means the owner of the firm, utility company or corporation
whose facilities or equipment are the subject of the right-of-way permit
application.
   2.   “Contractor” means the party doing the work.
   3.   “Emergency” means any condition which poses an immediate or imminent
hazard to people or property.
   4.   “Public improvement” includes, but is not limited to, grading, paving,
and landscaping, as well as the construction of curbs, gutters, drainage
facilities, sidewalks, paths, trails, irrigation, walls, driveways and berms.
   5.   “Right-of-way” means alleys, streets, thoroughfares, drainageways and
drainage easements dedicated to the town or to the public and other easements
dedicated to the public.
   6.   “Town engineer” means the town engineer or the town engineer’s
authorized representative.
12-7-2 Authority of town engineer
The town engineer is appointed the duly authorized representative of the town,
with full power and authority to authorize on behalf of the town and to
supervise the use of the public rights-of-way of the town.
12-7-3 Permit required; exception
A.   Any person, contractor, firm, utility company or corporation desiring to
dig any hole, drain, trench or ditch in any public right-of-way or desiring to
construct, remove or change any public improvement in any public right-of-way,
or desiring to cut, trench, pothole or excavate any public right-of-way, or
desiring to use any public right-of-way for traffic control, construction haul
routes, landscape maintenance, maintenance of underground facilities or
temporary parking shall first apply for and obtain a permit from the town
engineer.
B.   A permit is not required for work done for municipal purposes, using town
personnel and equipment.
12-7-4 Applicability
This chapter applies to all construction performed in town rights-of-way, as
well as all other uses listed under section 12-7-3 A, including, but not
limited to, the following:
A.   Routine service connections and maintenance work.
B.   Installation of utility distribution or collection systems and
communications systems.
C.   Work done by other governmental agencies and by public utilities.
D.   Work done for private development projects.
E.   Private homeowner encroachment in the right-of-way.
12-7-5 Permit process; grounds for denial
A.   Application forms for permits required by this chapter shall be obtained
from the town. Completed applications, accompanied by payment of all applicable
permit fees, shall be submitted electronically to the town engineer.
B.   Before issuance of any permit, each applicant will be required to do all
of the following:
   1.   Provide evidence of the applicant's right to use the public right-of-
way, typically by obtaining a town right-of-way license or franchise agreement.
   2.   Furnish insurance for both the applicant and the contractor in a form
satisfactory to the town, indemnifying, defending and holding harmless the
town, its officers, departments, employees and agents from and against any and
all suits, actions, legal or administrative proceedings, claims, demands or
damages of any kind or nature, arising out of the work under the permit, which
are attributed to any act or omission of the applicant, its agents, employees
or anyone acting under its direction, control or on its behalf.
   3.   Provide evidence that the contractor possesses an appropriate
contractor's license issued by the Arizona registrar of contractors.
   4.   Submit a signed and approved contract showing the cost of the work, or
submit a verifiable professional construction cost estimate.
   5.   Submit plans of the subject location and adjacent properties that
      a.   Show existing surface conditions, including pavement, curbs,
driveways, sidewalks, and landscaping; and
      b.   Show existing underground installations, if applicable; and
      c.   Diagram the work to be performed.
   6.   Obtain a business license for both the applicant and the contractor
from the town as required by
chapter 9-2 of this code.
   7.   Unless waived by the town engineer, post bonds or other cash forms of
assurance with the town in an amount equal to the cost of construction for all
required improvements plus 15% to ensure completion of the proposed work. Third
party trust forms of assurance are not acceptable for work in the public right-
of-way. The town engineer may waive the requirement to post bonds or other cash
forms of assurance by making a written finding specifying the reason the bond
or assurance is not needed to ensure completion of the proposed work for the
permit in question.
C.   Projects which are to be self-certified under section
12-7-10 C require a completed agreement for construction of public improvements
before a permit will be issued. Necessary forms are available from the town
engineer.
D.   Completed applications will be reviewed by the town engineer. The town
engineer shall issue the permit when all of the following have occurred:
   1.   The town engineer finds that the proposed construction does not
interfere with the safety of the traveling public or the authorized public use
of the right-of-way and does not otherwise interfere with the general health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the town.
   2.   The town engineer finds that the proposed construction does not
interfere with and is not inconsistent with a current or future community
improvement project (CIP).
   3.   The town engineer has approved the application, including all plans and
specifications for the proposed construction.
   4.   All applicable permit fees have been paid by the applicant.
   5.   The applicant has obtained an air quality permit, if required.
   6.   The applicant has submitted a traffic control plan that is approved by
the town engineer.
E.   Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph D of this section, the town
engineer may deny a permit requested pursuant to this chapter under the
following circumstances:
   1.   The town engineer has notified the applicant that the applicant failed
to comply with the construction requirements set forth in section
12-7-8 on a previously-issued permit and the applicant has failed to remedy the
violation at the time of the new permit application.
   2.   The applicant has failed to pay any fees owed to the town for
previously-issued permits, including, but not limited to, application fees,
late fees, and fees incurred by the town to repair or remedy work completed by
the applicant.
Ordinance 2018.007 revised the title of section
12-7-5 to add “grounds for denial” and added paragraph E
Ordinance 2013.011 modified paragraph 6 by adding the phrase addressing the
amount
Ordinance 2018.007 revised section
12-7-5 to add paragraph E
Ordinance 2023.023 repealed
12-7-5.B.6.
Ordinance 2025.018 revised permit application requirements in paragraphs A,
B.1, B.2, and B.6, and added a bond requirement in paragraph B.7.
12-7-6 Emergency work
When, in an emergency, it is impractical to obtain a permit before work is
begun, the applicant shall make a diligent effort to telephone the town
engineer prior to commencement of work. Emergency work shall be halted upon
issuance of a stop work order by the town engineer. A permit shall be applied
for, under the same procedures set forth in section
12-7-5, within two business days of commencing emergency work.
12-7-7 No warranty of title
By this section, applicants are placed on notice that the town may not own the
particular property or property rights for which the permit is issued.
Applicants assume all liability resulting from any defect to the title of the
land and no warranty of title to the underlying land is expressed or implied.
12-7-8 Construction requirements
A.   The applicant shall notify the town engineer of the proposed start date of
the work and shall schedule and complete a pre-construction meeting with the
town’s right-of-way inspector at least two full work days before starting work.
B.   Unless otherwise expressly approved in writing by the town engineer, all
work shall conform to the following:
   1.   The latest edition of the Pima association of governments (PAG)
standard specifications and details for public improvements.
   2.   Other specifications, details or regulations approved by the town
engineer or adopted by the town, including all conditions listed in the permit.
   3.   All requirements of this chapter.
C.   The applicant shall be responsible for verifying the location of all
underground utilities in accordance with the “blue stake” provisions of state
law, A.R.S. § 40-360.21 et seq., prior to the commencement of any excavation
and shall protect any utilities from damage. All town property shall be
returned substantially to its original condition. The applicant shall be held
responsible for any damage to, and for maintenance and protection of, existing
utilities and structures.
D.   Unless otherwise stipulated to in the permit, all pavement resurfacing
after excavation shall be completed by the applicant. During construction, the
site must be secured in a manner acceptable to the town whenever work is
discontinued and construction staff is not on site. Permanent pavement repairs
shall be completed within 30 working days after backfilling the trench.
E.   If the applicant fails to secure the site, or if the permanent pavement
repair is not performed within 30 working days after backfilling the trench and
an extension has not been granted by the town engineer, the town engineer may
select a contractor to perform all necessary work at the applicant’s expense.
F.   The applicant shall be responsible for restoration of all permanent
traffic-control devices including, but not limited to, all pavement markings,
signs and signals. The restoration of traffic-control devices may be
accomplished by the applicant or, at the request of the applicant, by the town.
In either case, the restoration shall be completed at the applicant’s expense.
All traffic control devices shall be approved by the town engineer prior to
installation.
G.   The applicant shall not allow any condition to exist during the project
which would be a hazard or source of danger to the traveling public. If the
work presents or becomes a hazard or source of danger to the traveling public,
the town may take immediate corrective action and bill the applicant for the
full cost incurred for the corrective action.
H.   Completed excavation, backfill, and pavement repair shall be guaranteed
free of defect by the applicant for a period of two years after closeout of
permit or approval by the council, whichever occurs later.
I.   The town engineer shall be notified by the applicant before backfilling
and upon completion of the work. If the applicant is not working under self-
certification as provided in 12-7-10 C and D, the applicant shall not proceed
with pavement replacement until the backfill has been approved.
J.   If the applicant does not repair the road and right-of-way to the
specifications of the town engineer, the town shall notify the applicant of any
deficiencies and the applicant shall have 20 working days to repair the
deficiencies to the specifications of the town engineer. By acceptance of a
permit, the applicant agrees to be responsible for all costs of the repair, if
any. If a lawsuit is filed, the applicant, by acceptance of a permit, agrees to
be responsible for all costs of collection including, but not limited to, court
costs and attorneys’ fees.
K.   The applicant shall adequately barricade its work in accordance with the
latest edition of the federal highway safety administration’s manual on uniform
traffic control devices and shall install sufficient warning lights and signs
to protect the public. Not more than one direction of travel may be blocked at
any one time, unless specifically allowed due to extenuating circumstances. The
applicant shall submit a traffic control plan to the town engineer and obtain
approval before closing or barricading any street or public right-of-way. All
traffic control devices shall be delivered and in place in conformance with the
approved traffic control plan prior to the contractor being allowed to begin
the work, or to begin a new element of work requiring changes to the existing
traffic control configuration.
L.   If the applicant performs work not authorized by the permit or under the
provisions for emergency repairs, the town shall notify the applicant of the
unauthorized work. The notification from the town will indicate whether the
town requires removal of the work. If the town requires removal of the work,
the applicant shall be responsible for the removal within 15 working days of
the notification. If the applicant does not remove the unauthorized work, the
town may have the work removed by a competent contractor at the applicant’s
expense.
M.   Where work is performed in a drainageway, drainage easement or designated
floodplain area, the applicant shall not at any time obstruct or diminish in
any manner the ability of the drainageway, drainage easement or designated
floodplain area to convey or pass stormwater. Prior to any work within a
drainageway, drainage easement or designated floodplain area, the applicant
shall obtain written authorization from the town engineer and a floodplain use
permit as required by title 21 of the land development code.
Ordinance 2018.007 revised subparagraph B.1 of section
12-7-8
Ordinance 2013.011 modified paragraph H by changing the period from one year to
two
Ordinance 2013.011 added the last sentence to paragraph K
12-7-9 Additional requirements for specified asphalt pavements
In addition to the requirements set forth in section
12-7-8, on asphalt pavements having an overall condition index (OCI) of over
70, as verified by the town engineer, the following additional regulations
apply:
A.   If sufficient right-of-way is available, directional bore shall be used in
lieu of open trench. This shall include the removal and replacement of sidewalk
to achieve working room for bore pits.
B.   No open pavement cuts shall occur without the permission of the town
engineer, except in an emergency.
C.   The applicant shall submit a letter to the town engineer assuring that all
other methods of construction have been reviewed and are impractical.
D.   The applicant shall guarantee the cut until the pavement is five years old
or for two years, whichever period is longer.
E.   Pavement repairs shall be a minimum of 50 feet asphalt replacement with a
15 degree skew, centered on the trench, unless the repair cannot be
accomplished by this method and the town engineer approves an alternate method.
Ordinance 2018.007 revised the title and introductory paragraph of section
12-7-9 to refer to the pavement OCI instead of age
Ordinance 2013.011 modified paragraph D by changing the period from one year to
two
12-7-10 Inspection of work
A.   All work is subject to inspection and ultimate approval by the town
engineer. Total inspection may be provided by the town as set forth in this
section, or the applicant may follow the self-certification processes outlined
in this section.
B.   Town inspection shall include, but is not limited to, the following
procedures and requirements:
   1.   The town engineer will set up a schedule of notifications from the
applicant at various stages of the work for inspection and approval.
   2.   The applicant shall be responsible for staking line and grade, subject
to review by the town engineer.
   3.   Any required testing and/or inspection designated by the permit or
required by the town engineer shall be at the expense of the applicant.
   4.   If applicable, the applicant shall be required to furnish evidence,
acceptable to the town engineer, that the required compaction density has been
obtained. This evidence shall be in the form of tests and certification from a
certified testing laboratory or from any engineering technician certified by
either the national institute for certification in engineering technologies at
level II or higher or by the Arizona technical training institute field
technician level or from any registered professional civil or geological
engineer. The location of the test shall be clearly shown on the report from
the applicant. The test report shall be submitted within 30 working days after
tests are taken.
   5.   At the conclusion of the work, the town engineer shall conduct a final
inspection and receive test reports, if any. When the project is satisfactorily
completed and approved, the applicant will be notified.
C.   The self-certification process for inspection shall include the following
procedures and requirements:
   1.   The applicant shall choose an engineer of record, acceptable to the
town engineer, to be responsible for the major inspection of the project.
   2.   An agreement for construction of public improvements shall be signed by
the applicant, the engineer of record, and the town engineer. This contract
shall detail the responsibilities of the engineer of record for the work.
   3.   The town engineer shall maintain oversight of the project, shall
perform final inspections, and shall approve the project when all requirements
have been satisfactorily completed.
D.   The self-certification process for inspection for utilities shall include
the following procedures and requirements:
   1.   The applicant shall file a letter with the town engineer indicating
that the utility is authorized by the Arizona corporation commission to work
within the public rights-of-way, is a permanent presence in the community, and
will react promptly to a request from the town engineer to correct any
deficiencies resulting from work done under a permit.
   2.   The applicant shall insure that, at all times when work is underway at
the site, a responsible person shall be present who, by reason of experience
and knowledge, is qualified to judge the quality of the work being performed.
   3.   The applicant shall provide records of test results performed by a
laboratory approved by the town engineer or by a technician certified by the
national institute for certification in engineering technologies or the Arizona
technical training institute to show that standards of materials, density, and
pavement replacement have been met.
E.   If the work performed under the permit or in an emergency fails to pass
final inspection, the applicant shall remove or replace the work within such
time as specified by written notice from the town engineer. If any material
used by the applicant in replacing or reconstructing any part of the work, or
if any workmanship performed under the permit, proves defective, the applicant
shall replace the work as specified by the town engineer.
12-7-11 Permit expiration
A.   A permit shall expire if work is not started within 30 days of issuance or
if not satisfactorily completed within ten days after the stated completion
date. If a permit has expired, a new permit must be applied for, paid for and
issued before beginning or completing construction.
B.   Permits shall be issued for a period of no more than one year. A one-time
extension of no more than six months may be obtained upon application and
showing of cause for the delay.
12-7-12 Fees; late fees
   A.   Right-of-way permit fees shall be set forth by a fee schedule approved
by the council and amended from time to time.
   B.   Permits obtained after work has started, other than work performed
under section 12-7-6, shall cost double the normal permit fee and shall be
subject to a late fee as established in the fee schedule.
   C.   Permits obtained under section 12-7-6 are also subject to double permit
fees and the late fee as established in the fee schedule if the permit
application is not filed within two business days of commencing emergency work.
   D.   Paying a double permit fee and/or a late fee does not waive any other
applicable penalties or violation fees for violation of this chapter.
Ordinance 2013.011 modified section 12-7-12 by clarifying the late fee
provisions and adding paragraph D (the substance of which was previously
covered in paragraph B)
Ordinance 2024.017 modified section 12-7-12 to delete a a provision requiring
the town engineer to maintain a copy of the town’s fee schedule.
12-7-13 Classification; penalties
A.   A violation of this chapter is a civil infraction.
B.   Violations shall be enforced pursuant to
chapter 5-7 of this code, except that upon issuing a finding in favor of the
town, the magistrate shall impose a civil sanction of not less than $1,500.
C.   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be responsible
for a separate offense for each and every day or portion of a day during which
any violation of this chapter is committed or permitted.
D.   In addition to any other penalties allowed by law, the magistrate shall
order abatement as necessary.
Ordinance 2013.011 modified section
12-7-13 by changing its title and rewriting paragraph B
CHAPTER 12-8.   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY
Chapter 12-8 was adopted by Ordinance 2018.002. For prior history, see
Ordinances 2008.11 and 2016.005
12-8-1 Purpose and background
A.   The purpose of this chapter is to:
   1.   Implement Arizona laws 2017, chapter 124 (A.R.S. § 9-591 et seq.);
   2.   Incorporate standard terms by reference in each individual telecom
license agreement and right-of-way permit;
   3.   Promote uniformity in the telecom license agreements; and
   4.   Streamline the preparation and administration of telecom license
agreements.
B.   Various laws (the “telecommunications laws”) authorize the town to
regulate its streets, alleys and public utility easements, and to grant, renew,
deny, amend and terminate licenses for and otherwise regulate the installation,
operation and maintenance of telecommunications systems. The telecommunications
laws include, without limitation, the following:
   1.   Chapter 12-7 of the town code (construction in town rights-of-way) (the
“street code”). Town code section
12-7-3 (permit required; exception) applies to a wireless provider, as defined
in A.R.S. § 9-591(26).
   2.   A.R.S. §§ 9-581 through 9-583, §§ 9-591 through 9-599, and other state
and federal statutes.
   3.   The constitution of the state of Arizona.
   4.   Other applicable federal, state and local laws, codes, rules and
regulations.
   5.   The town’s police powers, its authority over public right-of-way, and
its other governmental powers and authority.
C.   The town owns public street and alley rights-of-way and public utility
easements within the boundaries of the town that are designated for use by
utility companies for installation, operation and repair of water, electrical
and other utilities pursuant to franchises, licenses or other agreements
between utility companies and the town (collectively the “right-of-way”).
D.   The town anticipates that one or more wireless providers may desire to
locate antennas and immediately related equipment at various locations (“the
sites”) within the right-of-way.
E.   The standard terms become effective as to each site as they are
incorporated in the telecom license agreement by reference. Except as otherwise
stated, each telecom license agreement stands on its own.
F.   Because the town’s existing streetlight poles and traffic signed poles are
not designed to safely support the additional weight and stress of wireless
facilities, wireless providers shall be required to provide poles designed to
support these facilities to replace existing poles prior to attaching wireless
facilities.
12-8-2 Definitions
A.   The following definitions apply to each telecom license agreement and
right-of-way permit:
   1.   “Antenna” means communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals and that is used in providing wireless
services.
   2.   “Antenna mounting bracket” means the hardware required to secure the
antenna to the pole.
   3.   “Antenna mounting post” means the vertical post or pipe that the
antenna mounting bracket is mounted to in order for the antenna to be attached
to the pole.
   4.   “Antenna shroud” means the three-sided cover that is mounted at the
base of the antenna to conceal the appearance of the cables and wires from the
hand-hole port on the pole to the bottom-fed antenna.
   5.   “Base use fee” means the amount that the company shall pay to the town
for each year of a license for use of the town right-of-way and the town-owned
pole, in an amount established by a fee schedule adopted by the council and
amended from time to time.
   6.   “Canister antenna” means the canister or cylinder style housing used to
conceal the antenna(s), amplifier(s), radio(s), cables, and wires at the top of
a pole.
   7.   “Communications equipment” means any and all electronic equipment at
the small wireless facility location that processes and transports information
from the antennas to the wireless provider’s network.
   8.   “Competing users” means entities that own the water pipes, cables and
wires, pavement, and other facilities which may be located within the right-of-
way. The competing users include without limitation, the town, the state of
Arizona and its political subdivisions, the public, and all manner of utility
companies and other existing or future users of each use area.
   9.   “Dog house” means the plastic or metal attachment to the base of a pole
that covers the transition point of underground cables and wires to the
vertical section of the pole.
   10.   “FCC” means the federal communications commission.
   11.   “FCC rules” means all applicable radio frequency emissions laws and
regulations.
   12.   “FCC OET bulletin 65” means the FCC’s office of engineering &
technology bulletin 65 that includes the FCC radio frequency exposure
guidelines.
   13.   “Ground mounted equipment” means any communications equipment that is
mounted to a separate post or to a foundation on the ground.
   14.   “Light emitting diode” or “LED” is a type of lighting fixture
installed on town streetlight and traffic signal poles.
   15.   “Light fixture” means the lighting unit or luminaire that provides
lighting during the evening hours or during the hours of darkness.
   16.   “Luminaire mast arm” means the horizontal post that attaches the light
fixture to the streetlight pole or traffic signal pole.
   17.   “Omni-directional antenna” or “omni antenna” is an antenna that is
round in shape, like a pipe, and may be about one inch diameter up to about six
inches diameter.
   18.   “Ordinary permit use fee” means all fees related to the issuance of
the right-of-way permit in an amount established by a fee schedule adopted by
the council and amended from time to time (including without limitation all
fees listed in the currently-adopted comprehensive fee schedule under the
subheading “right of way”).
   19.   “Outside diameter” means the points of measurement, using the outer
edges of a pole, pipe or cylinder.
   20.   “Panel antenna” means the style of antenna that is rectangular in
shape and with dimensions that are generally four feet to eight feet in height,
by eight inches to 12 inches wide, and four inches to nine inches deep.
   21.   “Remote radio heads/remote radio units” or “RRU/RRH” means the
electronic devices used to amplify radio signals so that there is increased
performance (farther distance) of the outgoing radio signal from the antenna.
   22.    “RF” means radio frequency.
   23.   “RF letter” means a letter attesting to the wireless provider’s
compliance with FCC RF exposure guidelines from the wireless provider’s senior
internal engineer.
   24.   “Right-of-way” as defined for wireless sites in A.R.S. § 9-591 (18)
means the area on, below or above a public roadway, highway, street, sidewalk,
alley, or utility easement. Right-of-way does not include a federal interstate
highway, a state highway or state route under the jurisdiction of the
department of transportation, a private easement, property that is owned by a
special taxing district, or a utility easement that does not authorize the
deployment sought by the wireless provider.
   25.   “Right-of-way permit” means a permit issued pursuant to town code
section
12-7-3.
   26.    “Sight distance easement” means the area of land adjacent to an
intersection, driveway or roadway that has restrictive uses in order to
preserve the view of oncoming or crossing vehicular and pedestrian traffic by
drivers in vehicles attempting to merge with traffic or enter a roadway.
   27.   “Sight visibility triangle” means the traffic engineering and safety
concept that requires clear view by the driver of a vehicle to crossing traffic
at a stop sign, driveway or intersection. In order to achieve clear visibility
of the cross traffic, the land areas in the sight visibility triangle has
specific maximum heights on landscaping, cabinets, and other potential view
obstructions.
   28.   “Signal head” means the “red, yellow and green” light signals at a
signal-controlled intersection.
   29.   “Signal head mast arm” means the horizontal pole that has the signal
heads mounted to it and attaches to the traffic signal pole.
   30.   “Site documents” means the depiction of the use area, schematic plans
and map showing location of the installation of the wireless facility in the
right-of-way, including but not limited to the title report of the use area,
vicinity map, site plan, elevations, technical specifications and the cubic
feet of the non-antenna wireless equipment.
   31.   “Small wireless facility” as defined in A.R.S. §9-591 (19), means a
wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications:
      a.   All antennas are located inside an enclosure of not more than six
cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements,
the antenna and all of the antenna’s exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of not more than six cubic feet in volume.
      b.   All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is
cumulatively not more than 28 cubic feet in volume, or 50 cubic feet in volume
if the equipment was ground mounted before the effective date of this section.
The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume pursuant to this subdivision:
         i.   An electric meter.
         ii.   Concealment elements.
         iii.   A telecommunications demarcation box.
         iv.   Grounding equipment.
         v.   A power transfer switch.
         vi.   A cutoff switch.
         vii.   Vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other
services.
   32.   “Standard terms” means the provisions of this
chapter 12-8.
   33.   “Stealth and concealment elements” means the use of shrouds,
decorative elements, design concepts and faux elements so that a small wireless
facility can be designed to blend in with the surrounding streetscape with
minimal to any visual impact.
   34.   The “street code” means
chapter 12-7 (construction in town rights-of-way).
   35.    “Supplemental parcel agreement” means an agreement authorizing the
wireless provider to use property outside of the town’s right-of-way.
   36.   “Telecom license agreement” means the wireless communication
facilities license that incorporates this chapter of the town code—the standard
recitals and the standard terms for wireless providers to install and operate
wireless facilities in the right-of-way.
   37.    “Third party areas” means the portions of the right-of-way, such as
canal crossings or other areas that for any reason have limited right-of-way
dedications or that have regulatory use restrictions imposed by a third party.
   38.   “Use area” means the portions of the right-of-way where a wireless
provider is authorized to construct or place its wireless communication
facilities pursuant to a right-of-way permit and telecom license agreement (see
section
12-8-3, wireless communication facilities use area). As applied to the telecom
license agreement, “use area” refers collectively to all use areas authorized
by the telecom license agreement.
   39.   “Utility pole” as defined in A.R.S. § 9-591 (21) means a pole or
similar structure that is used in whole or in part for communications services,
electric distribution, lighting or traffic signals. Utility pole does not
include a monopole.
   40.   “Violation use fee” means the types of fees that the town has
available to remedy certain breaches of the telecom license agreement by a
wireless provider, in an amount established by a fee schedule adopted by the
council and amended from time to time.
   41.   “Wireless facility” as defined in A.R.S. § 9-591 (22):
      a.   Means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including
both of the following:
         i.   Equipment associated with wireless communications.
         ii.   Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cables,
regular and backup power supplies and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration.
      b.   Includes small wireless facilities.
      c.   Does not include the structure or improvements on, under or within
which the equipment is collocated, wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or
fiber-optic that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or
coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to, or
directly associated with, an antenna.
      d.   Does not include wi-fi radio equipment described in A.R.S. § 9-506
(I) or microcell equipment described in A.R.S. § 9-584 (E).
   42.   “Wireless infrastructure provider” as defined in A.R.S. § 9-591 (23)
means any person authorized to provide telecommunications service in this state
and who builds or installs wireless communications transmission equipment,
wireless facilities, utility poles or monopoles but who is not a wireless
service provider. Wireless infrastructure provider does not include a special
taxing district.
   43.   “Wireless provider” as defined in A.R.S. § 9-591 (24) means a cable
operator, wireless infrastructure provider, or wireless services provider.
   44.   “Wireless provider’s improvements” means all improvements installed by
the wireless provider, including but not limited to all elements of the
wireless facility, all screening elements, any landscaping plants or materials,
and any other elements provided by the wireless provider in the approved
telecom license agreement.
   45.   “Wireless services” as defined in A.R.S. § 9-591 (25) means any
services that are provided to the public and that use licensed or unlicensed
spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, using wireless facilities.
   46.   “Wireless services provider” as defined in A.R.S. § 9-591 (26) means a
person that provides wireless services. Wireless services provider does not
include a special taxing district.
   47.   “Wireless support structure” as defined in A.R.S. § 9-591 (27):
      a.   Means:
         i.   A freestanding structure, such as a monopole.
         ii.   A tower, either guyed or self-supporting.
         ii.   A sign or billboard.
         iv.   Any other existing or proposed structure designed to support or
capable of supporting small wireless facilities.
      b.   Does not include a utility pole.
12-8-3 Wireless communication facilities use area
Authority to use right-of-way. The town grants to wireless provider the right
to install wireless facilities in the town’s right-of-way upon approval of a
telecom license agreement and issuance of a right-of-way permit for each use
area, as set forth below:
A.   Limitations. Notwithstanding anything in this
chapter 12-8 or in the telecom license agreement to the contrary, the use area
includes and is limited to only certain areas that wireless provider is
permitted to exclusively use and occupy (the “exclusive areas”) and certain
areas that wireless provider is permitted to use on a shared basis (the “shared
areas”). Each use area is defined by the boundary plan.
B.   Use area boundary. The use area is the smallest geometric shape that
includes the exclusive areas and the shared areas. The use area excludes other
parts of the right-of-way and all other land. Wireless provider shall not
occupy or use any other portion of the right-of-way or adjoining lands. The
telecom license agreement does not allow any use of land outside the right-of-
way. If any portion of wireless provider’s work, improvement or equipment is to
be located on other land, then such work, improvements and equipment are
prohibited unless wireless provider first obtains from the owner of said land
(including the town, if applicable) an agreement allowing such work,
improvements and equipment (a “supplemental parcel agreement”).
C.   Exclusive areas. The exclusive areas are limited to the following, if and
as defined by the boundary plan:
   1.   The land area defined as “enclosure” on the boundary plan to be used by
wireless provider solely for the enclosure housing the electronic ground
equipment shown on the site plan (the “enclosure”). The area of the enclosure
is confined to the actual area occupied by the exterior structure and the
interior of the enclosure. If the boundary plan does not show a clearly defined
and correctly labeled “enclosure” area, then no enclosure area is available for
wireless provider’s use under an issued right-of-way permit and any enclosure
for wireless provider’s use must be located outside the right-of-way and
authorized by a supplemental parcel agreement.
   2.   The area on the pole defined as “antennas” on the boundary plan to be
used by wireless provider solely for mounting the antennas. Such area is
confined to the town approved elevations and locations actually occupied by the
antennas and their supporting brackets. If the boundary plan does not show a
clearly defined and correctly labeled “antennas” area, then no main antennas
area is available for wireless provider’s use under an issued right-of-way
permit and any main antennas for wireless provider’s use must be located
outside the right-of-way and authorized by a supplemental parcel agreement.
D.   Shared areas. Shared areas are limited to the following areas, if and as
defined by the boundary plan:
   1.   A motor vehicle parking space (the “parking space”) at the “parking
space” location described on the boundary plan to be used by wireless provider
solely for parking a service vehicle to service the communications equipment
and for ingress and egress to that parking space.
   2.   No temporary construction area is provided by these standard terms or
an issued right-of-way permit. Wireless provider must obtain from the town a
separate written document giving wireless provider permission to work in the
right-of-way.
   3.   An underground cable route (the “signal route”) labeled as the “signal
route” described on the boundary plan from the enclosure to the antenna to be
used by wireless provider solely for underground radio frequency lines between
the enclosure and the antenna. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the
portion of the signal route upon the pole shall not be underground but shall be
within the pole. If the boundary plan does not show a clearly defined and
correctly labeled “signal route” area, then no signal route area is available
for wireless provider’s use under these standard terms or an issued right-of-
way permit and any signal route for wireless provider’s use must be located
outside the right-of-way and authorized by a supplemental parcel agreement.
E.   Power and telephone service. Nothing in this
chapter 12-8 grants permission for any use of any portion of the right-of-way
for power, telephone or other service routes, if any. Use of the public street
right-of-way or public utility easements for these purposes, if any, is
governed by normal town right-of-way rules and policies and by the franchise
between the town and the electrical and telephone service providers.
F.   Rights in adjacent land. Wireless provider’s rights are expressly limited
to the real property defined as the “use area” in the issued right-of-way
permit. Without limitation, in the event any public right-of-way or other
public or private property at or adjacent to the use area is owned, dedicated,
abandoned or otherwise acquired, used, improved or disposed of by the town,
such property shall not accrue to wireless provider but shall be the town’s
only.
G.   Variation in area. In the event the use area consists of more or less than
any stated area, wireless provider’s obligations under the telecom license
agreement shall not be increased or diminished.
H.   Condition of title. Wireless provider shall not have power to amend,
modify, terminate or otherwise change the site documents or create new site
documents.
   1.   The town does not warrant its own or any other person’s title to or
rights to use the use area or any other property.
   2.   Wireless provider shall pay, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the
town and its agents and representatives of, from and against any and all
claims, demands, damages, expenses, interest or penalties of any kind or nature
whatsoever, including attorneys’, arbitrators’ and experts’ fees and court
costs that arise from or relate to wireless provider’s non-compliance with the
site documents.
I.   Condition of use area. Each use area is being made available in an “as is”
condition without any express or implied warranties of any kind, including
without limitation any warranties or representations as to its condition or
fitness for any use.
J.   No real property interest. Notwithstanding any provision of this
chapter 12-8 to the contrary, and notwithstanding any negotiation,
correspondence, course of performance or dealing, or other statements or acts
by or between the parties, wireless provider’s rights under the telecom license
agreement and any right-of-way permit are limited to use and occupation of the
use area for the permitted uses. Wireless provider’s rights in the use area are
limited to the specific rights created in the approved telecom license
agreement and right-of-way permit.
K.   Reserved right and competing users and activities. Notwithstanding
anything in this
chapter 12-8 or in the approved telecom license agreement to the contrary, the
town specifically reserves to itself and excludes from an issued right-of-way
permit a non-exclusive delegable right (the “reserved right”) over the entire
use area for all manner of real and personal improvements and for streets,
sidewalks, trails, landscaping, utilities and every other land use of every
description. Without limitation:
   1.   Competing users. Wireless provider accepts the risk that the town and
others (the “competing users”) may now or in the future install their
facilities in the use area in locations that make parts of the right-of-way
unavailable for wireless provider’s use.
   2.   Competing activities. Wireless provider accepts the risk that there may
now or in the future exist all manner of work and improvements upon the use
area (the “competing activities”). The competing activities include without
limitation any and all laying construction, erection, installation, use,
operation, repair, replacement, removal, relocation, raising, lowering,
widening, realigning or other dealing with any or all of the following, whether
above, upon or below the surface of the use area and whether occasioned by
existing or proposed uses of the right-of-way or existing or proposed uses of
adjoining or nearby land:
      a.   All manner of streets, alleys, sidewalks, trails, ways, traffic
control devices, subways, tunnels, trains and gates of every description, and
all manner of other transportation facilities and their appurtenances.
      b.   All manner of pipes, wires, cables, conduits, sewers, pumps, valves,
switches, conductors, connectors, poles, supports, access points and guy wires
of every description, and all manner of other utility facilities and their
appurtenances.
      c.   All manner of canals, drains, bridges, viaducts, overpasses,
underpasses, culverts, markings, balconies, porches, overhangs and other
encroachments of every description and all manner of other facilities and their
appurtenances.
      d.   All other uses of the right-of-way that the town may permit from
time to time.
   3.   The town’s rights cumulative. All of the town’s reserved rights under
various provisions of the town code or an approved telecom license agreement
shall be cumulative to each other.
   4.   Use priorities. This
chapter 12-8 and the approved telecom license agreement and right-of-way permit
do not grant to wireless provider or establish for wireless provider any
exclusive rights or priority in favor of wireless provider to use the use area.
Wireless provider shall not obstruct or interfere with or prevent any competing
user from using the use area.
   5.   Regulation. The town shall have full authority to regulate use of the
use area and to resolve competing demands and preferences regarding use of the
use area and to require wireless provider to cooperate and participate in
implementing such resolutions. Without limitation, the town may take any or all
of the following into account in regulating use of the use area:
      a.   All timing, public, operational, financial and other factors
affecting existing and future proposals, needs and plans for competing
activities.
      b.   All other factors the town may consider relevant, whether or not
mentioned in this
chapter 12-8, the telecom license agreement, or issued right-of-way permits.
      c.   Differing regulatory regimes or laws applicable to claimed rights,
public benefits, community needs and all other factors relating to competing
users and competing activities.
   6.   Communications equipment relocation. Upon 180 days’ notice from the
town, wireless provider shall temporarily or permanently relocate or otherwise
modify the communications equipment relocation (the “relocation work”) as
follows:
      a.   Wireless provider shall perform the relocation work at its own
expense when required by the town engineer or designee.
      b.   The relocation work includes all work determined by the town to be
necessary to accommodate competing activities, including without limitation
temporarily or permanently removing, protecting, supporting, disconnecting or
relocating any portion of the communications equipment.
      c.   The town may perform any part of the relocation work that has not
been performed within the allotted time. Wireless provider shall reimburse the
town for its actual costs in performing any relocation work. The town has no
obligation to move wireless provider’s, the town’s or others’ facilities, but
will in good faith assist wireless provider to find a new location and to
expedite the approval process.
      d.   The town and not wireless provider shall be entitled to use any of
wireless provider’s facilities that are abandoned in place or that are not
relocated on the town’s request.
      e.   All relocation work shall be subject to and comply with all other
provisions of the telecom license agreement.
   7.   Disruption by competing users. Neither the town nor any agent,
contractor or employee of the town shall be liable to wireless provider, its
customers or third parties for any service disruption or for any other harm
caused them or the communications equipment due to competing users or competing
activities.
   8.   Emergency disruption by the town. The town may remove, alter, tear out,
relocate or damage portions of the communications equipment in the case of
fire, disaster, or other emergencies if the town engineer deems such action to
be reasonably necessary under the circumstances. The town will make reasonable
efforts to contact the wireless provider’s network operations center. In that
event, neither the town nor any agent, contractor or employee of the town shall
be liable to wireless provider or its customers or third parties for any harm
so caused to them or the communications equipment. When practical, the town
shall consult with wireless provider in advance to assess the necessity of such
actions and to minimize to the extent practical under the circumstances damage
to and disruption of operation of the communications equipment. In any event,
the town shall inform wireless provider after such actions. Wireless provider’s
work to repair or restore the communications equipment shall be relocation
work.
   9.   Public safety. If the communications equipment or any other wireless
provider equipment, improvements or activities present any immediate hazard or
impediment to the public, to the town, to the town’s equipment or facilities,
to other improvements or activities within or without the use area, or to the
town’s ability to safely and conveniently operate the right-of-way or perform
the town’s utility, public safety or other public health, safety and welfare
functions, then wireless provider shall immediately remedy the hazard, comply
with the town’s requests to secure the right-of-way, and otherwise cooperate
with the town at no expense to the town to remove any such hazard or
impediment. Wireless provider’s work crews shall report to the use area within
four hours of any request by the town under this paragraph (the “safety
paragraph”).
L.   Third party permission. There may be portions of the right-of-way, such as
canal crossings or other areas that for any reason have limited right-of-way
dedications or that have regulatory use restrictions imposed by a third party
(“third party”). Areas subject to such restrictions or regulations by third
parties are referred to as “third party areas” and communications equipment may
not be built without permission from the third party or third parties that have
property rights or regulatory authority over a specific third party area.
Wireless provider’s right to use any use area shall be suspended, but not its
obligations with respect thereto, during any period that a third party
permission is not in effect.
M.   Telecom license agreement use area list. Upon wireless provider’s
satisfactory completion of construction or installation of wireless
communication facilities pursuant to an issued right-of-way permit, the town
engineer shall add the use area to the use area list attached to the wireless
provider’s telecom license agreement.
12-8-4 Term of telecom license agreements
A.   Term of agreement. The term of each telecom license agreement shall be as
follows:
   1.   Original term. The original term of each telecom license agreement
shall be for a period of ten years commencing on the effective date as stated
in the approved telecom license agreement, and the terms of all related right-
of-way permits shall have the same term as the approved telecom license
agreement.
   2.   Extensions. The term of each telecom license agreement may be extended
as follows:
      a.   The term of each telecom license agreement may be extended for one
additional ten-year period subject to consent by the town and wireless
provider, which either may withhold in its sole and absolute discretion.
      b.   Both the town and wireless provider shall be deemed to have elected
to extend unless the town or wireless provider, respectively, gives notice to
the contrary to the other at least 90 days prior to the end of the original
term or the current extension.
      c.   The second term shall begin ten years plus one day after the initial
effective date.
B.   Holding over. In any circumstance whereby wireless provider would remain
in possession or occupancy of the use area after the expiration of the
applicable telecom license agreement and issued right-of-way permits (as
extended, if applicable), such holding over shall not be deemed to operate as a
renewal or extension of the telecom license agreement and issued right-of-way
permits, but shall only create a use right from month to month that may be
terminated at any time by the town upon 30 days’ notice to wireless provider,
or by wireless provider upon 60 days’ notice to the town.
C.   The town’s right to cancel. Notwithstanding anything contained in this
chapter 12-8 or in the approved telecom license agreement to the contrary, the
town shall have the unconditional right, with or without cause, to terminate
any right-of-way permit for reasons including but not limited to street
widening, right-of-way abandonment, or development that may impact the location
of the site, upon 180 days’ notice given at any time after the first 180 days.
The town shall assist wireless provider in locating a new site for the facility
and expedite the process.
D.   Wireless provider’s right to cancel. Wireless provider shall have the
unilateral right to terminate any right-of-way permit without cause upon 30
days’ written notice. Wireless provider has no right to terminate any time
after an event of default by wireless provider has occurred (or an event has
occurred that would become a default after passage of time or giving of
notice).
12-8-5 Wireless provider’s payments
A.   Wireless provider’s payments. Wireless provider shall make payments to the
town as follows:
   1.   Use fee items. Wireless provider shall pay to the town each of the
following separate and cumulative amounts (collectively the “use fee”):
      a.   An annual amount (the “base use fee”).
      b.   An amount (the “ordinary permit use fee”) based on wireless
provider’s permit review and other costs as set out below.
      c.   An amount (the “violation use fee”) based on certain breaches by
wireless provider of the telecom license agreement as set out in paragraph
12-8-15 C below.
      d.   All other amounts required by the telecom license agreement.
   2.   Base use fee amount. The amount of base use fee wireless provider shall
pay to the town for each year of the telecom license agreement shall be the
total of all applicable fee line items for wireless communications facilities
(including without limitation “antenna base fee” and “ground equipment fee”, as
applicable), in an amount established by a fee schedule adopted by the council
and amended from time to time.
   3.   Ordinary permit use fee amount. The amount of the ordinary permit use
fee shall be the total amount of all applicable ordinary fees payable to the
town for the town’s review of plans, issuance of permits, and inspection of
wireless provider’s work upon the use area (including, without limitation,
right-of-way permits and any required building permits), in amounts established
by a fee schedule adopted by the council and amended from time to time.
   4.   Use fee cumulative. All items of use fee shall be cumulative and
separate from each other.
   5.   Use fee schedule. Wireless provider shall pay base use fee and ordinary
permit use fee at the times and in the amounts specified by the town’s normal
processes for the payment of base use fees and ordinary permit use fees.
   6.   Letter of credit. The initial letter of credit amount shall be based
upon the wireless provider’s good faith projection of the number of sites to be
constructed within the town limits of the town during the current calendar
year. The initial letter of credit shall be received by the town before the
first right-of-way permit is issued as follows:
      a.   The amount of the letter of credit shall be as follows:
         i.   $30,000 for up to ten wireless sites
         ii.   $60,000 for 11 to 20 wireless sites
         iii.   $105,000 for 21 to 35 wireless sites
         iv.   $180,000 for 36 to 60 wireless sites
         v.   $300,000 for 61 to 100 wireless sites
         vi.   $450,000 for 101 to 150 wireless sites
         vii.   $675,000 for 151 to 225 wireless sites
         viii.   $1,050,000 for 226 to 350 wireless sites
         ix.   $1,500,000 for 351 to 500 wireless sites
         x.   $2,250,000 for 501 to 750 wireless sites
         xi.   $3,000,000 for 751 to 1,000 wireless sites
         xii.   If the number of wireless provider’s wireless sites is more
than 1,000, the $3,000,000 letter of credit shall remain in effect and the
letter of credit for the wireless sites in excess of 1,000 sites shall be
calculated using the schedule provided in this subsection.
      b.   The town will determine at least once annually if the number of
wireless provider’s wireless sites that are licensed require that the letter of
credit be upgraded to a higher amount. If the town requires a new letter of
credit, it shall provide formal notice in writing to the wireless provider. The
wireless provider must provide the new letter of credit within 45 days of
receiving written notice.
      c.   The letter of credit is a security deposit for wireless provider’s
performance of all of its obligations under this
chapter 12-8 and the approved telecom license agreement within the town limits
of the town.
      d.   The letter of credit shall meet the following requirements.
         i.   The letter of credit shall be printed on bank safety paper.
         ii.   The following terms and no others shall be stated on the face of
the letter of credit:
            a)   The letter of credit is clean, unconditional, and irrevocable.
            b)   The letter of credit is payable to the town upon presentation
of the town’s draft.
            c)   The town may make partial draws upon the letter of credit.
            d)   The letter of credit is conditioned for payment solely upon
presentation of a sight draft and a copy of the letter of credit.
            e)   Within ten days after the town’s draft on the letter of credit
is honored, the town must make the original of the letter of credit available
to the issuer in Pima County, Arizona upon which the issuer may endorse its
payments.
            f)   The issuer specifies a telefax number, email address, and
street address at which the town may present drafts on the letter of credit.
            g)   The letter of credit is valid until a specified date.
            h)   The letter of credit will be automatically renewed for
successive one year periods, unless at least 120 days prior to expiration the
issuer notifies the town in writing, by either registered or certified mail,
that issuer elects not to renew the letter of credit for the additional period.
In the event of such notification, any then unused portion of the letter of
credit shall be available by draft on or before then current expiration date.
            i)   The letter of credit is otherwise subject to the most recent
edition of the uniform customs and practices for documentary credits, published
by the international chamber of commerce.
            j)   The letter of credit need not be transferable.
         iii.   Approved forms. The form of the letter of credit and of drafts
upon the letter of credit shall be as set forth in section
12-8-26 (forms)
         iv.   Issuer requirements. The issuer of the letter of credit shall
meet all of the following requirements:
            a)   The issuer shall be a federally insured financial institution
with offices in Pima County, Arizona, at which drafts upon the letter of credit
may be presented.
            b)   The issuer shall be a member of the New York clearing house
association or a commercial bank or trust company satisfactory to the town.
            c)   The issuer shall have a net worth of not less than $1 billion.
      e.   Wireless provider shall provide and maintain the letter of credit
during the entire term of each telecom license agreement as follows:
         i.   Wireless provider shall cause the original letter of credit to be
delivered to the town engineer for deposit with the town finance director.
         ii.   Wireless provider shall pay all costs associated with the letter
of credit, regardless of the reason or manner such costs are required.
         iii.   Within ten business days after the town gives wireless provider
notice that the town has drawn on the letter of credit, wireless provider shall
cause the letter of credit to be replenished to its prior amount.
      f.   The town may draw on the letter of credit upon any event of default,
and in the following circumstances whether or not they are an event of default:
         i.   Wireless provider fails to cause the letter of credit to be
renewed, extended, increased in amount or otherwise maintained as required by
these standard terms.
         ii.   Wireless provider fails to make monetary payments as required by
these standard terms.
         iii.   The issuer of the letter of credit fails to immediately honor a
draft on the letter of credit or otherwise repudiates or fails to honor the
letter of credit.
      g.   The town shall also have such additional rights regarding the letter
of credit as may be provided elsewhere in the telecom license agreement.
   7.   Late fees. Use fee is deemed paid only when the town actually receives
good cash payment. Should any use fee not be paid on or before the date due, a
late fee shall be added to the amount due in an amount established by a fee
schedule adopted by the council and amended from time to time. Any use fee that
is not timely paid shall accrue simple interest at the rate of 1½% per month
from the date the amount first came due until paid. Wireless provider expressly
agrees that the foregoing represent fair and reasonable estimates by the town
and wireless provider of the town’s costs (such as accounting, administrative,
legal, and processing costs) in the event of a delay in payment of use fee. The
town shall have the right to allocate payments received from wireless provider
among wireless provider’s obligations.
   8.   Use fee amounts cumulative. All amounts payable by wireless provider
under this
chapter 12-8 or an approved telecom license agreement or under any tax,
assessment or other existing or future ordinance, law or other contract or
obligations to the town or the state of Arizona shall be cumulative and payable
in addition to each other payment required under this
chapter 12-8 or an approved telecom license agreement, and such amounts shall
not be credited toward, substituted for, or setoff against each other in any
manner.
12-8-6 Use restrictions
Use restrictions. Wireless provider’s use and occupation of the use area shall
in all respects conform to all and each of the following cumulative provisions:
A.   Permitted uses. Wireless provider shall use the use area solely for the
permitted uses and shall conduct no other activity at or from the use area.
B.   Enclosure use. Wireless provider shall use the enclosure solely for
locating utility cabinets and housing the communications equipment used for the
antennas.
C.   Small wireless facility. Wireless provider may install a small wireless
facility, as defined in A.R.S. § 9-591 (19), to be limited as follows:
   1.   All antennas, including the antenna’s exposed elements, are located
inside an enclosure of not more than six cubic feet in volume, and
   2.   All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is
cumulatively not more than 28 cubic feet in volume.
   3.   The following ancillary equipment is not included in the equipment
volume:
      a.   Electric meter
      b.   Concealment elements
      c.   telecom demarcation box
      d.   Grounding equipment
      e.   Power transfer switch
      f.   Cutoff switch
      g.   Vertical cable runs
D.   Communications operations restriction. Wireless provider shall not
install, operate, or allow the use of equipment, methodology or technology that
interferes or is likely to interfere with the optimum effective use or
operation of the town’s existing or future fire, emergency or other
communications equipment, methodology or technology (i.e., voice or other data
carrying, receiving or transmitting equipment). If such interference should
occur, wireless provider shall immediately discontinue using the equipment,
methodology or technology that causes the interference until wireless provider
takes corrective measures to alter the communications equipment to eliminate
such interference. Any such corrective measures shall be made at no cost to the
town. Wireless provider shall give to the town notice containing a list of the
radio frequencies wireless provider is using at the use area and shall give
notice to the town of any change in frequencies.
E.   Other equipment. Wireless provider shall not disturb or otherwise
interfere with any other antennas or other equipment the town may have already
installed or may yet install upon the right-of-way.
F.   Signs. All signage is prohibited except in compliance with the following
requirements:
   1.   Wireless provider shall install and thereafter maintain the following
signs and other markings as reasonably determined by the town from time to
time:
      a.   All signs and markings required for safe use of the use area by the
town, wireless provider and other persons who may be at the use area at any
time for any reason.
      b.   Any signage the town may request directing parking, deliveries and
other vehicles and other users to comply with the telecom license agreement.
      c.   Warning signs listing only wireless provider’s name, permanent
business address, telephone number, emergency telephone number, and any
information required by law.
   2.   All signage not expressly allowed by these standard terms is
prohibited.
   3.   The location, size, content and style of each sign shall be subject to
the provisions of the applicable sign ordinance and shall comply with the
town’s sign programs as the same may change from time to time. Wireless
provider shall update signs as required to comply with changes in the
applicable sign ordinance and the town’s sign programs.
   4.   Wireless provider shall design, make, install and maintain all signage
in a first class, professional manner without broken panels, faded or peeling
paint or other damage.
   5.   Wireless provider shall bear all costs pertaining to the erection,
installation, operation, maintenance, replacement and removal of all signs
including, but not limited to, the application for and obtaining of any
required building or other permits regardless of the reason for any such
activity, even if such activity is required by the town pursuant to these
standard terms.
   6.   The requirements of this paragraph apply to all signs, designs,
monuments, decals, graphics, posters, banners, markings, and other manner of
signage.
G.   Wireless provider’s lighting. Except for security lighting operated with
the town’s approval from time to time, wireless provider shall not operate
outdoor lights at the use area.
H.   Noise. Except during construction permitted under these standard terms and
for burglar alarms and other safety devices, outdoor loud speakers, sirens or
other devices for making noise are prohibited. All equipment shall be operated
so that sound coming therefrom does not exceed the ambient noise level at the
boundary of the right-of-way and cannot be heard at the closer of (i) the
exterior boundary of the right-of-way or (ii) 200 feet outside the boundary of
the right-of-way. The preceding sentence does not apply to use of normal,
properly maintained construction equipment used as permitted by an issued
right-of-way permit, to infrequent use of equipment that is as quiet or quieter
than a typical well maintained gasoline powered passenger automobile, or to use
of an air conditioning unit that is no noisier than a typical well maintained
residential air conditioning unit.
I.   Limited access. It is wireless provider’s and not the town’s
responsibility to keep unauthorized persons from accessing the communications
equipment and the exclusive areas.
J.   Standards of service. Wireless provider shall operate the use area in a
first-class manner, and shall keep the use area attractively maintained,
orderly, clean, neat and tidy at all times.
K.   Wireless provider’s agent. Wireless provider shall at all times retain on
call available to the town by telephone an active, qualified, competent and
experienced person to supervise all activities upon the use area and operation
of the communications equipment and who shall be authorized to represent and
act for wireless provider in matters pertaining to all emergencies and the day-
to-day operation of the right-of-way and all other matters affecting the issued
right-of-way permit. Wireless provider shall also provide notice to the town of
the name, street address, electronic mail address, and regular and after hours
telephone number of a person to handle wireless provider’s affairs and
emergencies at the right-of-way. Any change shall be given in writing to the
town engineer in the manner stated for notices required under this
chapter 12-8 and the approved telecom license agreement.
L.   Coordination meetings. Wireless provider shall meet with the town and
other right-of-way users from time to time as requested by the town to
coordinate and plan construction on the use area and all matters affected by
these standard terms. Without limitation, wireless provider shall attend the
town’s scheduled utility planning meetings.
M.   Toxic substances. Wireless provider’s activities upon or about the use
area shall be subject to the following regarding any hazardous or toxic
substances, waste or materials or any substance now or hereafter subject to
regulation under the comprehensive environmental response compensation and
liability act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601, et seq., the Arizona hazardous waste
management act, A.R.S. §§ 49-901, et seq., the resource conservation and
recovery act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901, et seq., the toxic substances control act, 15
U.S.C. §§ 2601, et seq., or any other federal, state, county, or local law
pertaining to hazardous substances, waste or toxic substances and their
reporting requirements (collectively “toxic substances”):
      a.   Wireless provider understands the hazards presented to persons,
property and the environment by dealing with toxic substances. Notwithstanding
anything in this
chapter 12-8 or in the approved telecom license agreement to the contrary, the
town makes and has made no warranties as to whether the use area contains
actual or presumed asbestos or other toxic substances.
      b.   Within 24 hours after discovery by wireless provider of any toxic
substances, wireless provider shall report such toxic substances to the town in
writing. Within 14 days thereafter, wireless provider shall provide the town
with a written report of the nature and extent of such toxic substances found
by wireless provider.
      c.   Disturbance of toxic substances. Prior to undertaking any
construction or other significant work, wireless provider shall cause the use
area to be inspected to prevent disturbance of potential asbestos or other
toxic substances. Prior to any work of any description that bears a material
risk of disturbing potential asbestos or other toxic substances, wireless
provider shall cause the contractor or other person performing such work to
give to the town notice by the method described in this
chapter 12-8 or in the approved telecom license agreement to the effect that
the person will inspect for toxic substances, will not disturb toxic
substances, and will indemnify, defend and hold the town harmless against any
disturbance in toxic substances in the course of the contractor’s or other
person’s work. Wireless provider shall cause any on-site or off-site storage,
inspection, treatment, transportation, disposal, handling, or other work
involving toxic substances by wireless provider in connection with the use area
to be performed by persons, equipment, facilities and other resources who are
at all times properly and lawfully trained, authorized, licensed, permitted and
otherwise qualified to perform such services. Wireless provider shall promptly
deliver to the town copies of all reports or other information regarding toxic
substances.
N.   Required operation. During the entire term of the telecom license
agreement and any renewals or extensions, wireless provider shall actively and
continuously operate the communications equipment 24 hours a day, seven days a
week, for the permitted uses. Notwithstanding anything contained in this
paragraph to the contrary, the operation requirements of this paragraph shall
be effective commencing on the earlier of completion of the project or the
completion deadline and shall continue through the date the telecom license
agreement terminates or expires for any reason. In the event of relocation of
the communications equipment or damage to the use area severe enough that the
communications equipment cannot reasonably be operated during repairs, the
operation requirements of this paragraph shall be suspended during the time
specified by these standard terms for accomplishing repair of such damage to
relocation of the communications equipment. Wireless provider may temporarily
cease operating the communications equipment for short periods necessary to
test, repair, service or upgrade the communications equipment.
O.   Actions by others. Wireless provider shall be responsible to ensure
compliance with these standard terms by all persons using the right-of-way
through or under wireless provider or these standard terms.
12-8-7 Wireless provider’s improvements generally
All of wireless provider’s improvements and other construction work, whether or
not specifically described in this
chapter 12-8 or in the approved telecom license agreement, upon or related to
the use area (collectively “wireless provider’s improvements”) shall comply
with the following:
A.   Wireless provider’s improvements. Wireless provider’s improvements include
without limitation, all modification, replacement, repairs, installation,
construction, grading, structural, utility, lighting, plumbing, sewer or other
alterations, parking or traffic alterations, removal, demolition or other
cumulatively significant construction or similar work of any description and
all installation or alteration of the communications equipment.
B.   Zoning and similar approval process. The zoning processes, building permit
processes, right-of-way management policies and similar regulatory requirements
that apply to wireless provider’s improvements are completely separate from the
plans approval processes set forth in these standard terms. Wireless provider’s
satisfaction of any requirement set forth in these standard terms does not
substitute for compliance with any regulatory requirement. Wireless provider’s
satisfaction of any regulatory requirement does not substitute for compliance
with any requirement of these standard terms. Wireless provider must make all
submittals and communications regarding the requirements of these standard
terms through the town engineer and not through planning, zoning, building
safety or other staff. Wireless provider shall be responsible to directly
obtain all necessary permits and approvals from any and all governmental or
other entities having standing or jurisdiction over the use area. Wireless
provider bears sole responsibility to comply with all stipulations and
conditions that are required in order to secure such rezoning and other
approvals. Notwithstanding anything in this paragraph, to the extent regulatory
requirements and requirements of these standard terms are identical, compliance
with regulatory requirements shall constitute compliance with these standard
terms and vice versa.
C.   Batching sites for approval. Only sites that do not have a new or a
replacement pole required for the antennas, and do not have any underground
cables, conduit, and foundations, are eligible for batch processing of the
applications.
D.   Relationship of plans approval to regulatory processes. Wireless
provider’s submission of plans under these standard terms, the town’s approval
of plans for purposes of these standard terms, and the plans approval process
herein shall be separate and independent of all development, zoning, design
review and other regulatory or similar plans submittal and approval processes,
all of which shall continue to apply as provided under state law, in addition
to the requirements of these standard terms and its approvals. Building
permits, zoning clearances, or any other governmental reviews or actions do not
constitute approval of any plans for purposes of the telecom license agreement.
E.   The town’s fixtures and personalty. Wireless provider shall not remove,
alter or damage in any way any improvements or any personal property of the
town upon the use area without the town’s prior written approval. In all cases,
wireless provider will repair any damage or other alteration to the town’s
property caused by wireless provider or its contractors, employees or agents to
as good or better condition than existed before the damage or alteration.
F.   Design requirements. All wireless provider’s improvements shall comply
with the following design requirements:
   1.   All wireless provider’s improvements shall be contained entirely within
the use area and without any encroachment or dependence upon any other
property, except for permitted utility service.
   2.   Any changes to utility facilities shall be strictly limited to the use
area, shall not affect utilities used by the town, and shall be undertaken by
wireless provider at its sole cost and expense.
   3.   The antennas and other communications equipment shall be properly
designed, installed and maintained so as not to create a risk of damage to the
pole, to persons or property upon or using the right-of-way or the town’s other
property.
   4.   To the extent requested by the town, wireless provider’s plans shall
include a description of construction methods employed to address environmental
issues affecting or affected by the use area and protect other facilities at
the right-of-way and surrounding properties.
   5.   All specifications set forth in sections
12-8-8 through
12-8-12 below.
G.   Approval required. Wireless provider shall not construct any of wireless
provider’s improvements (including work on adjacent public lands, if
applicable) without having first received written plans approval from the town.
Such consent requirement shall apply to all improvements, furnishings,
equipment, fixtures, paint, wall treatments, utilities of every description,
communications cabling and other construction work of any description as
described in all plans heretofore or hereafter delivered by wireless provider
to the town. Such consent requirement does not apply to work on the
communications equipment that is confined to the area inside the enclosure and
not visible, audible, or otherwise discernible outside the enclosure.
H.   Effect of plans approval. Wireless provider shall submit engineering and
construction plans to the town for review and approval. The town’s approval of
plans submitted shall be for purposes of these standard terms only and shall
constitute irrevocable approval (but only at the level of detail of the
applicable stage of the review process) of the matters plainly shown on the
plans approved. The town shall not reject subsequent plans to the extent the
matter to which the town objects was plainly shown on plans previously approved
by the town. However, the town is not precluded from objecting to matters not
previously approved, changes to plans, matters not previously clearly disclosed
on approved plans, or refinements or implementation of matters previously
approved.
I.   Plans required. Wireless provider’s design of all wireless provider’s
improvements shall occur in three stages culminating in final working
construction documents for the wireless provider’s improvements (the “final
plans”). The three stages are, in order of submission and in increasing order
of detail, as follows:
      a.   Conceptual plans showing the general layout, locations, elevations,
configuration, and capacities of all significant improvements, topographical
features, pedestrian and vehicular ways, buildings, utilities, and other
features significantly affecting the appearance, design, function or operation
of each element of wireless provider’s improvements.
      b.   Preliminary plans showing all surface finishes and treatments,
finished elevations, general internal and external design (including without
limitation colors, textures and materials), mechanical, communications,
electrical, plumbing and other utility systems, building materials, landscaping
and all other elements necessary prior to preparation of final working
construction documents and showing compliance with all requirements of these
standard terms. The preliminary plans shall show all detail necessary prior to
preparation of final plans.
      c.   Final plans. In addition to the information that the town required
for preliminary plans, the final plans shall include engineering design
documents for the pole foundation, pole structural design, and other generally
required engineering specifications for construction drawings for permits.
J.   Approval process. The following procedure shall govern wireless provider’s
submission to the town of all plans for wireless provider’s improvements,
including any proposed changes by wireless provider to previously approved
plans:
      a.   All plans wireless provider submits under these standard terms shall
show design, appearance, capacity, views, and other information reasonably
deemed necessary by the town for a complete understanding of the work proposed,
all in detail reasonably deemed appropriate by the town for the level of plans
required herein.
      b.   Wireless provider shall deliver all plans submissions for non-
regulatory approvals required in this
chapter 12-8 or in the approved telecom license agreement directly to the town
engineer and shall clearly label the submissions to indicate that they are
submitted pursuant to this
chapter 12-8 and the approved telecom license agreement and not for building
permits, zoning or other approvals. Each submittal of plans by wireless
provider for the town’s review shall include the number and format of plans
conforming to then-current town administrative procedures.
      c.   All construction plans shall be prepared by qualified registered
professional engineers.
      d.   The town and wireless provider shall endeavor to resolve design and
construction issues to their mutual satisfaction but, in the event of an
impasse for any reason or however arising, in light of the town’s ownership and
other uses of the use area, and as a condition of the town’s issuance of a
right-of-way permit, final decision authority regarding all design and
construction issues shall rest with the town engineer.
      e.   All of wireless provider’s improvements shall comply with all
requirements of law, any applicable insurance contracts and these standard
terms.
K.   Cost of wireless provider improvements. All wireless provider’s
improvements shall be designed and constructed by wireless provider at wireless
provider’s sole cost and expense, including without limitation any alteration
or other change to the town’s equipment or other improvements or personalty
that may occur. In no event shall the town be obligated to compensate wireless
provider in any manner for any of wireless provider’s improvements or other
work provided by wireless provider during or related to the term of the telecom
license agreement or any right-of-way permit. Wireless provider shall timely
pay for all labor, materials, work, and all professional and other services
related thereto and shall pay, protect, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the
town and the town’s employees, officers, contractors and agents against all
claims related to such items. Wireless provider shall bear the cost of all work
required from time to time to cause the use area and the town’s adjoining
property (if directly affected by wireless provider’s work) to comply with
local zoning rules, the Americans with disabilities act, building codes and all
similar rules, regulations and other laws if such work is required because of
work performed by wireless provider, by wireless provider’s use of the use
area, or by any exercise of the rights granted to wireless provider under this
chapter 12-8 or a telecom license agreement.
L.   Improvement quality. Any and all work performed on the use area by
wireless provider shall be performed in a workman-like manner meeting or
exceeding the best practices of similar facilities in Pima County, Arizona, and
shall be diligently pursued to completion and in conformance with all building
codes and similar rules. All of wireless provider’s improvements shall be high
quality, safe, fire resistant, modern in design, and attractive in appearance,
all as approved by the town through the plans approval processes described in
these standard terms in addition to any zoning, building code or other
regulatory processes that may apply.
M.   Ownership of wireless provider’s improvements. All wireless provider’s
improvements (including without limitation poles and lights) except the
communications equipment shall be and become part of the real property of the
town “brick by brick” as constructed or installed.
N.   Damage during work. Upon performing any work upon the right-of-way,
wireless provider shall simultaneously restore the right-of-way to its prior
condition, as directed by the town and repair any holes, mounting surfaces or
other damage whatsoever to the right-of-way. Such work shall include
revegetation and appropriate irrigation systems for revegetated areas.
O.   Replacement pole. If the town approves a wireless provider proposal to
install antennas on a town owned pole, then in addition to the other
requirements, the following shall apply:
      a.   Wireless provider shall provide and deliver to the town a
replacement pole, including mast arm, so that a replacement is immediately
available to the town in case the original pole is damaged.
      b.   If the town uses a replacement pole, then wireless provider shall
provide another replacement pole.
      c.   Upon installation of a replacement pole, the town will determine if
the original pole, mast arm(s), signal head(s), and light fixture(s) shall be
delivered by wireless provider to the town’s operations center yard or if the
wireless provider shall dispose of the original pole, mast arm, signal head and
light fixture.
      d.   All performance under this paragraph shall be at wireless provider’s
expense. The town owns the original pole and all replacement poles.
P.   Coordination. The use area is located in the town’s public right-of-way.
Wireless provider shall obtain permits at wireless provider’s expense as
follows:
      a.   Wireless provider shall perform no construction work in the right-
of-way without obtaining a right-of-way permit giving permission for the
construction work in the right-of-way.
      b.   Wireless provider shall not alter or modify its antennas, wireless
equipment or any improvements without submitting plans or drawings of the
proposed alteration or modification to the town and obtaining approval from the
town engineer and any required building permits.
      c.   Wireless provider shall not perform any work on its own antennas or
wireless equipment without first obtaining from the town a right-of-way permit
giving it permission to work in the right-of-way.
      d.   Wireless provider shall not in any way obstruct pedestrian or
vehicular traffic within the right-of-way without first obtaining from the town
a right-of-way permit giving permission to obstruct traffic.
Q.   Time for completion. Wireless provider shall diligently and expeditiously
pursue to completion the construction of all approved wireless provider’s
improvements. Wireless provider shall complete initial construction of the
project no later than the completion deadline. Wireless provider shall complete
construction of all of other wireless provider’s improvements no later than 180
days of right-of-way permit issuance unless the town and wireless provider
agree to extend this period or a delay is caused by a lack of commercial power
at the site. If the town, in its sole examination of the construction activity
at a site, determines that wireless provider has not substantially performed
construction at a site within 180 days of the right-of-way permit issuance
date, the town may require the wireless provider to cease construction and
resubmit the site for approval.
R.   Construction notification. The town may establish requirements for
notification of nearby residents and property owners prior to construction.
S.   Work time and manner restrictions. All installation, construction,
maintenance, inspection, repair and other work of any kind shall be done in a
manner that does not disrupt traffic (except in compliance with appropriate
right-of-way permits) or nearby land uses. Without limitation, such work shall
be done in compliance with applicable the town policies and directions from
time to time, taking into account the various sensitivities of traffic,
tourism, events, adjoining land uses, other right-of-way uses, and all other
needs and concerns that are likely to be affected by wireless provider’s work.
12-8-8 Common standard design concepts, requirements and details for all
wireless facilities in the right-of-way
A.   The standard design requirements set forth in this section shall apply to
all new wireless facilities in the right-of-way.
B.   The design standards set forth in sections
12-8-8 through
12-8-12 below are not exhaustive. The town engineer may modify or adjust the
requirements on a case-by-case basis to address restraints or conditions
peculiar to a particular location.
C.   All work shall be performed by and on behalf of wireless provider in a
professional manner consistent with the highest standards of workmanship.
D.   All wireless communication facilities shall be installed in a manner that
minimizes the visual and ingress/egress impact to the general public.
E.   Pole design and installation.
   1.   Replacement pole clearances – underground utilities. All ground-mounted
electrical equipment shall maintain minimum horizontal clearance from
underground utilities.
      a.   General clearances shall be as follows:
         i.   Clearance from water lines shall be at least six feet.
         ii.   Clearance from sewer lines shall be at least six feet.
         iii.   Clearance from telecommunications shall be at least one foot.
         iv.   Clearance from cable television lines shall be at least one
foot.
         v.   Clearance from all other underground infrastructure shall be at
least six feet.
      b.   The town, in its sole discretion, may grant a variance, upon
approval by the town engineer, from these horizontal separation distances on a
case-by-case basis. The approval of a variance is dependent on factors specific
to the site.
      c.   In the case where there is an issue with horizontal separation from
other underground utilities, the wireless provider may elect to work with the
impacted utility to have lines, pipes or property moved so that minimum
clearance is achieved. All relocation of town-owned or a privately-owned
utility shall be at the sole expense of the wireless provider.
   2.   Calculating the base height of an existing pole. The base height, from
which the calculation of the “increase in pole height” is referenced for
determining the overall pole height, shall be calculated as follows:
      a.   Streetlight pole (refer to exhibits A1 and A2 in section
12-8-25 below)
         i.   A streetlight with a separate luminaire mast arm mounted to the
vertical pole shall use the top of the vertical pole as the base height.
         ii.   A streetlight, with the luminaire mast arm integrated (e.g.
telescopic style pole) into the top vertical section of the pole, shall use the
point on the pole where the mast arm is connected plus 24 inches as the base
height.
      b.   Traffic signal pole (refer to exhibit B in section
12-8-25 below). A traffic signal pole with a luminaire mast arm that is mounted
above the signal head mast arm to the pole shall use the top of the vertical
portion of the pole as the base height.
   3.   Replacement pole clearance—original streetlight pole or traffic signal
pole. The minimum distance of the replacement pole from the original pole
location shall be 60 inches or more so that construction can occur safely. The
town may change this minimum distance on a case-by-case basis.
   4.   Replacement pole clearances—sidewalks. The new or replacement pole
shall maintain 12-inch minimum clearance distance from sidewalks. The town, in
its sole discretion, may increase that minimum clearance on a case-by-case
basis to ensure the safe use of the sidewalk and adjacent area.
   5.   Sight distance easements and sight visibility triangles. All new and
replacement poles shall be installed in a location that does not impair or
interfere with sight distance easement or sight visibility triangle safety
requirements.
   6.   Cables, wires and jumpers.
      a.   All cables for the wireless equipment and antennas (except where
such cables or wires attach to the ports in the antenna) shall be located
inside a conduit, inside the caisson and pole. There shall not be any “dog
house” or externally visible conduit or entry point of the cables unless
specified by the town.
      b.   All electrical wires for the streetlight luminaire, traffic signal
heads, and any town device on the pole shall be new and connected to the
existing power source.
   7.   Hand-holes.
      a.   All hand-hole locations shall be called out on the plans.
      b.   All hand-holes near antennas shall have the top of the hand-hole no
lower than the bottom height of the antennas.
      c.   The bottom of the hand-hole should not exceed six inches below the
bottom of the antenna.
   8.   Wireless facility identification information
      a.   A four inch by six inch radio frequency safety notice may be mounted
no less than 24 inches from the bottom of the antenna, facing away from
traffic.
      b.   The wireless provider may place a discreet site identification or
number. The size, color and location of this identifier shall be determined by
the town.
      c.   No wireless provider signs may be placed on a streetlight, traffic
signal pole, wireless support structure, or a new or replacement pole except to
the extent required by local, state or federal law or regulations.
   9.   Interference with town wireless network. The town has certain wireless
devices in a network that connects traffic signals, community centers, water
sites, and other locations for the town’s proprietary use. The selection of a
location for a wireless site shall consider the potential interference of the
town’s wireless network with RF from a wireless provider’s proposed site.
   10.   Cable chase and dog houses. The town, in its sole discretion, shall
determine if an exterior cable chase and dog house are aesthetically compatible
with the pole and immediate area. The materials and paint color of the cable
chase and dog house shall be determined on a case-by-case basis.
F.   Removal of original pole, equipment and pole foundation
   1.   Removal of original signal pole, mast arm, signal heads and luminaire
      a.   The town shall determine what original components, (e.g., original
pole, mast arm, signal heads and luminaire, etc.) shall be delivered at no cost
to the town, to the town’s operations yard by the wireless provider.
      b.   If the town accepts some of the original components, then only those
components shall be delivered by the wireless provider to the town’ operations
yard and the remaining components shall be discarded by the wireless provider.
   2.   Removal of original streetlight or traffic signal pole foundation. The
concrete pole foundation for the original streetlight or traffic signal pole
shall be removed by the wireless provider as instructed by the town:
      a.   Partial removal. The original pole foundation shall be taken back to
a level that is 12 inches below existing grade and covered with four inches of
half-inch to three-quarter-inch rock materials. The remaining eight inches
shall be native soil.
      b.   Complete removal. If the entire original pole foundation must be
removed, then all materials (concrete, rebar, metals, bolts, etc.) shall be
removed. The town engineer shall determine, on a case-by-case basis, the type
of backfill material and compaction required, ranging from native soil that is
compacted to a half-sack slurry for the entire depth, or a combination of
native soil and slurry.
G.   Antennas, RRH/RRU, cables and mounting on pole.
   1.   General requirement: All antennas shall be installed in a manner that
minimizes the visual impact to the general public. All work shall be performed
in a professional manner that is consistent with the highest standards of
workmanship.
   2.   Specific criteria:
      a.   Antenna mounting posts and brackets.
         i.   All panel antennas shall be mounted directly to the pole or onto
a mounting pole so that the distance from the “face” of the streetlight pole to
the back of the antenna does not exceed nine inches.
         ii.   All mounting posts shall be trimmed so that the poles do not
extend higher than the top of the antenna or protrude lower than the antenna
unless necessary to install the shroud.
         iii.   All pole attached wireless equipment must be a minimum ten feet
from the sidewalk elevation.
      b.   Panel antennas.
         i.   All panel antennas for a small cell site shall fit within an
imaginary enclosure of not more than six cubic feet in volume in accordance
with A.R.S. § 9-591 (19) (a). (NOTE: This volume does not include antenna cable
shrouds when required.)
         ii.   All panel antennas with exposed cables from the bottom of the
antenna shall have a shroud installed on the antenna or antenna mounting posts
to conceal the cables. (refer to exhibits D1 and D2 in section
12-8-25 below)
            a)   The type of shroud may be a 45-degree angle (away from the
bottom of the antenna; toward the pole) or a 90-degree angle (parallel to the
bottom of the antenna) depending on the location of the site.
            b)   The shroud shall extend from the bottom of the antenna to two
inches below the bottom of the nearest hand-hole.
      c.   Canister antennas.
         i.   All canister antennas for a small cell site shall fit within an
imaginary enclosure of not more than six cubic feet in volume. (Note: This
volume does not include the canister as it is a stealth device and not the
antenna.)
         ii.   The canister shall be no larger than 18 inches (outside
diameter).
         iii.   All canister antennas shall be located in a canister mounted to
a base plate at the top of the vertical section of the replacement pole.
         iv.   All cables protruding from the canister shall be concealed
within the canister or by a shroud at the point where the canister is mounted
to the base plate.
      d.   Remote radio heads/remote radio units (RRU/RRH). Under A.R.S. § 9-
591 (19) (a), the RRH/RRU is not considered part of the antenna. If allowed,
the RRH/RRU shall be calculated as part of “all other wireless equipment
associated with this facility…” in A.R.S. § 9-591 (19) (b) and subject to the
28 cubic foot maximum size for small cell sites. On a case-by-case basis, the
town in the sole discretion of the town engineer—upon reviewing the landscape
in the immediate surrounding area, the location of the pole, and stealth
options— may allow a site to have an RRH/RRU installed on the pole.
      e.   Painting antennas and mounting equipment.
         i.   All antenna mounting brackets and hardware, antenna mounting
posts, cables, shrouds and other equipment mounted on a new or replacement
unpainted galvanized pole shall be painted with the town’s standard color and
quality of paint, as specified by the town engineer.
         ii.   All antenna mounting brackets and hardware, antenna mounting
posts, cables, shrouds and all other equipment mounted on a painted new or
replacement pole shall be painted a color specified by the town engineer.
If the antenna is mounted on a wood pole, the color of the antenna, antenna
canister, mounting brackets and posts, shrouds and cable chases shall be
painted a color specified by the town engineer that will closely match the
color of the wood.
H.   Ground-mounted equipment.
   1.   General requirements.
      a.   All ground-mounted equipment shall be installed in a manner that
minimizes the visual and ingress/egress impact to the general public.
      b.   All ground-mounted wireless equipment must be screened or concealed
to reduce the visual impact to the surrounding area. The screening or
concealment shall take into account the location of the site, the use of the
immediate area, and the existing aesthetic elements surrounding the site.
   2.   Specific criteria:
      a.   Sight distance easements and sight visibility triangles. All ground-
based wireless equipment shall be installed in a location that does not impair
or interfere with sight distance easement or sight visibility triangle safety
requirements. To ensure proper sight distance, all town standard details shall
apply.
      b.   Ground equipment location—generally. All ground-based wireless
equipment, including but not limited to equipment cabinets or power pedestals,
shall be placed as far as practical to the back of the right-of-way while
maintaining at least three feet of ingress/egress in the right-of-way or public
utility easement around the equipment.
      c.   Ground equipment clearances—underground utilities.
         i.   All ground-mounted electrical equipment shall maintain the
following minimum horizontal clearance from below-ground utilities:
            a)   Clearance from water lines shall be at least six feet.
            b)   Clearance from sewer lines shall be at least six feet.
            c)   Clearance from telecommunications shall be at least one foot.
            d)   Clearance from cable television lines shall be at least one
foot.
            e)   Clearance from all other underground infrastructure shall be
at least six feet.
         ii.   The town, in its sole discretion, may grant a variance upon
approval from the town engineer, from these horizontal separation distances on
a case-by-case basis. The approval of a variance is dependent on factors
specific to the site.
         iii.   Where there is an issue with horizontal separation from other
underground utilities, the wireless provider may elect to work with the
affected utility to have its lines, pipes or property moved so that minimum
clearance is achieved. All relocation work of town-owned or a privately-owned
utility shall be at the sole expense of the wireless provider.
      d.   Ground equipment clearance – sidewalks. Ground equipment shall
maintain a minimum 12-inch clearance distance from sidewalks. The town, in its
sole discretion, may increase the minimum clearance on a case-by-case basis to
ensure the safe use of the sidewalk and adjacent area.
      e.   Compliance with height requirements. Evidence or documentation that,
where the above-ground structure is over 36 inches in height, given its
proposed location, the structure will comply or be in compliance with the
town’s land development code.
      f.   Screening of ground equipment. The town, in its sole discretion, may
require ground-mounted equipment to be screened; the type of screening
materials and design will be addressed on a case-by-case basis. In cases when
screening is not required, the town may specify the paint color of the ground-
mounted equipment.
      g.   Decals and labels
         i.   All equipment manufacturers’ decals, logos and other
identification information shall be removed unless required for warranty
purposes.
         ii.   The wireless provider may affix an emergency contact decal or
emblem to the ground equipment.
         iii.   The ground-mounted equipment shall not have any flashing
lights, sirens or regular noise other than a cooling fan that may run
intermittently.
      h.   Equipment cabinets on residential property.
         i.   Residential single-family lot. The wireless equipment and
ancillary equipment listed in A.R.S. § 9-591 (19) (b) shall not exceed 36
inches in height in the front yard of a residential single-family zoned
property.
         ii.   Air-conditioning units. Unless otherwise specified by town, a
wireless equipment cabinet with air-conditioning (not a fan only) shall be
enclosed by walls and setback a minimum of 15 feet from lots where the existing
or planned primary use is a residential single-family dwelling.
      i.   Electric company meter.
         i.   All electric company meters shall be installed in the right-of-
way or in an adjacent public utility easement. The location of the meter
equipment shall have minimum ingress and egress clearance from private property
lines and driveways.
         ii.   All electric company meters shall maintain minimum clearance
from above-ground utility cabinets and below-ground utilities.
         iii.   All electric company meters shall be installed in a location
that does not impair or interfere with the sight distance easement or sight
visibility triangle safety requirements of the town.
         iv.   The electric company meters shall be screened or contained
within a “Myers-type” or “Milbank-type” pedestal cabinet that is painted to
match the ground equipment or as specified by the town. (refer to exhibit E in
section
12-8-25 below)
         v.   In the case where screening is not required, the town may specify
the paint color of the electric company meter cabinet on a case-by-case basis.
12-8-9 Standard design requirements for a small wireless facility on an
existing streetlight.
A.   General. In addition to the common standards set forth in section
12-8-8 above, the design standards in this section shall apply to the proposed
collocation of a small wireless facility on an existing town-owned or third
party-owned streetlight in the town right-of-way.
B.   Purpose of streetlight pole. The primary purpose of the pole shall remain
as a pole structure supporting a streetlight luminaire and related streetlight
fixtures used to provide lighting to the town right-of-way. The attachment of
wireless equipment to an existing streetlight pole or to a replacement pole
that impedes this primary purpose will not be approved.
C.   General requirements.
   1.   A small wireless facility shall be designed to blend in with the
surrounding streetscape with minimal visual impact.
   2.   A replacement pole shall match the town’s standard streetlight pole, as
closely as possible, subject to more specific criteria below.
   3.   As specified in paragraph
12-8-7 O above, for each individual pole type or style used to support the
wireless equipment, one spare replacement pole shall be provided by the
wireless provider to town in advance so the pole can be replaced promptly in
case of a knockdown.
   4.   All plans shall be signed and sealed by a registered professional
engineer.
   5.   All other standard town details shall apply.
D.   Specific criteria.
   1.   New or replacement pole height. A new or replacement pole may be
installed without zoning review under town code
chapter 17-18 (wireless communication facilities) if one of the two following
height requirements is met:
      a.   Up to a ten-foot increase, not to exceed 50 feet total (whichever is
less), per A.R.S. § 9-592 (I); or
      b.   Up to 40 feet above ground level, per A.R.S. § 9-592 (J).
   2.   Overall height of replacement pole.
      a.   The “base” height of an existing streetlight pole shall be the
height of the vertical pole section from the existing grade. The height of the
luminaire mast arm, if higher than the vertical pole section, shall not be used
to determine the new overall height of the replacement pole.
      b.   If the antennas are the highest vertical element of the site, then
the new overall height of the replacement pole is measured from the existing
grade to the top of the canister, top of the omni-directional antenna, or the
top of the panel antenna.
   3.   Increase in outside diameter of pole. The non-tapered replacement pole
outside diameter of the base section shall be equal to the top section, and the
outside diameter shall not exceed eight and five-eighths inches (the pole
manufacturing industry standard outside diameter for an 8-inch diameter pole)
or a 100% increase in diameter of the original pole, whichever is less.
   4.   Luminaire mast arms.
      a.   All luminaire mast arms shall be the same length as the original
luminaire arm, unless the town requires the mast arm to be different (longer or
shorter) based upon the location of the replacement pole.
      b.   Unless otherwise approved, all luminaire mast arms shall match the
arc (if applicable) and style of the original luminaire arm.
      c.   The replacement luminaire mast arm shall be at the same height above
the ground as the existing luminaire.
   5.   Luminaire fixtures.
      a.   All replacement poles shall have the town standard light-emitting
diode (LED) light fixture installed.
      b.   All replacement light fixtures shall have a new town standard photo-
cell or sensor provided by the wireless provider.
   6.   Pole foundation
      a.   All pole foundations shall conform to the town’s standards and
specifications on streetlight design and shall be modified for wireless
communications equipment and cables.
      b.   The town, in its sole discretion, may allow the pole foundation
design to be “worst case” for all soil conditions.
      c.   A separate, one-inch diameter conduit shall be installed in the pole
foundation for the town’s luminaire wire and any additional town wires or
cables. The town’s conduit shall be trimmed to three inches above the top of
the pole foundation.
      d.   The height of the pole foundation shall be two inches above finished
grade. If the pole foundation encroaches into any portion of the sidewalk, then
the pole foundation shall be flush with the sidewalk.
      e.   Shrouds for the streetlight pole mounting bolts may be required for
the replacement pole.
   7.   Painting of replacement pole.
      a.   If the replacement pole is an unpainted galvanized pole, the pole
shall not be painted or have a finish unless otherwise specified by the town.
      b.   For powder coated poles, the wireless provider shall replace with
same powder coated color and/or color combination per the town’s street light
standards, as directed by the town engineer.
   8.   Painting antennas and mounting equipment
      a.   All antenna mounting brackets and hardware, antenna mounting posts,
cables, shrouds and other equipment mounted on a new or replacement unpainted
galvanized pole shall be painted per the town’s street light standards, as
directed by the town engineer.
      b.   All antenna mounting brackets and hardware, antenna mounting posts,
cables, shrouds and all other equipment mounted on a painted new or replacement
pole shall be painted a color specified by the town.
   9.   Wireless provider shall install pole numbers on each replacement pole
(to match the number on the existing streetlight pole being replaced) per the
town’s street light standards, as directed by the town engineer.
12-8-10 Standard design requirements for a small wireless facility on a traffic
signal pole.
A.   General. In addition to the common standards set forth in section
12-8-8 above, the design standards in this section shall apply to the proposed
collocation of a small wireless facility on an existing town-owned or third
party-owned traffic signal in the town right-of-way.
B.   Purpose of traffic signal pole.
   1.   The primary purpose of the traffic signal pole shall remain as a pole
structure supporting a traffic signal and related streetlight fixtures used to
provide traffic control and lighting to the town right-of-way.
   2.   The attachment of wireless equipment to a new or replacement traffic
signal pole that impedes the traffic signal pole’s purpose will not be
approved.
C.   General requirements.
   1.   A small wireless facility shall be designed to blend in with the
surrounding streetscape with minimal visual impact.
   2.   A replacement pole shall match the town’s standard traffic signal pole,
as closely as possible, subject to more specific criteria below.
   3.   As specified in section 12-8-7 O above, for each individual pole type
or style used to support the wireless equipment, one spare replacement pole
shall be provided by wireless provider to town in advance so the pole can be
replaced promptly in case of a knockdown.
   4.   All plans shall be signed and sealed by a registered professional
engineer.
   5.   All other standard town details shall apply.
D.   Specific criteria.
   1.   New or replacement pole height. A new or replacement pole may be
installed without zoning review under town code
chapter 17-18 (wireless communication facilities) if one of the two following
height requirements is met:
      a.   Up to a ten-foot increase, not to exceed 50 feet total (whichever is
less), per A.R.S. § 9-592 (I); or
      b.   Up to 40 feet above ground level, per A.R.S. § 9-592 (J).
   2.   Overall height of replacement pole. The height of the replacement pole
is measured from grade to the top of the antenna canister or the top of the
panel antennas if the antennas are the highest elements.
   3.   Increase in outside diameter of pole.
      a.   If the replacement pole is a taper design, the outside diameter of
the base section of the replacement pole shall not exceed 12 inches or a 100%
increase in the outside diameter of the base section, whichever is less.
      b.   If the replacement pole is non-tapered, then the diameter of the
base section shall be equal to the top section and the outside diameter shall
not exceed 12 inches or a 100% increase, whichever is less.
   4.   Signal head mast arms.
      a.   The traffic signal head mast arms shall be the same length as the
original signal head mast arm unless the town requires the mast arm to be
different (longer or shorter) based upon the location of the replacement pole.
      b.   All signal head mast arms shall match the arc (if applicable) and
style of the original signal head mast arm.
   5.   Luminaire mast arms.
      a.   All luminaire mast arms shall be the same length as the original
luminaire arm unless the town requires the mast arm to be different (longer or
shorter) based upon the location of the replacement pole.
      b.   All luminaire mast arms shall match the arc (if applicable) and
style of the original luminaire arm.
   6.   Signal heads.
      a.   All existing signal heads shall be replaced, at no cost to town,
with new standard town light-emitting diode (LED) signal heads.
      b.   All signal heads shall be procured from a town approved signal heads
supplier or manufacturer.
   7.   Luminaire fixtures
      a.   All replacement poles shall have the town standard light-emitting
diode (LED) light fixture installed.
      b.   All replacement light fixtures shall have a new town standard photo-
cell or sensor provided by the wireless provider.
   8.   Other town elements on signal mast arm or pole.
      a.   All existing emergency signal detection units, video detection
cameras, video cameras, cross walk service buttons, cross walk signals, and any
other pedestrian or traffic devices shall be replaced with new units by
wireless provider and installed at no cost to the town.
      b.   All equipment shall be procured from a list of town approved
suppliers.
   9.   Signs and other miscellaneous items. All street name plates or signs,
directional signs and any other town approved signs shall be replaced with new
signs at no cost to the town. All signs and attachments shall be procured from
a list of town approved suppliers.
   10.   Traffic signal pole foundation
      a.   All pole foundations shall conform to the town’s standards and
specifications on traffic signal pole design and shall be modified for wireless
communications equipment, hand holes and cables.
      b.   The wireless provider shall install a three-inch outside diameter
conduit in the pole foundation for the town’s cables and wires for the signal
heads, luminaire and devices on the signal mast arm and luminaire mast arm. The
town’s conduit shall be trimmed to three inches above the top of the pole
foundation.
      c.   In addition to the conduits for the town’s use inside the pole, the
wireless provider shall install one of the following two conduit options for
its cables and wires:
         i.   One six-inch outside diameter conduit in the pole foundation; or
         ii.   Two four-inch outside diameter conduits in the pole foundation.
      d.   The length of the conduit installed as required by subparagraph c
above shall extend from the pole foundation to six inches above the signal head
mast arm.
      e.   Height above ground level.
         i.   If the pole foundation is in a landscaped or unimproved area, the
height of the caisson shall be two inches above finished grade.
         ii.   If the pole foundation is adjacent to or within a sidewalk or
ramp, the height of the pole foundation shall be flush with the surface of the
immediate area.
      f.   Shrouds shall be provided for the traffic signal pole mounting
bolts, including for the replacement pole.
   11.   Painting of pole, antennas and mounting equipment
      a.   If the replacement traffic signal pole is an unpainted galvanized
pole, the pole shall not be painted or have a finish unless otherwise specified
by the town.
      b.   For powder coated traffic signal poles, the wireless provider shall
replace with same powder coated color and/or color combination per the town’s
traffic signal standards, as directed by the town engineer.
   12.   Construction of traffic signal. The installation work of the
replacement traffic signal pole, including mast arms, signal heads and devices,
must be performed by an Arizona licensed traffic signal contractor with a
minimum of five years of experience installing traffic signals.
12-8-11 Standard design requirements for a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole.
A.   General. In addition to the common standards set forth in section
12-8-8 above, the design standards in this section shall apply to the proposed
collocation of a small wireless facility on an existing town-owned or third
party-owned utility pole in the town right-of-way.
B.   Purpose of the utility pole.
   1.   The primary purpose of the pole shall remain as a pole structure
supporting a cables and wires used to provide communications services and
electric distribution in the town right-of-way.
   2.   The attachment of wireless equipment to an existing third party-owned
utility pole that impedes the utility pole’s primary purpose will not be
approved.
C.   General requirements.
   1.   A small wireless facility shall be designed to blend in with the
surrounding streetscape with minimal visual impact.
   2.   All plans shall be signed and sealed by a registered professional
engineer.
D.   Specific criteria.
   1.   Replacement pole height. A replacement pole may be installed without
zoning review under town code
chapter 17-18 (wireless communication facilities) if one of the two following
height requirements is met:
      a.   Up to a ten-foot increase, not to exceed 50 feet total (whichever is
less), per A.R.S. § 9-592 (I); or
      b.   Up to 40 feet above ground level, per A.R.S. § 9-592 (J).
   2.   Overall height of replacement utility pole
      a.   The base height of an existing utility pole shall be the height of
the vertical pole section from the existing grade.
      b.   If the antennas are the highest vertical element of the site, then
the new overall height of the replacement pole is measured from the existing
grade to the top of the canister or the top of the panel antenna.
   3.   Use of existing pole – wood.
      a.   An existing wood pole used for a small wireless facility shall have
the antennas contained within an 18-inch outside diameter canister mounted at
the top of the pole.
      b.   Unless otherwise approved, the cables and wires from the base of the
pole to the antennas shall be installed in a conduit or cable chase outside of
the pole, facing away from the street or away from on-coming traffic.
      c.   If a dog house is required as a transition point connecting the
underground cables and wires from the ground mounted equipment to the pole, the
town shall provide the maximum size, dimension and shape of the dog house on a
case-by-case basis (refer to exhibit C in section
12-8-25 below).
   4.   Use of existing pole – metal.
      a.   An existing metal pole used for a small wireless facility shall have
the antennas contained within an 18-inch outside diameter canister mounted at
the top of the pole.
      b.   Panel antennas on a metal pole shall have the same center of
radiation so the antennas will be at the same height on the pole.
      c.   The cables and wires from the base of the pole to the antennas shall
be installed in a conduit or cable chase on the outside of the pole, facing
away from the street or away from on-coming traffic.
      d.   If a dog house is required as a transition point connecting the
underground cables and wires from the ground mounted equipment to the pole, the
town engineer shall provide the maximum size, dimension and shape of the dog
house on a case-by-case basis (refer to exhibit C in section
12-8-25 below).
   5.   Painting of pole and dog house.
      a.   If the replacement pole is an unpainted galvanized pole, the pole
shall not be painted or have a finish unless otherwise specified by the town.
      b.   If the existing or replacement pole includes a dog house for the
transition of the cables and wires to the pole, the dog house shall be painted
the same color as the pole or a color specified by the town.
12-8-12 Standard design requirements for a new wireless facility.
A.   General.
   1.   The wireless provider shall obtain a conditional use permit under town
code
chapter 17-18 (wireless communication facilities) for any new wireless facility
in the right-of-way, including without limitation those proposed to be placed
on a wireless support structure or new utility pole, except those expressly
exempt from zoning by Arizona law.
   2.   In addition to the common standards set forth in section
12-8-8 above, the design standards in this section shall apply to any wireless
facility that a wireless provider may install in the right-of-way that is not
being placed on an existing streetlight (see section
12-8-9 above), an existing traffic signal pole (see section
12-8-10 above), or an existing utility pole (see section
12-8-11 above).
   3.   A new wireless support structure, including a monopole not to exceed an
outside diameter of 40 inches, shall incorporate the highest level of stealth
and concealment of the antennas and wireless equipment in order to minimize the
visual impact of the site to the public.
B.   Purpose of wireless support structure. The sole purpose of a new vertical
element or wireless support structure is to attach antennas for the provision
of wireless services by a wireless provider in the town’s right-of-way.
C.   General requirements.
   1.   A new wireless support structure shall be designed to minimize the
visual and aesthetic impact of the new vertical element and associated
equipment upon the look, feel, theme, and use of the surrounding area.
   2.   A small wireless facility shall be designed to blend in with the
surrounding streetscape with minimal visual impact.
   3.   The new wireless support structure shall be architecturally integrated
and compatible with the use of the surrounding area.
   4.   The height of the new wireless support structure shall not exceed the
maximum allowed height of the zoning district of the nearest property outside
the right-of-way where the site is proposed to be located.
   5.   All plans shall be signed and sealed by a registered professional
engineer.
D.   Specific criteria.
   1.   New pole height.
      a.   Except as provided in subparagraph b below, the new pole shall not
exceed the maximum allowed height of the zoning district of the nearest
property outside the right-of-way where the site is proposed to be located.
      b.   A new monopole or utility pole may be installed without zoning
review under town code
chapter 17-18 (wireless communication facilities) if it falls within the zoning
exemptions set forth in A.R.S. § 9-529 (I) and (J).
         i.   A.R.S. § 9-529 (I) provides that a new, replacement or modified
utility pole that is associated with the collocation of small wireless
facilities and that is installed in the right-of-way is not subject to zoning
review and approval if the utility pole does not exceed the greater of either:
            a)   Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on August 9, 2017, that is located within 500 feet of the new, replacement or
modified utility pole and that is in the same right-of-way within the
jurisdictional boundary of the authority, but not more than 50 feet above
ground level.
            b)   Forty feet above ground level.
         ii.   A.R.S. § 9-529 (J) provides that new small wireless facilities
collocated on a utility pole or wireless support structure in the right-of-way
are not subject to zoning review and approval if they do not extend more than
ten feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure and do not exceed
50 feet above ground level
   2.   Overall height of new pole. The height of the new wireless support
structure is measured from grade to top of the antenna canister, or the top of
the panel antenna if the antennas are the highest elements of the site.
Otherwise, the measured height shall be from existing grade to the highest
point of the wireless support structure.
   3.   Outside diameter of monopole. The maximum outside diameter of a
monopole shall not exceed 40 inches.
   4.   Stealth and concealment elements. As part of the stealth and
concealment elements of the wireless support structure, the town may require
the wireless provider to install street name plates, directional signs, and
other decorative signs or artistic elements on the structure.
      a.   The wireless provider is solely responsible for the cost of all
stealth and concealment elements and the installation of other elements
required by the town.
      b.   The wireless provider is responsible for the performance of and any
costs incurred for regular upkeep, maintenance and replacement (if necessary)
of all stealth and concealment elements.
   5.   Architectural integration with surrounding area.
      a.   The new wireless support structure shall be designed in consultation
with various internal town stakeholders and may include external stakeholders.
      b.   The town may require the new wireless support structure to be
constructed of a specific material that will enhance the stealth and
concealment of the site.
   6.   Pole foundation.
      a.   The pole foundation for the wireless support structure shall conform
to civil and structural engineering standards acceptable to the town, with
design modifications for wireless communications equipment and cables.
      b.   The height of the pole foundation shall be two inches above finished
grade, except that if the pole foundation is adjacent to or within a sidewalk
or ramp, the height of the pole foundation shall be flush with the surface of
the immediate area.
      c.   Shrouds must be provided for the pole mounting bolts.
12-8-13 RF safety for town employees
To assure that the town’s employees, agents, and representatives have
uninterrupted and safe access to the right-of-way and all structures located in
the right-of-way, wireless provider must comply with at least one of the
following safety protocols:
A.   Participate in a town-approved or sponsored RF safety program (a “safety
program”), enrollment in which shall include:
   1.   A one-time contribution to the town of two RF personal monitors, as
specified below, for monitoring radio frequency emissions from wireless
provider facilities during the repair and maintenance of the town’s Facilities
and right-of-way. The RF personal monitors shall be delivered to the town
engineer within 60 days of the effective date of the telecom license agreement.
      a.   The RF personal monitor shall be a new, with full original
manufacturer’s warranty, NARDA (2271/101) – Nardalert S3 personal & area
monitor or equivalent device that is approved by the town.
      b.   The wireless provider shall provide for each Nardalert S3 personal &
area monitor, a protective silicon or rubberized cover, and a case to store and
carry the device.
   2.   An annual contribution in an amount established by a fee schedule
adopted by the council and amended from time to time (“annual contribution”)
for third-party training of the town employees who will work on poles that have
a wireless facility and for the ongoing operation—including the annual
recertification training of the town employees, test set calibration, and test
set maintenance and repair—of the town’s safety program.
      a.   The first annual contribution, payable to the town, shall be
delivered or transferred as directed by the town engineer within 60 days of the
effective date of the telecom license agreement.
      b.   Each annual contribution thereafter shall be made payable to the
town as directed by the town engineer on or before the anniversary date of the
within 60 days of the effective date of the telecom license agreement.
   3.   On each five-year interval of the effective date of the telecom license
agreement, the wireless provider shall provide the town with one additional RF
personal monitor that meets or exceeds the requirement in subparagraph
12-8-13 A. 1 above that the town must approve prior to purchase.
   4.   Prior to performing any work on a wireless site in the right-of-way,
the town’s employee will contact the wireless provider’s network operations
center, whose information shall be located on the ground equipment or on the
pole. The town’s employee shall identify himself or herself as an employee of
the town and needs the RF to be turned off at the site for a specified period
to perform maintenance or repair work at the site. Upon completion of the work,
the town’s employee shall contact the wireless provider’s network operations
center and inform them that the site may activate the RF signals.
B.   Provide access to a “kill switch” for each wireless site that the town’s
employees, agents, or representatives can use to turn off all power to the
wireless provider’s facilities while the town’s work is performed at the
location.
C.   Within 24 hours of a request, agree to send a technician with an RF
monitor to confirm that all RF emitting equipment has, in fact, been
deactivated, and to install all appropriate lockout tags and devices.
12-8-14 Maintenance and utilities
Except as expressly provided below, wireless provider shall be solely
responsible for all maintenance, repair and utilities for the use area during
the term of the telecom license agreement. Without limitation, wireless
provider shall perform the following:
A.   Maintenance by the town. The town has no maintenance or repair obligations
for the communications equipment or other of wireless provider’s improvements.
B.   Maintenance by wireless provider. Wireless provider shall at all times
repair and maintain the use area at wireless provider’s sole expense in a
first-class, sound, clean, safe and attractive manner, meeting or exceeding the
manner of maintenance at first class comparable facilities in Pima county,
Arizona, as determined in the town’s reasonable discretion. The preceding
sentence does not require wireless provider to repair or maintain the town’s
facilities at the use area unless such work is attributable in whole or in part
to wireless provider’s use of the use area.
C.   Utility service. Wireless provider shall contract for and pay all charges,
fees, deposits and other amounts for electricity and telephone and other data
communication service to the use area at the rates applicable thereto. Wireless
provider shall use no other utilities at the use area. 
D.   Utility interruptions. The town is not responsible for any interruption of
utilities to or upon the use area or other difficulties related to utilities at
the use area.
E.   Right of inspection. The town shall be entitled to inspect all
construction, reconstruction or installation work and to make such tests as it
deems necessary to ensure compliance with the terms herein, the street code, or
other telecommunications laws. All the town plans reviews, inspections,
standards and other rights and actions with relation to wireless provider’s
improvements are for the town’s sole and exclusive benefit and neither wireless
provider nor any other person shall rely thereon or have any rights related
thereto. The preceding sentence does not prevent wireless provider from relying
on consents, permits or approvals the town may grant based on the town’s plans,
reviews, and inspections. This right of access is in addition to access rights
for the town inspectors or other employees and officers acting within their
legal authority.
F.   Construction notification. The town may establish requirements for
wireless provider to notify nearby residents prior to construction.
G.   Blue stake. Wireless provider shall register with and comply with the
local blue stake program.
12-8-15 Breach by wireless provider
Wireless provider shall comply with, perform and do each obligation required of
wireless provider in this
chapter 12-8 and in the approved telecom license agreement, and shall cause all
persons using the use area on behalf of wireless provider to do the same.
Wireless provider’s failure to do    so shall be a material breach by wireless
provider of these standard terms.
A.   Events of default. Each telecom license agreement and right-of-way permit
is approved upon the condition that each and every one of the following events
shall be deemed an “event of default” by wireless provider of wireless
provider’s material obligations under these standard terms:
   1.   If wireless provider shall be in arrears in the payment of use fee and
shall not cure such arrearage within 15 days after the town has notified
wireless provider of such arrearage.
   2.   If wireless provider shall fail to operate the communications equipment
(except during specific periods expressly excused herein) for a period of 30
consecutive days or a total of 60 days within any 12-month period.
   3.   If wireless provider shall fail to maintain any insurance required
under these standard terms. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, such
failure shall not be a default if within five business days after notice from
the town, wireless provider provides to the town the required insurance and the
required evidence thereof. Such insurance must cover the past for a period
adequate that there is no gap in the insurance coverage required by these
standard terms.
   4.   If the wireless provider’s right to use a pole expires or is terminated
for any reason.
   5.   If wireless provider does not commence and diligently pursue to
completion each required stage of construction of the site within the times
required herein. The times specified for concluding each stage of required
construction have been established far enough in advance, and have taken into
account the likelihood of construction delays, so that no cure period is
provided.
   6.   If wireless provider is the subject of a voluntary or involuntary
bankruptcy, receivership, insolvency or similar proceeding or if any assignment
of any of wireless provider’s or such other person’s property is made for the
benefit of creditors or if wireless provider or such other person dies or is
not regularly paying its debts as they come due (collectively a “wireless
provider insolvency”).
   7.   If the issuer of any letter of credit fails for any reason to timely
and fully honor any request by the town for funds or other performance under
the instrument and wireless provider fails to cause the issuer to or some other
person to honor the request within ten days after the town notifies wireless
provider that a town request for funds has not been honored.
   8.   If wireless provider fails to obtain or maintain any licenses, permits,
or other governmental approvals pertaining to the right-of-way or timely pay
any taxes pertaining to the right-of-way and does not cure the failure within
30 days which shall be extended to 90 days if wireless provider begins to cure
in good faith within 30 days.
   9.   If the town is exposed to any liability, obligation, damage, cost,
expense, or other claim of any description, whether or not asserted; except
that this is not an event of default if wireless provider does all of the
following:
      a.   Gives immediate notice to the town of wireless provider’s commitment
to indemnify, defend and hold the town harmless against the claim.
      b.   Promptly commences and continues to indemnify, defend and hold the
town harmless against the claim.
   10.   If wireless provider fails to meet its obligations under section
12-8-13 (RF safety for town employees).
   11.   If wireless provider engages in a pattern of repeated failure (or
neglect) to timely do or perform or observe any provision contained in this
chapter 12-8 or in the approved telecom license agreement. After the town has
once given notice of any failure by wireless provider to comply with its
obligations set forth in these standard terms, the following shall constitute a
repeated failure by wireless provider to comply with such provision:
      a.   Another failure to comply with any provision of these standard terms
during the following 30-day period.
      b.   Three or more failures to comply with any provision of these
standard terms during any 90-day period.
      c.   Six or more failures to comply with any provision of these standard
terms during any 12-month period.
   12.   If wireless provider fails or neglects to timely and completely do or
perform or observe any other provisions of this
chapter 12-8 or the approved telecom license agreement and the failure or
neglect continues for a period of 30 days after the town has notified wireless
provider in writing of the failure or neglect.
B.   The town’s remedies. Upon the occurrence of any event of default or at any
time thereafter, the town may, at its option and from time to time, exercise at
wireless provider’s expense any or all or any combination of the following
cumulative remedies in any order and repetitively at the town’s option:
   1.   Terminate the telecom license agreement and right-of-way permits issued
to the wireless provider due to wireless provider’s breach; provided, however,
that this shall not terminate wireless provider’s obligations arising during
the time simultaneous with or prior to or the termination, and in no way
eliminates or reduces wireless provider’s liability resulting from the breach.
   2.   Pay or perform, for wireless provider’s account, in wireless provider’s
name, and at wireless provider’s expense, any or all payments or performances
required under these standard terms to be paid or performed by wireless
provider.
   3.   Abate at wireless provider’s expense any violation of these standard
terms.
   4.   Notwithstanding anything under these standard terms to the contrary,
unilaterally and without wireless provider’s or any other person’s consent or
approval, draw upon, withdraw or otherwise realize upon or obtain the value of
any letter of credit, escrowed funds, insurance policies, or other deposits,
sureties, bonds or other funds or security held by the town or pledged or
otherwise obligated to the town by wireless provider or by any third party
(whether or not specifically mentioned herein) and use the proceeds for any
remedy permitted by these standard terms.
   5.   Require an additional security deposit adequate in the town’s sole
discretion to protect the town and the right-of-way.
   6.   Assert, exercise or otherwise pursue at wireless provider’s expense any
and all other rights or remedies, legal or equitable, to which the town may be
entitled, subject only to the limitation set out below on the town’s ability to
collect money damages in light of the violation use fee.
C.   Violation use fee. In lieu of certain money damages (the “inconvenience
costs”) set out below, the following shall apply to wireless provider’s
violation of certain limited requirements of these standard terms ( the
“violation fee provisions”):
   1.   The inconvenience costs are the money damages that the town suffers in
the form of administrative cost and inconvenience, disharmony among competing
users, and general inconvenience in right-of-way use by the town, competing
users and the public when wireless provider fails to comply with the violation
fee provisions.
   2.   Wireless provider’s failure to comply with violation fee provisions
will result in inconvenience costs in an amount that is and will be
impracticable to determine. Therefore, the parties have agreed that, in lieu of
wireless provider paying to the town as damages the actual amount of the
inconvenience costs for violating the violation fee provisions, wireless
provider shall pay the violation use fee.
   3.   The violation use fee is only intended to remedy inconvenience costs
that the town suffers because of wireless provider’s breach of the violation
fee provisions. Wireless provider’s payment of a violation use fee does not in
any way excuse any breach by wireless provider of these standard terms or limit
in any way wireless provider’s obtaining any other legal or equitable remedy
provided by these standard terms or otherwise for such breach. For example,
wireless provider’s obligation to pay the violation use fee does not in any way
detract from wireless provider’s indemnity and insurance obligations under
these standard terms, which shall apply according to their terms in addition to
wireless provider’s obligation to pay the violation use fee.
   4.   Wireless provider may elect to draw upon the letter of credit to
collect the violation use fee.
   5.   The violation fee per day is an amount established by a fee schedule
adopted by the council and amended from time to time.
   6.   Violation use fees shall be assessed as follows:
      a.   If the town determines that wireless provider is liable for a
violation use fee, then the town shall issue to wireless provider a notice of
the town’s assessing a violation use fee. The notice shall set forth the nature
of the violation and the amount of the assessment.
      b.   Wireless provider shall pay the violation use fee within ten days
after the town’s notice unless the violation use fee amount exceeds $5,000, in
which case the following shall apply:
         i.   Wireless provider shall have 30 days after the notice to pay the
violation use fee or give the town notice contesting the assertion of
noncompliance.
         ii.   If wireless provider fails to respond to the notice, wireless
provider shall pay the violation use fee. Otherwise, the town shall schedule a
public hearing to investigate whether the violation use fee is properly
assessed. The town shall provide wireless provider at least ten days’ notice of
such hearing, which shall specify the time, place and purpose of the hearing.
At the hearing, wireless provider shall be provided an opportunity to be heard
and present evidence. If the result of the hearing is that wireless provider is
liable for the violation use fee, then the violation use fee is due ten days
after the hearing decision is announced.
D.   Non-waiver. Wireless provider acknowledges wireless provider’s
unconditional obligation to comply with these standard terms. No failure by the
town to demand any performance required of wireless provider under these
standard terms, and no acceptance by the town of any imperfect or partial
performances under these standard terms, shall excuse such performance or
impair in any way the town’s ability to insist, prospectively and
retroactively, upon full compliance with these standard terms. No acceptance by
the town of use fee payments or other performances under this
chapter 12-8 and the approved telecom license agreement shall be deemed a
compromise or settlement of any right the town may have for additional,
different or further payments or performances as provided for in these standard
terms. Any waiver by the town of any breach of condition or covenant set forth
in
chapter 12-8 or the approved telecom license agreement shall not be deemed or
considered as a continuing waiver and shall not operate to bar or otherwise
prevent the town from declaring a default for any breach or succeeding or
continuing breach either of the same condition or covenant or otherwise. No
statement, bill or notice by the town or wireless provider concerning payments
or other performances due under
chapter 12-8 or the approved telecom license agreement, or failure by the town
to demand any performance under
chapter 12-8 or the approved telecom license agreement, shall excuse wireless
provider from compliance with its obligations nor estop the town (or otherwise
impair the town’s ability) to at any time correct such notice and/or insist
prospectively and retroactively upon full compliance with the telecom license
agreement. No waiver of any description (including any waiver of this sentence
or paragraph) shall be effective against the town unless made in writing by a
duly authorized representative of the town specifically identifying the
particular provision being waived and specifically stating the scope of the
waiver. Wireless provider expressly disclaims and shall not have the right to
rely on any supposed waiver or other change or modification, whether by word or
conduct or otherwise, not conforming to this paragraph.
E.   Reimbursement of the town’s expenses. Wireless provider shall pay to the
town within 30 days after the town’s demand any and all amounts expended or
incurred by the town in performing wireless provider’s obligations (upon
wireless provider’s failure to perform the same after notice from the town)
together with interest thereon at the rate of 10% per annum from the date
expended or incurred by the town.
F.   Breach by the town. Notwithstanding anything in these standard terms to
the contrary, if the town at any time is required to pay to wireless provider
any amount or render any performance, such amount or performance is not due
until 30 days after notice by wireless provider to the town that the amount has
become payable or that the performance is due. In the event a cure cannot be
effected during that period, the town shall not be in default so long as the
town commences cure during the period and diligently prosecutes the cure to
completion provided such cure must be completed within 60 days after the
notice.
G.   Right to setoff and credit. In addition to its other rights and remedies
the town shall have the right to setoff and credit from time to time and at any
time, any and all amounts due from wireless provider to the town, whether
pursuant to these standard terms or otherwise, against any sum which may be due
from the town to wireless provider.
12-8-16 Termination
The following provisions shall apply at the expiration of the term of the
telecom license agreement:
A.   Surviving obligations. Expiration or termination of the telecom license
agreement does not terminate wireless provider’s obligations existing or
arising prior to or simultaneous with, or attributable to, the termination or
events leading to or occurring before termination.
B.   Delivery of possession. Wireless provider shall cease using the use area
of the expired or terminated telecom license agreement. Wireless provider shall
without demand, peaceably and quietly quit and deliver up the use area to the
town thoroughly cleaned, in good repair with the use area maintained and
repaired and in as good order and condition, reasonable use and wear excepted,
as prior to wireless provider’s activities.
C.   Confirmation of termination. Upon expiration or termination of a telecom
license agreement for any reason, wireless provider shall provide to the town
upon demand recordable disclaimers covering the use area executed and
acknowledged by wireless provider and by all persons claiming through these
standard terms, the telecom license agreement, any right-of-way permit, or
wireless provider any interest in or right to use the use area.
D.   Removal of improvements. Wireless provider shall remove all communications
equipment and restore the use area including pole, mast arms, luminaires, or
wireless support structure to its prior condition, or to a condition matching
the town’s surrounding land and improvements, as directed by the town, at
wireless provider’s expense prior to normal expiration of the term of a telecom
license agreement, or within 90 days after full or partial termination of a
telecom license agreement for any other reason whatsoever. Without limitation,
such work shall include revegetation and appropriate irrigation systems for
revegetated areas. Notwithstanding anything in these standard terms to the
contrary, the town may elect to require wireless provider to leave any or all
construction or other items (except the communications equipment) in place, and
all such items shall be owned by the town. Unless the town directs otherwise,
all wiring, pipes and conduits shall be left in good and safe condition, in
working order, with each end properly labeled and enclosed in proper junction
boxes.
E.   Prior improvements. This article also applies to any improvements that
wireless provider may have made to the use area.
12-8-17 Indemnity and insurance
During the entire term of the telecom license agreement, wireless provider
shall insure its property and activities at and about the use area and shall
provide insurance and indemnification as follows:
A.   Insurance required. Not later than the date of the telecom license
agreement, and at all times thereafter when wireless provider is occupying or
using the use area in any way, wireless provider shall obtain and cause to be
in force and effect the following insurance:
   1.   Commercial general liability. Commercial general liability insurance
with a limit of $10,000,000 for each occurrence, a limit of $10,000,000 for
products and completed operations annual aggregate, and a limit of $10,000,000
general aggregate limit per policy year. The policy shall cover liability
arising from premises, operations, independent contractors, products, completed
operations, personal injury, bodily injury, advertising injury, and liability
assumed under an “insured contract” including the telecom license agreement.
The policy will cover wireless provider’s liability under the indemnity
provisions set forth in these standard terms. The policy shall contain a
“separation of insured’s” clause.
   2.   Automobile liability. Automobile liability insurance with a limit of
$1,000,000 for each occurrence covering any and all owned, hired, and non-owned
vehicles assigned to or used in any way in connection with wireless provider’s
use of the right-of-way. Without limitation, such insurance shall cover hazards
of motor vehicle use for loading and off-loading.
   3.   Workers’ compensation. Such workers’ compensation and similar insurance
as is required by law and employer’s liability insurance with a minimum limit
of $100,000 for each accident, $100,000 disease for each employee, $500,000
policy limit for disease. All contractors and subcontractors must provide like
insurance.
   4.   Special risk property. Unless waived by the town in writing, all risk
property insurance covering damage to or destruction of all real and personal
improvements to the right-of-way, including without limitation all improvements
existing upon the right-of-way or constructed after the telecom license
agreement or right-of-way permit is in effect, shall be effective and in force
prior to the effective date of an approved telecom license agreement or right-
of-way permit, in an amount equal to full replacement cost of all such
improvements. The insurance shall be special causes of loss policy form
(minimally including perils of fire, lightning, explosion, windstorm, hail,
smoke, aircraft, vehicles, riot, civil commotion, theft, vandalism, malicious
mischief, collapse and flood). Coverage shall include pollutant clean up and
removal with minimum limits coverage of $50,000.
   5.   Other insurance. Any other insurance the town may reasonably require
for the protection of the town and the town’s employees, officials,
representatives, officers and agents (all of whom, including the town, are
collectively “additional insureds”), the right-of-way, surrounding property,
wireless provider, or the activities carried on or about the right-of-way. Such
insurance shall be limited to insurance a reasonable person owning, leasing,
designing, constructing, occupying, or operating similar facilities might
reasonably purchase.
B.   Policy limit escalation. The town may elect by notice to wireless provider
to increase the amount or type of any insurance to account for inflation,
changes in risk, or any other factor that the town reasonably determines to
affect the prudent amount of insurance to be provided.
C.   Form of all insurance. All insurance provided by wireless provider with
respect to the right-of-way, whether required in these standard terms or not,
shall meet the following requirements:
   1.   “Occurrence” coverage is required.
   2.   If wireless provider uses any excess insurance then such excess
insurance shall be “follow form” equal to or broader in coverage than the
underlying insurance.
   3.   Policies must also cover and insure wireless provider’s activities
relating to the business operations and activities conducted away from the
right-of-way.
   4.   Within five business days of receiving a written request from the town,
wireless provider shall provide copies of insurance certificates, insurance
policies, formal endorsements or other documentation acceptable to the town
that all insurance coverage required herein is provided.
   5.   Wireless provider’s insurance shall be primary insurance with respect
to claims arising out of wireless provider’s operations, activities and
obligations set forth in these standard terms.
   6.   All policies, including workers’ compensation, shall waive transfer
rights of recovery (subrogation) against the town, and the other additional
insureds.
   7.   All deductibles, retentions, or “self-insured” amounts shall be subject
to the following:
      a.   Wireless provider shall be solely responsible for any self-insurance
amount or deductible.
      b.   Such amounts shall not exceed in total $100,000 per loss. At such
times as wireless provider’s net worth is more than $100,000,000, such limit
shall be $1,000,000.
      c.   Any self-insured exposure shall be deemed to be an insured risk
under the telecom license agreement.
      d.   Wireless provider shall provide to the beneficiaries of all such
amounts no less insurance protection than if such self-insured portion was
fully insured by an insurance company of the quality and caliber required this
section.
      e.   The right to self-insure is limited and specific to wireless
provider and does not extend to wireless provider’s contractors or others.
   8.   All policies except workers’ compensation must name the town and the
other additional insureds as additional insureds. Wireless provider shall cause
coverage for additional insureds to be incorporated into each insurance policy
by endorsement with respect to claims arising out of wireless provider’s
operations, activities and obligations under these standard terms.
   9.   All policies must require the insurer to provide the town with at least
30 days’ prior notice of any cancellation. The insurer’s duty to notify the
town of changes in coverage shall not include phrases such as “endeavor to” or
“but failure to mail such notice shall impose no obligation or liability of any
kind upon the company, its agents or representatives.”
   10.   All policies shall require that notices be given to the town in the
manner specified for notices to the town set forth in these standard terms.
D.   Insurance certificates. Wireless provider shall evidence all insurance by
furnishing to the town certificates of insurance annually and with each change
in insurance coverage. Certificates must evidence that the policy described by
the certificate is in full force and effect and that the policy satisfies each
requirement of these standard terms applicable to the policy. For example,
certificates must evidence that the town and the other additional insureds are
additional insureds. Certificates must also be in an industry standard form
reasonably acceptable to the town. Wireless provider shall provide updated
certificates at the town’s request.
E.   Acceptable insurers. All insurance policies shall be issued by insurers
acceptable to the town. At a minimum, all insurers shall be duly licensed (or
qualified unlicensed non-admitted insurer) by the state of Arizona, department
of insurance. At a minimum, all insurers shall have and maintain an A.M. Best,
Inc. rating of B++ 6.
F.   No representation of coverage adequacy. By requiring insurance, the town
does not represent that coverage and limits will be adequate to protect
wireless provider. The town reserves the right to review any and all of the
insurance policies and/or endorsements cited in these standard terms but has no
obligation to do so. Failure to demand such evidence of full compliance with
the insurance requirements set forth in these standard terms or failure to
identify any insurance deficiency shall not relieve wireless provider from, nor
be construed or deemed a waiver of, wireless provider’s obligation to maintain
the required insurance at all times.
G.   Indemnity. In addition to all other indemnities and other obligations
hereunder, to the fullest extent permitted by law, throughout the term of each
telecom license agreement and right-of-way permit and until all obligations and
performances under or related to these standard terms are satisfied and all
matters described in this paragraph are completely resolved, wireless provider
and all other persons using, acting, working or claiming through or for
wireless provider (if they or their subcontractor, employee or other person or
entity hired or directed by them participated in any way in causing the claim
in question)) shall jointly and severally indemnify, defend and hold harmless
the town and all other additional insureds for, from and against any and all
claims or harm related to wireless provider’s use of the right-of-way or the
rights granted to wireless provider with respect to the right-of-way or
wireless provider’s exercise of its rights under these standard terms (the
“indemnity”). Without limitation, the Indemnity shall include and apply to any
and all allegations, demands, judgments, assessments, taxes, impositions,
expenses, proceedings, liabilities, obligations, suits, actions, claims
(including without limitation claims of personal injury, bodily injury,
sickness, disease, death, property damage, destruction, loss of use, financial
harm, or other impairment), damages, losses, expenses, penalties, fines or
other matters (together with all attorney fees, court costs, and the cost of
appellate proceedings and all other costs and expenses of litigation or
resolving the claim) that may arise in any manner out of any use of the right-
of-way or other property pursuant to any telecom license agreement or right-of-
way permit or any actions, acts, errors, mistakes or omissions relating to work
or services in the performance of or related to the telecom license agreement
or right-of-way permit, including without limitation any injury or damages or
cause of action claimed or caused by any employees, contractors,
subcontractors, tenants, subtenants, agents or other persons upon or using the
right-of-way or surrounding areas related to wireless provider’s exercise of
its rights under the telecom license agreement, including without limitation,
claims, liability, harm or damages caused in part by the town or any other
additional insured or anyone for whose mistakes, errors, omissions or
negligence wireless provider or the town may be liable. As a condition to the
town’s approval of any telecom license agreement or right-of-way permit,
wireless provider specifically agrees that to the extent any provision of this
paragraph is not fully enforceable against wireless provider for any reason
whatsoever, this paragraph shall be deemed automatically reformed to the
minimal extent necessary to cause it to be enforceable to the fullest extent
permitted by law. The indemnity shall also include and apply to any
environmental injury, personal injury or other liability relating to wireless
provider’s use of real property under each right-of-way permit. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the Indemnity does not apply to:
   1.   Claims arising only from the sole gross negligence or intentionally
wrongful acts of the town.
   2.   Claims that the law prohibits from being imposed upon the indemnitor.
H.   Risk of Loss. Wireless provider assumes the risk of any and all loss,
damage or claims related to wireless provider’s use of the right-of-way or
other property of the town, wireless provider or third parties throughout the
term of any telecom license agreement or right-of-way permit. Wireless provider
shall be responsible for any and all damage to its property and equipment
related to these standard terms.
I.   Insurance to be provided by others. Wireless provider shall cause its
contractors or other persons occupying, working on or about, or using the
right-of-way pursuant to these standard terms to be covered by their own or
wireless provider’s insurance as required by these standard terms. The required
policy limits for commercial general liability insurance provided by such
persons shall be $1,000,000 for each occurrence, $1,000,000 for products and
completed operations annual aggregate, and $2,000,000 general aggregate limit
per policy year. This paragraph does not apply to persons who do not actually
perform physical labor in the right-of-way (such as wireless provider’s
consulting design engineers).
12-8-18 Condemnation
This section governs any condemnation of any part of or interest in the use
area and any conveyance to the town or another condemnor in avoidance or
settlement of condemnation or a threat of condemnation.
A.   Termination for condemnation. The wireless provider’s right to use the use
area shall terminate on the date that is the earlier of the date title vests in
the condemnor, or the date upon which the condemnor is let into possession.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the town reasonably determines that the use
area continues to be suitable for wireless provider to conduct the permitted
uses, the town may elect to cause the telecom license agreement to continue to
remain in effect as to the part of the use area not taken and the use fee shall
not be reduced or abated. Nevertheless, if wireless provider reasonably
determines that the use area is not suitable for wireless provider to conduct
the permitted uses, then the wireless provider’s right to use that use area
shall terminate when wireless provider gives written notice to the town
engineer of the termination of the telecom license agreement as to that use
area.
B.   Condemnation proceeds. Wireless provider hereby assigns and transfers to
the town wireless provider’s entire interest in all condemnation damages,
interest, severance damages, and any other payments or proceeds of any kind
relating to the condemnation (collectively the “condemnation proceeds”).
Wireless provider shall execute and deliver to the town assignments or other
instruments requested by the town confirming such assignment and transfer.
Wireless provider shall immediately pay to the town any condemnation proceeds
wireless provider may receive. The condemnation proceeds shall not include
relocation benefits, if any, awarded specifically to wireless provider to cover
expenses of relocating wireless provider’s business located at the use area at
the time of the condemnation, or any compensation specifically awarded to
wireless provider for any taking of the communications equipment itself. Any
repair, relocation or similar costs relating to the communications equipment
shall be borne by wireless provider.
C.   Power to condemn. Wireless provider acknowledges that the town and others
from time-to-time may use the power to condemn the use area or any interest in
it. The town has not relinquished any right of condemnation or eminent domain
over the use area. The town does not warrant that the town will not condemn the
use area during the term of the telecom license agreement, but (unless the
town’s representatives state otherwise at the time of the right-of-way permit
issuance) the town represents by its issuance of the right-of-way permit that
it does not presently have intentions to condemn the use area.
12-8-19 Damage to or destruction of the use area
This section governs damage to or destruction of the use area by fire, flood,
explosion, the elements, the public enemy, or other casualty (collectively
“casualty damage”):
A.   Damage to wireless provider’s improvements. Wireless provider shall
commence restoring the casualty damage to wireless provider’s improvements
within 30 days after any casualty damage occurs. Wireless provider shall
complete the restoration work within 30 days after commencement. The work shall
be subject to the plans approval process and all other requirements for
wireless provider’s improvements. Wireless provider shall perform all
restoration work at wireless provider’s sole cost and expense.
B.   Monthly restoration work report. Wireless provider shall provide to the
town no later than the tenth day of each month a written narrative report of
the progress of the restoration work.
12-8-20 Wireless provider’s records
During the entire term of the telecom license agreement, wireless provider
shall keep records and provide information to the town as provided in this
section.
A.   Scope of information. Unless otherwise specified, all of wireless
provider’s recordkeeping and disclosure obligations under this article are
limited to the following (collectively the “covered information”):
   1.   The status of the construction, repair or restoration of wireless
provider improvements.
   2.   Information indicating whether the town or wireless provider is in
compliance with the terms of this chapter, all other applicable provisions of
the town code, and the telecom license agreement.
   3.   Records inspection. At wireless provider’s expense, wireless provider
shall:
      a.   Permit and assist the town and its representatives upon 21 days’
notice to inspect, audit, and copy wireless provider’s records of covered
information.
      b.   Make the records of covered information (and reasonable
accommodations for the town’s audit and inspection) available to the town at
wireless provider’s Arizona offices.
      c.   Cause wireless provider’s employees and agents and accountants to
give their full cooperation and assistance in connection with the town’s access
to the covered information.
B.   Record retention. Wireless provider shall preserve records of the covered
information in a secure place at wireless provider’s corporate headquarters in
the continental United States for a period ending seven years after the time
period reported by the records.
C.   Record media included. The town’s and wireless provider’s rights and
obligations regarding the covered information apply regardless of the type of
media, materials, or data repositories that may contain the covered
information. The town shall have access to covered information contained,
without limitation, in records, books, papers, documents, recordings, computer
data, contracts, logs, notes, ledgers, correspondence, reports, drawings, and
memoranda, and any and all other sources, records and repositories of covered
information.
D.   Reports. Wireless provider shall deliver to the town written reports (and,
if requested by the town, a presentation to the town’s governing council or
designee) covering such covered information as the town may request from time
to time. The town shall not request such reports more often than once in any
12-month period.
E.   Standards for records. Wireless provider shall maintain a standard, modern
system of recordkeeping for the covered information and shall keep and maintain
proper and accurate books and other repositories of information relating to the
covered information.
12-8-21 Compliance with law
Wireless provider shall perform its obligations under these standard terms in
accordance with all federal, state, county and local laws, ordinances,
regulations or other rules or policies as are now in effect or as may hereafter
be adopted or amended. Without limiting in any way the generality of the
foregoing, wireless provider shall comply with all and each of the provisions
set forth in this section.
A.   Applicability of municipal law. Without limitation, wireless provider
shall comply with municipal laws as follows:
   1.   Wireless provider acknowledges nothing set forth in this
chapter 12-8 or in the telecom license agreement or any right-of-way permit
constitutes, and the town has not promised or offered, any type of waiver of,
or agreement to waive (or show any type of forbearance, priority or favoritism
to wireless provider with regard to) any law, ordinance, power, regulation,
tax, assessment or other legal requirement now or hereafter imposed by the town
or any other governmental body upon or affecting wireless provider, the use
area, or the right-of-way or wireless provider’s use of the use area, or the
right-of-way.
   2.   All of wireless provider’s obligations hereunder are in addition to,
and cumulative upon (and not to any extent in substitution or satisfaction of),
all existing or future laws and regulations applicable to wireless provider.
   3.   The town, by entering into the telecom license agreement or issuing a
right-of-way permit, cannot and has not relinquished or limited any right of
condemnation or eminent domain over the use area or any other property related
to these standard terms or within the right-of-way.
   4.   A telecom license agreement or right-of-way permit cannot and does not
impair the town’s, power to enact, apply or enforce any laws or regulations, or
exercise any governmental powers affecting in any way wireless provider, any
use area, or the right-of-way.
   5.   The town’s rights and remedies under the telecom license agreement and
any right-of-way permit for wireless provider’s failure to comply with all
applicable laws supplement and are in addition to and do not replace otherwise
existing powers of the town or any other governmental body.
   6.   Wireless provider’s rights under the telecom license agreement and any
right-of-way permit are further subject to all present and future building
restrictions, regulations, zoning laws, and all ordinances, resolutions, rules
and orders of all bodies, bureaus, commissions and bodies of any municipal,
county, state, or federal authority, now or hereafter having jurisdiction over
any use area or wireless provider’s use of any use area. Wireless provider
shall comply with all of the foregoing.
B.   Radio frequency compliance requirements. Wireless provider shall document,
report and confirm its compliance with FCC radio frequency exposure guidelines
(FCC OET bulletin 65) and all other FCC rules as follows:
   1.   Wireless provider shall cause its senior internal engineer responsible
for compliance with the FCC rules to deliver to the town a letter attesting
that wireless provider’s operation of the communications equipment is in
compliance with the FCC rules. A statement from wireless provider declaring
exemption from reporting to FCC is not acceptable to comply with the
requirements of this paragraph.
   2.   Wireless provider shall maintain records of radio frequency
measurements and communications equipment performance in accordance with the
FCC rules.
   3.   Wireless provider shall also evidence and demonstrate its compliance
with the FCC rules in such manner and at such intervals as the town code and
other applicable laws and regulations may mandate.
C.   Government property lease excise tax. Wireless provider shall be
responsible for any and all property taxes and all government property lease
excise taxes described in A.R.S. § 42-6201 et seq. or similar laws in force
from time to time. Pursuant to A.R.S. § 42-6206, failure by wireless provider
to pay the taxes after notice and an opportunity to cure is an event of default
that could result in divesting wireless provider of any interest in or right of
occupancy of the use area.
D.   Use area regulations. The town reserves the right to adopt, amend and
enforce against wireless provider rules and regulations governing the operation
of the right-of-way, including the use area, wireless provider’s activities on
them, and the public areas and facilities used by wireless provider in
connection with them.
E.   Taxes, liens and assessments. In addition to all other amounts provided in
this
chapter 12-8 and in the telecom license agreement and any right-of-way permit,
and to the extent consistent with applicable law, wireless provider shall pay,
when they become due and payable, all taxes and general and special fees,
charges and assessments of every description that during the term of any
telecom license agreement or right-of-way permit may be levied upon or assessed
upon or with respect to wireless provider’s use of the right-of-way, the
operations conducted there, any amounts paid or other performances required by
these standard terms by either party, and all possessory interest in the right-
of-way and wireless provider’s improvements and other property located there.
Wireless provider shall pay, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the town from
any and all obligations, including any interest, penalties and other expenses
which may be imposed, and from any lien or sale or other proceedings to enforce
their payment.
F.   Permits. Nothing in these standard terms relieves wireless provider of the
obligation to obtain permits, licenses and other approvals from the town or
other units of government that are required for the erection, construction,
reconstruction, installation, operation or maintenance of the communications
equipment or provision of telecommunications services; or from compliance with
applicable municipal codes, ordinances, laws and policies, such as zoning and
land use ordinances and regulations, pavement cut and restoration ordinances
and regulations, subdivision and project improvement ordinances, curb cut
permits, building permits, right-of-way permits and the like.
12-8-22 Assignment
Telecom license agreements and right-of-way permits are not assignable by
wireless provider (and any assignment shall be void and vest no rights in the
purported assignee) unless the assignment is made in strict compliance with the
requirements of this section.
A.   Assignments affected. Every assignment of any of wireless provider’s
interest in the right-of-way, the telecom license agreement, any right-of-way
permit, or any of wireless provider’s rights or interests under this
chapter 12-8 is prohibited unless wireless provider first receives from the
town notice of the town’s consent to the assignment. The town’s consent to
assignment shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned, or delayed. All
references in these standard terms to assignments by wireless provider or to
assignees shall be deemed also to apply to all of the following transactions,
circumstances and conditions and to all persons claiming pursuant to such
transactions, circumstances and conditions:
   1.   Any voluntary or involuntary assignment, conveyance or transfer of
wireless provider’s right to use the right-of-way under the telecom license
agreement or any right-of-way permit, or any interest or rights of the town
under the telecom license agreement or any right-of-way permit, in whole or in
part.
   2.   Any voluntary or involuntary pledge, lien, mortgage, security interest,
judgment, claim or demand, whether arising from any contract, any agreement,
any work of construction, repair, restoration, maintenance or removal, or
otherwise affecting wireless provider’s rights to use the right-of-way
(collectively “liens”).
   3.   Any voluntary or involuntary assignment by wireless provider of any
interest in the telecom license agreement or any right-of-way permit for the
benefit of creditors.
   4.   A wireless provider insolvency.
   5.   The occurrence of any of the foregoing by operation of law or
otherwise.
   6.   The occurrence of any of the foregoing with respect to any assignee or
other successor to wireless provider.
B.   Pre-approved assignments. Subject to certain conditions hereafter stated,
the town hereby consents to certain assignments (the “pre-approved
assignments”). Only the following assignments are pre-approved assignments:
   1.   Complete assignment of telecom license agreement. Wireless provider’s
complete assignment of all of wireless provider’s rights and interests in the
telecom license agreement and associated use areas to a single assignee who
meets all of the following requirements, as determined by the town in the
town’s reasonable discretion (a “qualified operator”):
      a.   The assignee has experience, management, credit standing and
financial capacity and other resources equal to or greater than wireless
provider’s and adequate to successfully perform the obligations set forth
herein.
      b.   The assignee is experienced in the management and operation of
similar projects.
      c.   The assignee assumes all of wireless provider’s obligations under
the telecom license agreement.
      d.   The assignee has a net worth of not less than $50,000,000.
   2.   Stock transfers. The transfer of publicly traded stock, regardless of
quantity.
   3.   Merger. The merger or consolidation of wireless provider with another
entity that is a qualified operator.
   4.   Common ownership transfer. Wireless provider’s complete assignment of
all of wireless provider’s rights and interests in the telecom license
agreement and associated use areas to single assignee who is and remains a
wholly owned subsidiary of wireless provider’s sole owner as of the date of the
telecom license agreement (or a wholly owned subsidiary of a wholly owned
subsidiary of wireless provider’s sole owner as of the date of the telecom
license agreement).
C.   Limitations on assignments. The town’s consent to any assignment,
including without limitation, pre-approved assignments, is not effective until
the following conditions are satisfied:
   1.   Except for the sale of stock, wireless provider shall provide to the
town a summary of provisions of the transaction documents assigning its
interests.
   2.   Each assignee must execute an assumption of the telecom license
agreement in substantially the form set forth in section
12-8-26 (forms).
   3.   Each pre-approved assignment must satisfy all other requirements of
these standard terms pertaining to assignments.
D.   Assignment remedies. Any assignment without the town’s consent shall be
void and shall not result in the assignee obtaining any rights or interests.
The town may, in its sole discretion and in addition to all other remedies
available to the town under these standard terms or otherwise, and in any
combination, terminate the telecom license agreement and any and all right-of-
way permits, collect use fee from the assignee and/or declare the assignment to
be void, all without prejudicing any other right or remedy of the town under
these standard terms. No cure or grace periods shall apply to assignments
prohibited under these standard terms or to enforcement of any provision under
these standard terms against an assignee who did not receive the town’s
consent.
E.   Effect of assignment. Prior to any assignment, each assignee must execute
an assumption of the telecom license agreement in the form set forth in section
12-8-26. No action or inaction by the town shall be deemed a waiver of the
prohibition on assignments or any other provision herein, or the acceptance of
the assignee, wireless provider or occupant as wireless provider, or a release
of wireless provider from the further performance by wireless provider of the
provisions of the telecom license agreement or any right-of-way permit. Consent
by the town to an assignment shall not relieve wireless provider from obtaining
the town’s consent to any further assignment. No assignment shall release
wireless provider from any liability under this
chapter 12-8 or the telecom license agreement.
F.   Enforceability after assignment. No consent by the town shall be deemed to
be a novation. The town’s consent to any assignment does not in any way expand
or modify the terms set forth in these standard terms or waive, diminish or
modify any of the town’s rights or remedies under the telecom license agreement
or any right-of-way permit. The terms set forth in these standard terms shall
be enforceable against wireless provider and each successor, partial or total,
and regardless of the method of succession, to wireless provider’s interest
under this
chapter 12-8 or the telecom license agreement. Each successor having actual or
constructive notice of the telecom license agreement or any right-of-way permit
shall be deemed to have agreed to the preceding sentence.
G.   Grounds for refusal. Except for the pre-approved assignments, no
assignment of any telecom license agreement by wireless provider is
contemplated or bargained for. Without limitation, the town has the right to
impose upon any consent to assignment such conditions and requirements as the
town may deem appropriate.
H.   Consent to assignments. Wireless provider shall attach to each pre-
approved assignment a copy of wireless provider’s notice to the town of the
pre-approved assignment and other required documents, wireless provider shall
attach to each other assignment, a copy of the town’s notice to wireless
provider of the town’s consent to the assignment. These standard terms shall
continue to be enforceable according to its terms in spite of any provisions of
any documents relating to an assignment.
I.   Assignment fee. Wireless provider shall pay to the town in advance a
nonrefundable fee in an amount established by a fee schedule adopted by the
council and amended from time to time for legal, administrative and other
expenses related to every pre-approved assignment of any license agreement
(other than the sale of publicly traded stock) or to any request for a consent
to assignment, whether or not the town grants the request.
12-8-23 Miscellaneous
The additional provisions set forth in this section apply to each and every
telecom license agreement and right-of-way permit.
A.   Amendments. These standard terms may not be amended except by a formal
writing executed by all of the parties.
B.   Dates. Any reference to a year shall refer to a calendar year unless a
fiscal year is specifically stated. Sunday, Saturday and Arizona legal holidays
are holidays.
C.   Time of essence. Time is of the essence of each and every provision of
this
chapter 12-8, the telecom license agreement, and any right-of-way permit.
D.   Severability. If any provision of these standard terms shall be ruled by a
court or agency of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable for
any reason, then:
   1.   The invalidity or unenforceability of the provision shall not affect
the validity of any remaining provisions of these standard terms.
   2.   These standard terms shall be automatically reformed to secure to the
parties the benefits of the unenforceable provision, to the maximum extent
consistent with law.
E.   Conflicts of interest. No officer, representative or employee of the town
shall have any direct or indirect interest in the telecom license agreement or
any right-of-way permit, or participate in any decision relating to any telecom
license agreement or right-of-way permit that is prohibited by law.
F.   No partnership. The transactions and performances contemplated hereby
shall not create any sort of partnership, joint venture or similar relationship
between the parties.
G.   Nonliability of officials and employees. No official, representative or
employee of the town shall be personally liable to any party, or to any
successor in interest to any party, in the event of any default or breach by
the town or for any amount which may become due to any party or successor, or
with respect to any obligation of the town or otherwise under the terms of the
telecom license agreement or any right-of-way permit, or in any way related to
the telecom license agreement or any right-of-way permit.
H.   Notices. Notices under this
chapter 12-8 and under the telecom license agreement and any right-of-way
permit shall be given in writing delivered to the other party or mailed by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid to the
addresses set forth in the telecom license agreement and to the town as
follows:
      If to the town:   Town engineer
               Town of Marana
               11555 West Civic Center Drive
               Marana, Arizona 85653
      With a copy to:   Town attorney
               Town of Marana
               11555 West Civic Center Drive
               Marana, Arizona 85653
By notice from time to time, a person may designate any other street address
within Pima County, Arizona as its address for giving notice under this
chapter 12-8 and under the telecom license agreement. Service of any notice by
mail shall be deemed to be complete three days (excluding Saturday, Sunday and
legal holidays) after the notice is deposited in the United States mail.
I.   Construction. Whenever the context of these standard terms requires herein
the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include the
feminine.
J.   Funding. This subparagraph shall control notwithstanding any provision of
the telecom license agreement or any exhibit or other agreement or document
related to it. If funds necessary to fulfill the town’s obligations under the
telecom license agreement are not appropriated by the town council, the town
may terminate the telecom license agreement by notice to wireless provider. The
town shall use best efforts to give notice of termination to wireless provider
at least 30 days prior to the end of the town’s then current fiscal period.
Termination in accordance with this provision shall not constitute a breach of
the telecom license agreement by the town. No person will be entitled to any
compensation, damages or other remedy from the town for the termination of a
telecom license agreement pursuant to the terms of this subsection.
K.   No third party beneficiaries. No person or entity shall be a third party
beneficiary to the telecom license agreement or shall have any right or cause
of action hereunder. The town shall have no liability to third parties for any
approval of plans, wireless provider’s construction of improvements, wireless
provider’s negligence, wireless provider’s failure to comply with the
provisions of these standard terms (including any absence or inadequacy of
insurance required to be carried by wireless provider).
L.   Exhibits. All exhibits specifically stated to be attached to this
chapter 12-8 or to the telecom license agreement are hereby incorporated into
and made an integral part of the telecom license agreement for all purposes.
M.   Attorneys’ fees. If any action, suit or proceeding is brought by either
party to enforce the telecom license agreement or any right-of-way permit, or
for failure to observe any of the covenants of the telecom license agreement or
right-of-way permit, or to vindicate or exercise any rights or remedies under
the telecom license agreement or any right-of-way permit, the prevailing party
shall be entitled to recover from the other party the prevailing party’s
reasonable attorneys’ fees and other reasonable litigation costs (as determined
by the court, and not a jury).
N.   Approvals and inspections. All approvals, reviews and inspections by the
town are for the town’s sole benefit and not for the benefit of wireless
provider, its contractors, engineers or other consultants or agents, or any
other person.
O.   Legal workers. If and to the extent A.R.S. § 41-4401 is applicable,
wireless provider shall comply with laws regarding workers as follows:
   1.   Wireless provider warrants to the town that wireless provider and all
its subcontractors will comply with all federal immigration laws and
regulations that relate to their employees and that wireless provider and all
its subcontractors now comply with the e-verify program under A.R.S. § 23-214
(A). This is referred to in these standard terms as the “immigration warranty.”
   2.   A breach of the immigration warranty by wireless provider shall be
deemed a material breach of the telecom license agreement and any issued right-
of-way permit that is subject to penalties up to and including termination of
the telecom license agreement and right-of-way permit.
   3.   The town retains the legal right to inspect the papers of any employee
of wireless provider or any subcontractor who works on a use area pursuant to
the telecom license agreement and any issued right-of-way permit to ensure that
they or the subcontractor is complying with the immigration warranty.
   4.   The town may conduct random verification of wireless provider’s and its
subcontractors’ employment records to ensure compliance with the immigration
warranty.
   5.   Wireless provider shall indemnify, defend and hold the town harmless
for, from and against all losses and liabilities arising from any and all
violations of the immigration warranty.
12-8-24 Town engineer authorization
A.   The town engineer is hereby authorized to sign telecom license agreements
and other documents in form substantially conforming to those set forth in
section
12-8-26 (forms).
B.   The town council shall review and approve any telecom license agreement
with a wireless provider containing different or additional terms than those
authorized by this chapter (see A.R.S. § 9-592 (F)).
12-8-25 Exhibits
The following exhibits are incorporated by reference into this
chapter 12-8.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-30.png]
Exhibit A1: Calculation points for height of an existing streetlight with
separate luminaire mast arm. The yellow line next to the streetlight depicts
the section of the existing streetlight pole used to calculate the height of
the existing pole. The lines are not to scale and are solely used for
illustrative purposes.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-32.png]
Exhibit A2: Calculation points for height of an existing streetlight with
integrated luminaire mast arm.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-34.png]
Exhibit B: Calculation points for height of existing traffic signal pole.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-36.png]
Exhibit C: Dog house—cable transition from underground to electric utility
pole.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-38.png]
Exhibit D1: Antenna shrouds—45 degrees.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-40.png]
Exhibit D2: Antenna shrouds—90 degrees.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-42.png]
Exhibit E: Examples of electrical meter pedestals—”Myers” or “Milbank” style.
12-8-26 Forms
A.   Forms shall substantially conform to those set forth in this section, with
such revisions as may be approved as to substance by the town manager and town
engineer and approved as to form and legality by the town attorney.
B.   Form of telecom license agreement.
 
Town of Marana Right-of-Way Telecom License Agreement
This Telecom License Agreement is granted by the Town of Marana (the “Town”), an
Arizona municipal corporation; in favor of _________________________________ (the
“Wireless Provider”). The Town and Wireless Provider are each sometimes referred
to as a “Party” and together referred to as the “Parties.”
Recitals
The Town owns and controls public right-of-way within the town limits of the Town
of Marana.
Wireless Provider desires to install and operate wireless telecommunications
receiving, processing and transmitting devices and related electronic equipment
(the “Communications Equipment”) in the public right-of-way in accordance with the
Standard Terms, this Telecom License Agreement, and the terms of one or more
right-of-way permits issued by the Town.
Wireless Provider has obtained or is in the process of seeking from the Town one
or more right-of-way permits pursuant to Marana Town Code Chapter 12-7
(Construction in town rights-of-way) (the “Street Code”), each of which is
referred to in this Telecom License Agreement as a “right-of-way permit” for a
specifically described parcel of Town right-of-way referred to in the right-of-way
permit and in this Telecom License Agreement as a “Use Area.”
License
Now, therefore, in consideration of the foregoing recitals, which are incorporated
into this License as though fully restated here, and the mutual covenants set
forth in this License, the Parties hereby agree as follows:
1. Incorporation of Standard Terms. Marana Town Code Chapter 12-8 (Wireless
communication facilities in the right-of-way) sets out the various recitals and
provisions (collectively the “Standard Terms”) of this Telecom License Agreement,
and is incorporated by reference as if set forth in full in this Telecom License
Agreement. WIRELESS PROVIDER WARRANTS AND REPRESENTS THAT WIRELESS PROVIDER HAS
READ AND AGREES TO THE STANDARD RECITALS AND THE STANDARD TERMS. Terms used but
not defined in this Telecom License Agreement shall have the meanings assigned by
the Standard Terms.
2. License. The Town hereby authorizes the Wireless Provider to use the Use Area
of each right-of-way permit in conformance with this Telecom License Agreement and
all applicable local, state, and federal laws and regulations.
3. Use of Use Area. Wireless Provider may use the Use Area for the installation of
the particular Communications Equipment in the particular configuration all as
described in the Boundary Plan and other supporting materials submitted by the
Wireless Provider for the right-of-way permit.
4. Term; modification, termination, assignment, etc. This Telecom License
Agreement is issued for an initial term of ten years, and its term, modification,
termination, assignment, and other terms, conditions, and provisions are set forth
in the Standard Terms.
5. Notices. Any notice, request, demand, consent, approval, waiver or other
communication, herein individually and collectively referred to as “notice”, which
may be or is required to be given by a Party under this License or by law to the
other Party shall be in writing and shall be either personally delivered to the
Party or shall be sent by: (i) registered or certified mail, postage paid by
sender, return receipt requested; or (ii) overnight courier service (such as
FedEx). Said notice shall be deemed received upon the earlier of: (i) personal
delivery; (ii) if mailed, the date of posting by the United States Post Office or
overnight courier service. Notices shall be sent to the other Parties at the
following addresses:
Town:   Town of Marana
11555 W. Civic Center Drive
Marana, Arizona 85653
Wireless Provider:   [Insert name]
[Address]
[City/State/Zip]
6. Change of address. Notice of change of any Party’s address shall be given
promptly by written notice in any method described in paragraph 5 (“Notices”) of
this Telecom License Agreement. In the event any notice is rejected, refused,
returned, or otherwise not received as a result of failure of a Party to give
adequate notice of changed address, the notice shall nevertheless be deemed
received.
7. Recording. The Town shall record this License in the office of the Pima County
Recorder after it has been executed by the Parties.
8. Conflicts. This License is subject to A.R.S. § 38-511, which provides for
cancelation in certain instances involving conflicts of interest.
In witness whereof, the Parties have executed this License effective as of the
last Party’s signature date below.
The “Town”:
Town of Marana, an Arizona municipal corporation
By:   
Town Engineer
Date:    
Attest:
   
Town Clerk
Approved as to Form:
   
Town Attorney
The “Wireless Provider”:
[Name of entity], a [type and state of entity]
By:    
Its:    
Date:    
STATE OF ARIZONA   )
   ) ss.
County of Pima   )
The foregoing instrument was acknowledged before me this _____ day of , 20____ by
, the of [Wireless Provider’s name], a [Wireless Provider’s entity type and
state], on behalf of the [corporation/LLC].
(Seal)
   
Notary Public
Exhibit A – List of Right-of-Way Permits/Use Areas
Right-of-Way Permit Number RW_____________, issued on _______________________, for
the Use Area described as follows:___________________________________________
[Add as needed]
C..   Form of letter of credit.
 
Date ____________________, 20__
Letter of credit no.:______________
Town Engineer
Town of Marana
11555 West Civic Center Drive
Marana, Arizona 85653
Dear Sir or Madam:
We hereby establish our clean, unconditional and irrevocable letter of credit
in your favor at the request and for the account of
________________________________ in the aggregate amount of
_____________________________ ($_____________), available upon presentation of
your draft in the form attached hereto as Schedule 1.
We will honor each draft presented to us in compliance with the terms of this
letter of credit. Partial draws are permitted. Each draft must be accompanied
by a copy of this letter of credit. Within ten days after we honor your draft,
you must make the original of this letter of credit available to us in Pima
County, Arizona upon which we may endorse our payment. Drafts may be presented
by any of the following means:
By telefax to (_____) _____-__________.
By email to ____________________________________.
By hand or overnight courier service delivery to:
[This address must be in Pima County, Arizona.]
   _________________________
   _________________________
   _________________________
By hand or overnight courier service delivery to:
[This address need not be in Pima County, Arizona]
   _________________________
   _________________________
   _________________________
This letter of credit is valid until _______________________, 20____ and shall
thereafter be automatically renewed for successive one year periods, unless at
least 120 days prior to expiration we notify you in writing, by either
registered or certified mail, that we elect not to renew the letter of credit
for such additional period. In the event of such notification, any then unused
portion of the letter of credit shall be available upon your presenting to us
your draft on or before then current expiration date.
This letter of credit is subject to the UCP600. This letter of credit is not
assignable.
[Bank name], a _________
By [Bank officer’s signature] 
[Bank officer’s name printed]
Its [Bank officer’s title]
Phone: [Bank officer’s phone number]
D.   Form of draft on letter of credit
 
To:    _____________________
   _____________________
   _____________________
From:    Town Engineer
   Town of Marana
   11555 West Civic Center Drive
   Marana, Arizona 85653
Date: ___________________, 20_____
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Pursuant to your Credit No. ________, the Town of Marana hereby demands cash
payment in the amount of __________________________ ($_______).
Please make your payment to the town of Marana in the form of a wire deposit
to:
            _____________________
            _____________________
            _____________________
            _____________________
If the deposit cannot be accomplished immediately for any reason, please make
your payment in the form of a cashier’s check issued by your institution and
delivered to me at the address listed above.
I certify that I am the Town Engineer of the Town of Marana.
If there is any imperfection or defect in this draft or its presentation,
please inform me immediately at (520) 382-2600 so that I can correct it. Also,
please immediately notify the town Attorney at (520) 382-1940.
Thank you.
_______________________________
Town Engineer, Town of Marana
E.   Form of assumption of telecom license agreement and antenna site right-of-
way permit
 
Assumption of Telecom License Agreement
This assumption is made pursuant to Marana Town Code section
12-8-22 (Assignment) incorporated by reference into of the telecom license
agreement and right-of-way permit(s) issued by the Town of Marana, an Arizona
municipal corporation (“the town”) to _________________________, a
_________________________ (“wireless provider”), and particularly described as
follows:
Telecom license agreement no._________________ dated ________________, 20____.
__________________________, a __________________________ (“Assignee”), having
acquired the rights of the wireless provider under the telecom license agreement
listed above, hereby assumes the telecom license agreement, agrees to be bound by
it, and obligates itself to perform the terms and conditions of the telecom
license agreement and all standard terms incorporated by reference in it, all in
favor of the town. The person signing this document on behalf of Assignee warrants
to the town his or her authority to do so.
Dated:   ______________________, 20_______
ASSIGNEE: ________________, a ____________
By: _________________________
Its: _________________________ 
State of _________________   )
   )    ss.
County of _______________   )
The foregoing instrument was acknowledged before me this ____ day of
______________, 20__, by _________________, _____________ of _____________, a
_______________.
    
Notary Public
(Seal)
 
CHAPTER 12-9.
OVERDIMENSIONAL VEHICLES
Ordinance 2018.008 added
chapter 12-9
12-9-1 Definition
For purposes of this chapter, “overdimensional vehicle” means any vehicle or
combination of vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the
limits set forth in A.R.S. title 28, chapter 3, article 18, as amended.
12-9-2 Operation of overdimensional vehicles; permit required; non-transferable
A.   It shall be unlawful to operate or move any overdimensional vehicle on a
town street without a special permit issued by the town pursuant to this
chapter.
B.   A special permit issued under this chapter shall be issued pursuant to and
in conformity with A.R.S. title 28, chapter 3, article 18, as amended, and
Arizona administrative code title 17, chapter 6, as amended.
C.   A special permit issued under this chapter must be carried in the
overdimensional vehicle to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by
any police officer or authorized agent of the town.
D.   A person shall not violate any of the terms or conditions of a special
permit.
E.   All special permits issued pursuant to this chapter are non-transferable.
12-9-3 Application process; fees; non-refundable
A.   The applicant or the applicant’s authorized representative shall submit a
written special permit application to the town manager or designee on the form
provided by the town for that purpose.
B.   The application for special permit shall specifically describe the vehicle
or vehicles and load to be operated or moved, including the type of vehicle and
the number of axles, and the maximum length, width, height, and weight of the
vehicle or vehicles and load.
C.   The application for special permit shall specifically describe the
particular streets for which the permit to operate is requested.
D.   The application for special permit shall specify whether the applicant is
applying for a single trip permit, a 30-day permit, or a one-year permit. 30-
day and one-year permits may be issued for the operation or movement of
overdimensional vehicles when any load to be carried within the 30-day or one-
year period does not exceed the permitted weight and dimensions and the same
equipment will be used for the same type load during the permit period.
E.   If the overdimensional vehicle is to be routed over a bridge, culvert, or
similar type of structure under the jurisdiction of the town, the maximum
weight load must be under the maximum load capacity for the particular bridge,
culvert, or structure, as determined by the town engineer.
F.   The applicant, at the applicant’s own expense, may be required to submit
an engineering analysis certifying that the applicant’s overdimensional vehicle
will not overstress or damage any element of the transport route or a structure
on the route. The engineering analysis must be prepared by an engineer
registered by the Arizona state board of technical registration in structural
or civil engineering, as prescribed under A.R.S. title 32, chapter 1, according
to industry standards. For purposes of this paragraph, an engineering analysis
prepared according to the following publications complies with industry
standards:
   1.   The most recently published edition of the American association of
state highway transportation officials manual for bridge evaluation, including
all interims, standards, or guidelines;
   2.   The most recently published edition of the American association of
state highway transportation officials load and resistance factor design –
bridge design specifications, including all interims, standards, or guidelines;
and
   3.   The Arizona department of transportation bridge load rating guidelines
and bridge design guidelines
G.   The applicant shall certify to the town that all information provided on
the application is true and correct.
H.   The applicant shall pay any applicable fees as set forth in a fee schedule
adopted by the council and amended from time to time, except that fees shall
not be assessed in the following circumstances:
   1.   When the overdimensional vehicles is owned by the United States
government, the state of Arizona, or an Arizona county, city, or town.
   2.   If a special permit is required by the state of Arizona and the town,
the applicant shall pay a permit fee only to the state of Arizona.
   3.   If a special permit is required by more than one municipality or
county, and is not required by the state of Arizona, the applicant shall pay a
permit fee only to the municipality or county that has jurisdiction of the
streets and highways where the movement of the overdimensional vehicle
originates.
I.   All fees collected pursuant to this section are non-refundable.
J.   The town may require an undertaking or any other security as deemed
necessary by the town manager or designee to compensate for damage to a roadway
or road structure.
12-9-4 Permit issuance or denial
A.   A special permit application under this chapter shall be approved unless
the town manager or designee determines that any of the following conditions
exist:
   1.   The proposed transport route or a structure on the route is:
      a.   Unable to bear the size or weight of the overdimensional vehicle and
load; or
      b.   Under repair; or
      c.   Temporarily closed due to a hazardous condition.
   2.   An applicant for a permit to transport a mobile home does not provide
written proof of ad valorem tax payment or clearance as required under A.R.S. §
28-1104.
   3.   The applicant made a material misrepresentation or misstatement on the
permit application or any other document submitted to the town in support of
the permit application.
B.   If the permit is denied, the town manager or designee shall provide
written notice of the denial to the applicant. The notice shall include a
statement of the reasons the application was denied and may be delivered by
first class mail or electronic mail.
12-9-5 Classification; enforcement; continuing violations
A.   Whenever in this chapter any act is prohibited or declared to be unlawful,
or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared
to be unlawful, the violation of that provision is a civil infraction.
B.   This chapter may be enforced in any manner provided for by town ordinances
and state laws.
C.   Each day any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
CHAPTER 12-10.
OTHER PENALTIES
Ordinances 2008.04, 2008.11, and 2018.008 renumbered this chapter, and
Ordinance 2006.31 added “other” to the chapter title
12-10-1 Other violations
A.   It is a civil traffic violation for any person to do any act forbidden or
fail to perform any act required by this title, unless otherwise designated in
this title or under state law.
B.   A civil sanction of not more than $250 shall be imposed on any person
found in violation of any other provision of this title unless otherwise
designated in this title or under state law.
This section was renumbered and modified by Ordinance 2006.31
TITLE 13
PARKS & RECREATION
Ordinance 96.02 adopted title 13
CHAPTER 13-1.   PARKS AND RECREATION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 13-2.   FINGERPRINTING AND CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECKS OF PARKS AND
RECREATION PERSONNEL AND VOLUNTEERS
CHAPTER 13-1.
PARKS AND RECREATION REGULATIONS
13-1-1 Domestic animals and pets
A.   No domestic animals or other pets are permitted to be at-large in town
parks and recreation areas. Domestic animals and pets must be restrained by a
cage or a leash of not more than six feet in length and of sufficient strength
to control the animal. Dogs over four months of age must wear a valid license
on a collar.
B.   Animals participating in pet shows or classes approved by the town shall
be exempt from the restraint requirement, provided that the animal is
accompanied by and under the control of its owner or handler.
C.   Dog owners or handlers must clean up all litter created by the animal and
place it in trash cans. Owners of seeing eye dogs are exempted.
D.   Certified police dogs, police dogs in training, certified human assistance
animals or those in training, and their handler or trainers when directing
those dogs or other animals are exempt from the provisions of subsection A of
this section.
E.   Owners and dogs within a town-maintained dog park, as defined by
Chapter 6-1 of this code, must comply with
Chapter 6-4 of this code.
Ordinance 2015.006 adopted the current version of section
13-1-2. For prior history, see Ordinance 97.20
Ordinance 2023.039 added paragraph E
13-1-2 Spirituous liquor prohibited; permits; exception; definitions
A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or have in his possession
any spirituous liquor in a town park, including any parkway, trail,
recreational area, playground, mountain park, open space area or mountain
preserve area or any parking lot or driveway associated with the foregoing,
except as provided in paragraph B of this section.
B.   The parks and recreation director is empowered to issue permits
authorizing the consumption and possession of beer and wine in a park and to
adopt rules and procedures for the issuance of such permits.
C.   A person who has obtained a permit pursuant to paragraph B of this section
shall display the permit upon request. The permit holder and all persons
covered by the permit shall abide by the terms and conditions of use set forth
in the permit. The permit may be revoked for failure to comply with the terms
and conditions.
D.   This section shall not apply to premises or events for which a liquor
license has been issued pursuant to title 4, Arizona revised statutes.
E.   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   1.   “Beer” means any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation,
infusion or decoction of barley malt, hops, or other ingredients not drinkable,
or any combination of them.
   2.   “Spirituous liquor” means alcohol, brandy, whiskey, rum, tequila,
mescal, gin, wine, porter, ale, beer, any malt liquor or malt beverage,
absinthe, a compound or mixture of any of them or of any of them with any
vegetable or other substance, alcohol bitters, bitters containing alcohol, any
liquid mixture or preparation, whether patented or otherwise, which produces
intoxication, fruits preserved in ardent spirits, and beverages containing more
than one-half of one per cent of alcohol by volume.
   3.   “Wine” means the product obtained by the fermentation of grapes or
other agricultural products containing natural or added sugar or any such
alcoholic beverage fortified with grape brandy and containing not more than
twenty-four per cent of alcohol by volume.
13-1-3 Use and occupancy rules and regulations
A.   It is unlawful in any town park to:
   1.   Operate motorbikes, motorcycles or other motor vehicles on trails, or
cross country or on primitive unsurfaced roadways that have been posted, signed
or barriered to prohibit vehicle use or on lawns or landscaping.
   2.   Operate a motor vehicle except on roads and parking areas designated
for those purposes; to operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater than that
posted or to fail to obey traffic signs. In all cases, motor vehicles shall be
operated in compliance with the Arizona motor vehicle code as provided under
title 28, A.R.S., while within the boundaries of any town parks or recreation
area.
   3.   Destroy, damage, deface or remove any town regulatory sign, property or
facility owned or administered by the town.
   4.   Use town park or recreation areas for commercial purposes, public
meetings or assemblies, erection of signs, fences, barriers or structures, to
distribute advertising materials or to sell any goods or services without first
obtaining a written permit from the town.
   5.   Litter, deposit or abandon in or on any town park, parkway or
recreational facility any garbage, sewage, refuse, trash, waste or other
obnoxious materials except in receptacles or containers provided for those
purposes. These receptacles are not to be used for residential trash disposal.
   6.   Enter upon or use for any purpose the land, water or facilities within
the boundaries of town parks and recreation areas when a fee, rental, admission
or other consideration has been established for that use, unless the person
entering or using the land, water or facility has paid the fee, rental,
admission or other consideration to the town.
   7.   Enter, use or occupy public parks or recreation areas under the
supervision and control of the town for any purpose when the parks or areas are
posted against that entrance, use or occupancy.
   8.   Shoot with bow and arrow except in designated archery ranges or for
specific purposes, locations and seasons as licensed and permitted by Arizona
game and fish regulations.
   9.   Bring saddle, pack or draft animals into a town park site unless it has
been developed to accommodate them and is posted accordingly.
   10.   Allow grazing or forage consuming domestic livestock to graze or to
roam at-large within the fenced or posted boundaries of town parks.
   11.   Build fires, except in designated places, or in fireplaces, stoves or
grills either provided or approved by the town.
Ordinance 2017.006 added the last sentence to subparagraph 12
   12.   Operate any aircraft of any nature or parachute or hang glide on town
park property except in areas designated for that use or in an emergency or by
permit issued by the town. For purposes of this subparagraph, aircraft does not
include model aircraft as defined and regulated in section
13-1-4.
   13.   Collect, remove, destroy, mutilate, damage or deface any natural
resource including but not limited to all live and dead vegetation and all
parts of it, wildlife, soil, rocks and water, except as otherwise provided for
by law or without obtaining prior written approval from the town. Except as
otherwise planned for and provided for by the town, all environmental settings
shall be kept in their natural state.
   14.   Bicycle, skateboard, roller skate or roller blade on tennis or
basketball courts, or on any other surface which is marked to prohibit these
activities.
   15.   Possess glass containers, except that the parks and recreation
director is empowered to issue an exemption authorizing the possession of glass
containers and to adopt rules and procedures for the issuance of such
exemptions. The person issued the exemption and all persons covered by the
exemption shall abide by any terms and conditions regarding the exemption. The
exemption may be revoked for failure to comply with the terms and conditions.
   16.   Discharge a firearm.
      a.   This subparagraph 16 does not apply to a person who discharges a
firearm under the following circumstances:
         i.   As allowed pursuant to A.R.S. title 13, chapter 4;
         ii.   On a properly supervised range as defined in A.R.S. § 13-3107;
         iii.   In an area approved as a hunting area by the Arizona game and
fish department; provided, however, that any such area may be closed when
deemed unsafe by the director of the Arizona game and fish department;
         iv.   To control nuisance wildlife by permit from the Arizona game and
fish department or the United States fish and wildlife service;
         v.   By special permit of the chief of police;
         vi.   As required by an animal control officer in performing duties
specified in A.R.S. § 9-499.04 and title 11, chapter 7, article 6 and title 6
of this code; or
         vii.   In self-defense or defense of another person against an animal
attack if a reasonable person would believe that deadly physical force against
the animal is immediately necessary and reasonable under the circumstances to
protect oneself or the other person.
      b.   For the purposes of this subparagraph 16, “firearm” means any loaded
or unloaded handgun, pistol, revolver, rifle, shotgun or other weapon that will
expel, is designed to expel or may readily be converted to expel a projectile
by the action of an explosive, but does not include a firearm that is in
permanently inoperable condition.
   17.   Smoke within 25 feet of any athletic field, athletic facility or
children’s play area. For purposes of this subparagraph 17, to “smoke” means to
inhale, exhale, burn, carry or possess any lighted tobacco product, including
cigars, cigarettes, pipe tobacco and any other lighted tobacco product.
B.   Hours of park established. The parks and recreation areas, unless
otherwise posted, shall be open from 7:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m.
Ordinance 2007.15 modified paragraph 8
Ordinance 97.20 added paragraphs 14 and 15
Ordinance 2015.006 added everything after the first clause of paragraph 15
Paragraph 16 was originally added as paragraph 17 by Ordinance 2007.15.
Ordinance 2010.09 renumbered it to paragraph 16, amended subparagraph a.iii to
remove reference to the chief of police to conform to Laws 2010 Chapter 19, and
amended subparagraph b to insert a definition of “firearm.” A former paragraph
16 prohibiting possession of a firearm was added by Ordinance 2007.15 and
repealed by Ordinance 2010.09 to conform to Laws 2010 Chapter 19.
Paragraph 17 was added as paragraph 18 by Ordinance 2009.15 and renumbered by
Ordinance 2010.09
Ordinance 97.20 added paragraph B
13-1-4 Model aircraft operation; definition; prohibitions; exceptions
A.   For purposes of this section, “model aircraft” has the same meaning as
prescribed in section 336 of the FAA modernization and reform act of 2012, as
amended, and includes aircraft commonly known as drones.
B.   It is unlawful to:
   1.   Operate a model aircraft to takeoff or land in a town park or preserve
without a permit issued by the parks and recreation department.
   2.   Operate a model aircraft to takeoff or land in a town park or preserve
where the parks and recreation director has prohibited such operations. The
parks and recreation director shall ensure that a list of prohibited locations
shall be on file with the town clerk.
   3.   Operate a model aircraft to takeoff or land in any town park or
preserve located within five miles of the Marana regional airport unless the
person operating the model aircraft is in compliance with all applicable
requirements of section
15-2-18 of this code.
C.   This section does not apply to model aircraft that are operated by town
police personnel or other law enforcement officers, fire department personnel,
and other town employees in the course of their official duties, and in
compliance with all federal laws and regulations.
Section 13-1-4 was added by Ordinance 2017.006.
Ordinance 2018.013 amended subparagraph B.3.
13-1-5 Violations; classification
A.   Except as provided in paragraph B of this section, any violation of this
chapter is a class 1 misdemeanor.
B.   Any violation of section
13-1-3A.16 is a class 2 misdemeanor.
This section was renumbered as 13-1-5 by Ordinance 2017.006. Ordinance 2015.006
revised the title of and rewrote this section. Ordinance 2007.15 added
paragraph B
13-1-6 Town employees
In addition to any authority created by state law, town employees designated by
the town manager shall also have authority to order violators of the above
rules and regulations to leave the parks and recreation areas.
This section was renumbered as 13-1-6 by Ordinance 2017.006.
CHAPTER 13-2.
FINGERPRINTING AND CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECKS OF PARKS AND RECREATION
PERSONNEL AND VOLUNTEERS
Ordinance 2010.10 added Chapter 13-2
13-2-1 Authority to receive criminal history record information
Pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750, the town is hereby authorized to receive criminal
history record information for the purpose of evaluating the fitness of current
and prospective parks and recreation department employees, contract employees
and volunteers who work directly with children under the age of 18 or
vulnerable adults.
13-2-2 Definition
For purposes of this chapter, “vulnerable adult” means an individual who is 18
years of age or older and who is unable to protect himself from abuse, neglect
or exploitation by others because of a mental or physical impairment.
Ordinance 2014.029 modified section
13-2-3 by amending paragraphs A and B and adding paragraph D
13-2-3 Fingerprinting of current and prospective parks and recreation personnel
and volunteers; criminal history record information
A.   Each town of Marana parks and recreation department employee, contract
employee or volunteer who works directly with children under the age of 18 or
vulnerable adults and who has not furnished a full set of fingerprints to the
town within 12 months of the effective date of this chapter, may be required,
as a condition of continued employment, within 60 days of the effective date of
this chapter and annually thereafter, to furnish a full set of fingerprints on
a standard fingerprint card to the town. Any current employee, contract
employee or volunteer who has furnished a full set of fingerprints to the town
within 12 months of the effective date of this chapter, shall not be required
to furnish another set of fingerprints until 12 months has passed since the
furnishing of the fingerprints.
B.   Each prospective town of Marana parks and recreation department employee,
contract employee or volunteer who will work directly with children under the
age of 18 or vulnerable adults may be required, as a condition of hire and
annually thereafter, to furnish a full set of fingerprints on a standard
fingerprint card to the town.
C.   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750 and Public Law 92-544, the town shall submit
all fingerprints obtained pursuant to this chapter to the Arizona department of
public safety for the purpose of obtaining state and federal criminal history
record information. The Arizona department of public safety is authorized to
exchange this fingerprint data with the federal bureau of investigation.
D.   For purposes of this section, a current or prospective parks and
recreation employee, contract employee or volunteer may furnish a full set of
fingerprints by resubmitting a previously-submitted full set of fingerprints if
Arizona department of public safety protocols allow for resubmission of the
fingerprints.
Ordinance 2014.029 added section
13-2-4 
13-2-4 Alternative background investigations
A.   The town may choose to conduct background investigations to obtain
criminal history record information regarding current and prospective
employees, contract employees and volunteers covered under this chapter by
using alternative methods instead of fingerprinting. Any alternative methods
the town employs shall be at least as thorough as the national recreation and
park association’s recommended guidelines for credentialing volunteers.
B.   If the town employs alternative background investigation methods pursuant
to this section, the town shall conduct background investigation screenings on
all employees, contract employees and volunteers covered under this chapter on
at least an annual basis.
13-2-5 Use of criminal history record information
Criminal history record information obtained by the town pursuant to this
chapter shall be used only for the purpose of evaluating the fitness of current
and prospective employees, contract employees and volunteers who work directly
with children under the age of 18 or vulnerable adults. The town shall comply
with all relevant state and federal rules and regulations regarding the
dissemination of criminal history record information.
Ordinance 2014.029 renumbered section
13-2-5 
TITLE 14
UTILITIES
Ordinance 2011.24 adopted title 14. For prior history, see Ordinance 96.06,
96.35, 98.19, 2005.17, 2005.22, 2007.31, 2009.03, 2009.11, and 2009.13
CHAPTER 14-1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 14-2.   RESPONSIBILITIES
CHAPTER 14-3.   UTILITY SERVICE
CHAPTER 14-4.   CONSTRUCTION AND FINANCING OF UTILITY FACILITIES
CHAPTER 14-5.   PROVISION OF UTILITY SERVICE
CHAPTER 14-6.   RATES AND CHARGES
CHAPTER 14-7.   EMERGENCY WATER CONSERVATION RESPONSE
CHAPTER 14-8.   BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
CHAPTER 14-9.   VIOLATIONS
CHAPTER 14-10.   INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER ORDINANCE
CHAPTER 14-11.   NON-POTABLE WATER SERVICE WITHIN CORTARO-MARANA IRRIGATION
DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
CHAPTER 14-1.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
14-1-1 Intent and purpose
A.   The intent and purpose of this title is to promote the health, safety,
order and general welfare of the present and future utility customers of the
town, and specifically to:
   1.   Provide safe and reliable service to utility customers of the town;
   2.   Provide for the financial integrity of the town utilities;
   3.   Manage the water resources of the town to protect the utility customers
of the town and to facilitate the economic development of the town;
   4.   Develop water resources for the benefit of current and future residents
and utility customers of the town;
   5.   Provide for the expansion and improvement of the town’s water and
wastewater utilities; and
   6.   Provide adequate water and wastewater system capacity in a fiscally
responsible manner.
14-1-2 Definitions
A.   In this title, unless the context otherwise requires:
   1.   “Applicant” means a person requesting the town to provide utility
service.
   2.   “Application” means a request to the town for utility service.
   3.   “Commodity charge” means the unit cost of billed usage as set forth in
the adopted utility rates and charges.
   4.   “Contributions in aid of construction” means funds provided to the town
by the applicant under the terms of a utilities extension agreement or service
connection agreement.
   5.   “Customer” means the person or entity in whose name service is
rendered, as evidenced by the name on the application, the contract for
service, or utility bills, regardless of the identity of the actual user of the
utility service. Customer includes the customer’s agent or contractor.
   6.   “Meter” means the instrument for measuring and indicating or recording
the volume of water that has passed through it.
   7.   “Non-potable water” means water not suitable for human consumption.
   8.   “Point of delivery” means the point where facilities owned, leased or
under license by a customer connect to the town water utility’s pipes at the
outlet side of the meter.
   9.   “Potable water” means water suitable for human consumption.
   10.   “Premises” means all of the real property and apparatus employed by a
single enterprise on an integral parcel of land undivided by public streets,
alleys or other rights-of-way or easements.
   11.   “Service line” means a water line that transports water from a common
source (normally a distribution main) of supply to the customer’s point of
delivery.
   12.   “Wastewater facilities” means infrastructure used for the collection
or treatment of wastewater.
   13.   “Water facilities” means infrastructure used for the extraction,
storage, or delivery of potable water or non-potable water but not for the
delivery of wastewater or stormwater.
CHAPTER 14-2.
RESPONSIBILITIES
14-1-2 Responsibilities of the council
A.   Adoption of comprehensive master plans. The council may adopt
comprehensive utility system master plans. Upon adoption of the plans, the
council shall assure that no extension, improvement or addition to a town
utility shall be constructed or authorized unless and until the extension,
improvement or addition conforms to the corresponding comprehensive utility
system master plan.
B.   Utility construction standards. The council may adopt and amend
engineering design and construction standards for improvements to, extensions
of, additions to, and modifications of the town’s utilities.
C.   Utilities to be operated as enterprise funds. A separate fund is
established for the town’s water utility and for the town’s wastewater utility.
All funds paid to the town pursuant to provisions of this title for, but not
limited to, service charges, fees, construction of facilities, fines and
penalties shall be deposited into the corresponding utility fund, and all
expenditures made by the town in relation to the town’s ownership, operation,
maintenance, repair, expansion, acquisition, management, salaries, professional
fees, debt service, bond payments and other costs and charges shall be paid
from the corresponding utility fund. The town council may make loans from the
general fund to the town utility funds from time to time to supplement revenues
generated by the town utilities to assure the timely payment of all
obligations, provided that the loans are timely repaid from the corresponding
utility fund to the general fund. The town utilities shall be self-supporting
and funded solely from revenues generated from utility operations. All fees and
charges levied by the town in relation to its utilities shall be, to the degree
practical, based on the cost of providing the service for which a fee or charge
is levied.
14-2-2 Water director
The town water director shall be responsible for the day to day management of
the town utilities including, but not limited to:
A.   Provision of safe and reliable service to town utility customers.
B.   Compliance with federal, state, and local ordinances and regulations.
C.   Preparation of utility system master plans.
D.   Sufficiency of the town’s water supply.
E.   Adequacy of the town’s wastewater utility capacity.
F.   Inspection and repair of the utility systems.
G.   Review of all engineering plans and contracts.
H.   Collection of all funds due the town’s utilities.
I.   Development of utilities elements of the town’s capital improvement plan
J.   Preparation and administration of annual budgets.
K.   Enforcement of this title.
Ordinance 2015.015 modified the title and introductory paragraph of section
14-2-2 by changing “utilities director” to “water director”
CHAPTER 14-3.
UTILITY SERVICE
14-3-1 Application for service
Ordinance 2015.015 modified section
14-3-1 by changing “utilities department” to “water department”
Water and/or wastewater utility service may only be provided pursuant to
application to the town. Before providing service, the town shall collect all
installation and other charges required by this title and all customer
information deemed appropriate by the water department.
14-3-2 Deposits
A.   Requirement of deposit; amount. The town may require a deposit from an
applicant for service not to exceed twice the average monthly bill for the
account or in the case of a new account, twice the estimated monthly bill, or
in the case of an account which has shown delinquency for three consecutive
months as a condition of providing service. A separate deposit may be required
for each service connection.
B.   Deposit; refund. Deposits shall be refunded when the customer moves or
requests a discontinuance of service, as long as all bills are paid in full. No
interest shall be paid to customers on deposits. Deposit refunds shall be made
to the individual whose name is on the account at the time of the refund.
C.   Use of deposit for payment of bill. Upon discontinuation of service, the
deposit will be applied by the town toward settlement of the account.
D.   Homeowner customers. The deposit may be waived for the primary residence
of a new homeowner customer with favorable credit references from three utility
companies who serve or previously served the customer. Upon customer request,
the deposit will be credited to the account after one year of no delinquency.
14-3-3 Grounds for refusal of service
A.   The town may refuse to establish utility service if any of the following
conditions exist:
   1.   The applicant has an outstanding amount due for utility service with
the town, and the applicant does not bring current any outstanding bills.
   2.   A condition exists which in the town’s judgment is unsafe or hazardous
to the applicant, a resident of the town or the town’s personnel or facilities.
   3.   Refusal by the applicant to provide the town with a utility deposit.
   4.   Failure of customer to furnish such funds, service, equipment or
rights-of-way necessary to serve the customer and which has been specified by
the town as a condition for providing utility service.
   5.   Applicant provides false information for the purpose of obtaining
service.
14-3-4 Service lines, valves and water meters
A.   An applicant for utility service shall be responsible for the cost of
installing all customer piping up to the water meter and/or discharge point for
the sewer connection.
B.   Where water service is being provided for the first time or to a new
customer, the customer shall provide and maintain a private cutoff valve within
eighteen inches of the meter on the customer’s side of the meter.
C.   The town will install its water meter at the property line or in the
public right-of-way.
D.   Where the meter or service line location is changed at the request of the
customer or due to alterations on the customer’s premises, the customer shall
provide and have installed at his expense all piping necessary for relocating
the meter, and the town may charge for moving the meter or service line.
E.   The customer’s lines or piping must be installed in a way that prevents
cross-connection or backflow.
14-3-5 Easements and rights of-way
A.   Each town utility customer shall grant adequate easements or rights-of-way
satisfactory to the town to ensure that customer service connections are
accessible by the town.
B.   The customer’s failure to grant adequate easements or rights-of-way shall
be grounds for the town to refuse utility service.
C.   When the town discovers that a customer is performing work or has
constructed facilities adjacent to or within an easement or right-of-way and
the work, construction or facility poses a hazard or is in violation of
federal, state or town laws, ordinances, statutes, rules or regulations, or may
significantly interfere with the town’s access to its utility facilities or
equipment, the town shall notify the customer and shall take whatever actions
are necessary to eliminate the hazard, obstruction or violation at the
customer’s expense.
CHAPTER 14-4.
CONSTRUCTION AND FINANCING OF UTILITY FACILITIES
14-4-1 Agreements to construct new facilities
A.   Approval of agreements to construct new facilities. The council may permit
the construction of facilities to provide utility service in areas where no
water or sewer service is available, or where existing water or sewer
facilities are inadequate.
   1.   Agreements for construction of utility facilities shall provide that
all costs be at the sole expense of the applicant for service, except as
otherwise noted in the agreement.
   2.   Costs shall include, but not be limited to, engineering and design
fees, materials, labor, applicable taxes, permits and inspection fees.
   3.   Facilities shall include, but are not limited to, the following within
an applicant’s proposed development as well as outside the development if the
facilities are deemed necessary or desirable in the sole opinion of the town to
serve the new development:
      a.   Wells, pumps, storage tanks and reservoirs, mains, valves, meters
and other appurtenances to the water system
      b.   Customer connections, collection system, lift stations, treatment
facilities, and other appurtenances to the sewer system.
   4.   All agreements for the construction of utility facilities shall be
subject to the final approval of the council.
   5.   No agreement for the construction of utility facilities shall be
submitted for approval by the council unless the engineering plans have been
approved by the town engineer and the water director.
Ordinance 2015.015 modified paragraph 5 by changing “utilities director” to
“water director”
14-4-2 Construction other than by town
A.   Construction. The council, at its sole discretion and option, may permit
construction of water and/or sewer facilities by private contract. The
facilities shall be constructed at the sole expense and cost of the applicant
within public streets, alleys, rights-of-way and/easements.
B.   Approval of construction plans and inspections. Plans for construction of
facilities to be constructed other than by the town shall be provided by
applicant, certified by a registered professional engineer and approved by the
town engineer and the town water director. The construction of facilities
authorized and approved by the council shall be inspected by the town engineer
and shall comply in every respect with the engineering, construction, material
and installation standards of the town.
C.   Construction agreement. With each application for a permit for the
construction of facilities authorized by this section, the applicant shall
execute and deliver to the town water director the agreement for construction
of utility facilities by private contract. If the agreement conforms to the
provisions of this title, the town water director may submit the agreement for
approval to the council.
Ordinance 2015.015 modified paragraphs B and C by changing three instances of
“utilities director” to “water director”
14-4-3 Capacity requirements
A.   Water, wastewater, or drainage system capacity requirements. The town
water director may require an applicant to install “on-site” or “off-site”
water and/ or wastewater facilities of a size greater than is required to
provide service to applicant’s development, and the town engineer may require
an applicant to install “on-site” or “off-site” drainage facilities of a size
greater than is required to protect or serve applicant’s development. This
requirement to install oversized facilities is referred to as oversizing.
B.   Refunds. Refunds of the cost of oversizing shall be solely by agreement
approved by the council. If infrastructure is installed pursuant to this
section so as to provide service to a property not participating in the
construction cost (a “non-participating property”), the town may enter into an
agreement for partial refund of the cost of the infrastructure, subject to the
following:
   1.   In no case will the agreed refunded amount exceed the total funds to be
collected as oversizing charges pursuant to this section.
   2.   Refunds shall continue for a term set forth in the agreement, and any
balances remaining unpaid upon termination shall be canceled, and the town
shall be fully discharged from any further obligation under the agreement.
   3.   No interest shall accrue on any costs advanced by an applicant which
are agreed to be refunded by the town.
C.   Oversizing recovery charge. The council may, at its sole option, designate
the facility as a “protected facility” and establish an “oversizing recovery
charge” to be charged proportionately to each subsequent use of the protected
facility by non-participating property owners made to or benefiting from the
oversizing.
Ordinance 2015.015 modified paragraph A by changing “utilities director” to
“water director”
Ordinance 2018.022 modified paragraph C by adding the phrase about designating
a protected facility
Ordinance 2020.020 modified paragraphs A and C to make the protected facility
designation and associated charge available for drainage facilities
14-4-4 Refund of cost of facilities funded and installed by the town
If a water, wastewater, or drainage facility is installed and funded by the
town to provide water or wastewater service or drainage to a property not
participating in the construction cost, the water director or town engineer may
request that the council designate the facility as a “protected facility” and
establish a “protected facility charge” to be charged proportionately to each
subsequent use of the protected facility by non-participating property owners
made to or benefiting from the protected facility.
Ordinance 2018.022 added section
14-4-4. The town attorney added “is” to the first sentence on January 15, 2019,
as a scrivener’s error correction, by authority of section
1-4-5
Ordinance 2020.020 modified section
14-4-4 to include drainage facilities, and added “or town engineer”
14-4-5 Notice of protected facility and associated charge
A.   Not less than 30 days before the designation of a protected facility and
the adoption of an oversizing recovery charge or protected facility charge, the
water director (for water or wastewater facilities) or town engineer (for
drainage facilities) shall notify owners of potentially affected property.
B.   Potentially affected property consists of lands the water director or town
engineer reasonably believes are likely someday to be served or drained by the
protected facility, taking into consideration topography, proximity, and (for
water or wastewater facilities) normal water and sewer facility service and
extension factors or (for drainage facilities) anticipated drainage flow
attributes.
C.   Notice shall be given by electronic mail whose receipt is acknowledged by
the recipient or by first class mail to the owner of the property as listed on
the property tax roll.
D.   All of the following shall be included with the notice:
   1.   A description of the protected facility.
   2.   The amount per equivalent demand unit, acre, unit of flow, or other
similar measurement of the oversizing recovery charge or protected facility
charge.
   3.   An explanation of how the charge was calculated.
   4.   The date and time of the council meeting where the protected facility
designation and charge are expected to be considered for adoption.
E.   Failure to give or receive notice as provided in this section shall not
affect the validity of the protected facility designation or the charge.
Ordinance 2018.022 added section
14-4-5
Ordinance 2020.020 modified paragraphs A and B to include drainage facilities
and the town engineer, and modified paragraph D.2 to expand the types of
measurement
CHAPTER 14-5.
PROVISION OF UTILITY SERVICE
14-5-1 Customer responsibility
A.   Each town utility customer shall be responsible for the following:
   1.   Maintaining all facilities on the customer’s side of the point of
connection in a safe and efficient manner and in accordance with all applicable
federal, state, and local rules and regulations. The point of connection is the
meter for water service and is where the house sewer connects to the sewer
collection system for sewer service.
   2.   Safeguarding all town utility property installed in or on the
customer’s premises for the purpose of providing utility service to that
customer.
   3.   Exercising all reasonable care to prevent loss or damage to town
utility property, excluding ordinary wear and tear. The customer shall be
responsible for loss of or damage to town utility property on the customer’s
premises arising from neglect, carelessness or misuse and shall reimburse the
town for the cost of necessary repairs or replacements.
   4.   Payment of any equipment damage resulting from unauthorized breaking of
seals, tampering or bypassing the town water meter.
   5.   Notifying the town of any town utility equipment failure.
   6.   Paying all utility rates, charges and fees when due.
B.   Special provisions relating to water service.
   1.   Water furnished by the town shall be used only on the customer’s
premises and shall not be transported outside of the Marana water service area
boundaries or the town limits except in accordance with the following:
      a.   A construction water customer may fill water storage equipment from
an authorized Marana water service connection and transport the water for
construction use at a premises different from the service connection premises,
provided that the construction premises is within the Marana water service area
boundaries or is within the town limits.
      b.   A standpipe water customer may transport water outside of the Marana
water service area boundaries and outside of the town limits, so long as such
transport is no greater than two miles beyond the town limits and is for
personal residential use on the customer’s premises; provided that standpipe
water customers already using the standpipe pursuant to an application for
standpipe water service dated before September 18, 2025 may continue to use the
standpipe in accordance with the customer’s preexisting, lawful use until the
customer’s existing standpipe water account is closed.
      c.   The water director may authorize the transportation of water within
or beyond the Marana water service area boundaries or the town limits during an
emergency for uses reasonably related to the emergency and only for the
duration of the emergency.
      d.   All transportation of water shall comply with title 45, chapter 2,
article 8 of the Arizona revised statutes relating to the transportation of
groundwater.
   2.   Water furnished by the town shall not be resold.
   3.   During critical water conditions, as determined by the council, the
customer shall use water only for those purposes specified by the council.
   4.   Disregard for these provisions shall be sufficient cause for refusal or
discontinuance of water utility service by the town.
   5.   For purposes of this paragraph B, the following definitions shall
apply:
      a.   “Construction use” means the use of water for construction purposes,
including, but not limited to, dust control, compaction and preparation of
building materials on construction sites.
      b.   “Construction water customer” means a customer receiving water from
the town for the purpose of construction use.
      c.   “Standpipe” means a bulk potable water filling station designed to
dispense potable water to customers.
      d.   “Standpipe water customer” means a customer receiving water from the
town by means of a standpipe.
      e.   “Emergency” means a disruption or threat to the normal supply or
safety of water anywhere within the Tucson active management area or the use of
water to help prevent or mitigate wildfires. In determining whether an
emergency exists, the water director may consider factors such as regional or
local drought conditions, livestock and wildlife impacts, water infrastructure
or equipment failures on public or private property, water quality concerns,
wildfire mitigation needs, and similar considerations the water director deems
reasonable and prudent under the circumstances.
C.   Special provisions relating to sewer service.
   1.   Sewer service provided by the town shall be only for the benefit of the
customer’s premises and shall not be extended to any other property.
   2.   Nothing shall be discharged into the sewer collection system which is
prohibited by law, may lead to a sanitary sewerage overflow, or adversely
affects the operation or maintenance of the collection system. This prohibition
includes but is not limited to oil, grease, and flammable material.
   3.   Disregard for this provision shall be sufficient cause for refusal or
discontinuance of sewer service by the town.
D.   Each customer shall provide the town and its employees and agents the
right of safe ingress and egress to the customer’s premises for any purpose
reasonably related to the town’s provision of utility service to the premises.
Ordinance 2025.017 amended paragraphs B.1 through B.3 as B.1 through B.4 to add
provisions on transporting water, and added definitions in paragraphs B.5
through B.5.e.
14-5-2 Payment of bills
Utility rates, charges or fees are due and payable to the town upon billing.
Any rates, charges or fees not paid in full by the next billing date are
subject to a late charge, in addition to the balance due, in an amount
established by a fee schedule adopted by the council and amended from time to
time.
14-5-3 Grounds for termination of service
A.   Utility service to a customer may be terminated by the town upon ten days
advance written notice for any of the following reasons:
   1.   Customer violation of any of the provisions of this title;
   2.   Failure of the customer to meet or maintain the utility department’s
credit and deposit requirements;
   3.   Failure of the customer to provide the town reasonable access to its
utility equipment and property;
   4.   Failure of a customer to pay a delinquent bill for utility service.
14-5-4 Nonpayment of delinquent bill; filing of lien; interest
A.   If any bill for a utility rate, charge or fee made to the customer
pursuant to this title is not paid by the next billing date, the customer shall
be given written notice specifying that the bill is delinquent and outlining
the procedure by which the customer may challenge the accuracy of the bill. If
a delinquent bill is not paid and no challenge has been made to the accuracy of
the bill after the notice of delinquency, the water supply will, without
further notice, be turned off, and not turned on until all sums due are paid in
full, together with a charge for reconnection after delinquency as provided in
chapter 14-6.
B.   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-511.02, the town may file a lien on the property
for unpaid fees that are at least 90 days delinquent. The town may enforce the
lien by any method permitted by law. Unpaid fees shall accrue interest at the
rate provided by A.R.S. § 44-1201.
14-5-5 Reconnection of service
In no case shall any individual or plumber turn on the water supply to any
building or any supply pipe where the supply has been turned off for the
nonpayment of the monthly water bill or for the violation of any provision of
this title. All water that has been turned off by the town water utility shall
only be turned on again by the employees or agents of the town water utility.
14-5-6 Challenge of accuracy of utility bill
A.   The procedure by which a customer may challenge the accuracy of a utility
bill and the determination of the validity of the challenge shall be as
follows:
   1.   The customer shall notify the town, in writing, of the challenge of the
accuracy of the bill and the reasons for it. If the customer has received a
notice of delinquency, the challenge shall be filed within ten days of the date
of the notice of delinquency.
   2.   The customer may request that the water meter be re-read or tested,
provided the customer pays the meter re-read charge or the meter test charge in
advance in the amount established by a fee established by the schedule adopted
by the council and amended from time to time. A request for meter re-read or
meter test, paid for by the customer, shall constitute a challenge to the
accuracy of the bill.
   3.   The town shall send the customer a corrected bill and refund the cost
of the meter re-read or meter test if the bill is found to be in error either
because the meter was misread or because a meter test shows that the meter
over-calculated the volume by more than 3%. Customer shall have 20 days to pay
the corrected bill.
   4.   The water director is authorized to negotiate a mediation process
mutually acceptable to the water director and the customer. The customer shall
deposit the full estimated cost of the mediation process with the water
department. The mediation shall make a final determination of the validity of
the customer’s challenge and whether the town should be required to pay all or
a portion of the cost of the mediation process.
   5.   The customer’s utility service shall not be terminated during the
mediation process.
Ordinance 2015.015 modified paragraph A 4 by changing “utilities director” to
“water director” and “utilities department” to “water department”
14-5-7 Deposit requirement after termination
If utility service is terminated due to nonpayment of a delinquent bill, the
town shall require payment in full of all amounts due and owing and payment of
a utility deposit as a condition of reestablishing service.
14-5-8 Termination without notice
A.   Utility service may be terminated by the town without advance written
notice under the following conditions:
   1.   Existence of an obvious hazard to the safety or health of the customer
or the general population;
   2.   Evidence of water meter tampering or fraud;
   3.   Evidence of unauthorized resale of water or utility services;
   4.   A customer’s failure to comply with the curtailment procedures imposed
by the council during water supply shortages.
14-5-9 Service obligations of town
A.   Level of service. The town shall make reasonable efforts to provide
quality, continuous service to its customers.
B.   Non-liability. The town shall not be responsible for any damage
attributable to any interruption or discontinuation of service resulting from
any of the following:
   1.   Any cause against which the town could not have reasonably foreseen or
made provision for, such as but not limited to any condition or event not
reasonably within the control of the town, including without limitation, acts
of public enemies, insurrection, civil disturbances, riots, epidemics,
landslides, lightning, earthquakes, subsidence, fires, storms, droughts, and
floods.
   2.   Intentional service interruptions to make repairs or perform routine
maintenance.
   3.   Curtailment procedures imposed by the council during water supply
shortages.
C.   Service interruptions. The town shall make reasonable efforts to
reestablish service within the shortest possible time when service
interruptions occur.
   1.   If there is a national emergency or local disaster resulting in
disruption of normal service, the town may, in the public interest, interrupt
service to provide necessary service to civil defense, fire protection or other
emergency service agencies on a temporary basis until normal service can be
restored.
   2.   When the town plans to interrupt service for more than four hours to
perform necessary repairs or maintenance, the town shall attempt to inform
affected customers at least 24 hours in advance of the scheduled day and the
estimated duration of the service interruption.
   3.   Notice to customers shall not be required if there is an emergency or
an outage due to unanticipated events or causes.
D.   Minimum water delivery pressure. The town shall maintain a minimum
standard water delivery pressure of 20 pounds per square inch at the customer’s
meter or point of delivery, except during water outages.
E.   Construction standards. The town shall construct all facilities in
accordance with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.
14-5-10 Meter reading; measurement of service
A.   Each customer’s water meter shall be read monthly on as close to the same
day as practical.
B.   All utility service provided by the water department shall be billed:
   1.   On the basis of metered water volume, or
   2.   Based on historic usage when a meter has malfunctioned or cannot be
read for reasons beyond the town’s control. Each bill based on estimated usage
will indicate that it is an estimated bill.
Ordinance 2015.015 modified paragraph B by changing “utilities department” to
“water department”
14-5-11 Billing and collection
A.   Minimum bill information. Each bill for utility service will contain the
following minimum information:
   1.   Bill date.
   2.   Date and meter reading at the start of the billing period.
   3.   Previous month’s meter reading.
   4.   Water volume used during the billing period.
   5.   Utility department’s email address and telephone number.
   6.   Customer’s name and address.
   7.   Service account number and service address.
   8.   Amount due and due date.
   9.   Past due amount.
   10.   Other applicable charges and taxes.
CHAPTER 14-6.
RATES AND CHARGES
14-6-1 Monthly charges
A.   Customers shall be charged for utility services monthly, at rates designed
to recover the cost to secure, develop and deliver utility services, and all
capital, operational and maintenance costs associated with or attributable to
providing utility services, plus applicable state and local taxes.
B.   Service fees shall be established by a fee schedule adopted by the council
and amended from time to time.
14-6-2 Installation charges
A.   There shall be an installation charge for all utility service connections,
established by a fee schedule adopted by the council and amended from time to
time.
B.   All applicable permit fees, right-of-way costs or unusual construction
costs shall be paid for by the applicant at the time of application.
C.   Installation charges assume availability of an existing water main
contiguous to the applicant’s property. If a main extension is required,
applicant shall pay all costs for the main extension, which costs shall be non-
refundable.
D.   In addition to the adopted installation fee, the applicant shall pay all
actual costs of installation incurred due to unusual site conditions, such as
pavement cutting, excessive length, rocky ground, or any other additional cost
inflating factors.
E.   Installation of meters larger than two inches typically require additional
labor and equipment not covered by the base fee. These extra actual costs shall
be charged to the customer.
F.   Meters larger than two inches may be installed by the customer’s
contractor if the work meets town standards and the contractor furnishes proof
of its contractor’s license and town business license. All final inspections
and approvals shall be made by Marana utility personnel.
14-6-3 Other service charges
The following service charges are established, the amounts of which are set
forth in a fee schedule adopted by the council and amended from time to time.
Ordinance 2015.015 modified paragraphs A and K by changing “utilities
department” to “water department”
A.   After-hours new service establishment fee. An after-hours new service
establishment fee shall be charged for the cost of establishing the new
customer service account after hours, on weekends or on holidays. The amount of
the fee shall be the actual labor and material costs incurred by the water
department to connect the new service.
B.   After-hours reconnect fee. An after-hours reconnect fee shall be charged
for the cost of reconnecting service after hours, on weekends or on holidays.
C.   Backflow permit fee. A backflow permit fee is charged to incorporate
information concerning a new backflow device into the utility department’s
database, to track annual device testing.
D.   Backflow permit replacement fee. A backflow permit replacement fee is
charged when a device fails and must be replaced rather than repaired.
E.   Customer-requested meter re-read fee. A customer requested meter re-read
fee shall be charged each time a customer requests that its meter be re-read.
This fee shall be refunded if the meter is found not to be reading accurately,
defined as an error of greater than 3%.
F.   Customer-requested meter test fee. A customer-requested meter test fee
shall be charged each time a customer requests that its meter be tested. This
fee shall be refunded to the customer if the meter is found not to be reading
accurately, defined as an error of greater than 3%.
G.   Delinquency. If there is a delinquent balance due, the delinquent balance
must be paid in full before service is reconnected.
H.   Hydrant meter relocation fee. The hydrant meter relocation fee is charged
each time a hydrant meter is relocated.
I.   Hydrant meter setup fee. The hydrant meter setup fee is the fee assessed
on all hydrant meter installations. This fee is in addition to the security
deposit.
J.   Late payment fee. A late payment fee shall be added to a customer’s water
bill if any water rates, charges or fees are not paid in full by the next
billing date.
K.   New service establishment fee. The new service establishment fee is for
the cost of establishing the new customer service account during normal working
hours, and requires 24 hours notice. No service connections will be made after
hours, weekends or holidays except in an emergency situation as determined by
the water department.
L.   Reconnect fee. The reconnect fee shall be for the cost of reestablishing
service after it has been terminated for any reason and requires 24 hours
notice.
M.   Returned check fee. A returned check fee shall be added to a customer’s
bill if the check for payment is returned unpaid due to insufficient funds,
closed account or stop payment. An additional fee calculated at 25% of the
total outstanding balance shall be added to any bill sent to outside
collections for payment.
N.   Standpipe card replacement fee. The standpipe card replacement fee is the
fee to replace a standpipe card.
O.   Standpipe setup fee. The standpipe setup fee is a new service fee for a
standpipe account.
P.   Vacation service fee. A vacation service fee shall be the fee charged for
one disconnect when the customer leaves on vacation and one reconnect when the
customer returns.
Q.   Water modeling fee. A water modeling fee is charged to cover the town’s
cost to update the water distribution and operation model to account for a
development’s potable water and fire flow demands.
14-6-4 Bill adjustment for excessive water leak; payment plan
A.   Purpose. This section is intended to provide financial relief for an
abnormally high residential water bill caused by an unpredictable and
accidental water leak.
B.   Criteria. The relief authorized by this section is available only if all
of the following elements are present:
   1.   The affected meter serves a residential customer for domestic use.
   2.   Relief authorized by this section has not been granted with respect to
the affected meter within the 36-month period preceding the date of the bill in
question.
   3.   The customer seeking relief is current on all Marana water payments
except the bill in question.
   4.   The application for relief is submitted by the customer who is
responsible for paying the bill in question.
   5.   The water director reasonably determines that:
      a.   The bill in question was caused by an accidental water leak; and
      b.   The water leak that caused the bill in question has been repaired;
and
      c.   Water use at the affected meter has returned to normal consumption.
   6.   The application for relief is submitted to the water director within 60
days of the date of the bill in question.
   7.   The bill in question shows water consumption no less than three times
the affected meter’s normal consumption.
C.   Definitions. The following definitions apply to this section:
   1.   The “affected meter” is the meter that delivers water to the leak
location.
   2.   The “bill in question” is the water bill for which relief is sought.
   3.   “Normal consumption” is the total water consumption measured by the
affected meter over the 12 months preceding the date of the bill in question
divided by 12. If for any reason the subject residence has been vacant at any
time in the 12 months preceding the date of the bill in question, “normal
consumption” shall be the higher of the following:
      a.   The total water consumption measured by the affected meter during
the months the subject residence was fully occupied and the applicant was the
customer on the water account in the prior year, divided by the number of
months so measured.
      b.   The default average for all Marana water customers.
   4.   The “subject residence” is the residential property served by the
affected water meter.
D.   Adjustment calculation. If an application meets all requirements of this
section, the water department shall adjust the bill in question as follows:
   1.   Normal tiered water rates shall apply to the quantity of water
constituting three times the affected meter’s normal consumption.
   2.   Any quantity of water exceeding three times the affected meter’s normal
consumption shall be charged based on the irrigation rate.
   3.   The ground water resource acquisition fee and superfund tax shall be
charged for the full volume of water reported in the bill in question.
E.   Payment and remedies.
   1.   A customer shall not be subject to late fees or in jeopardy of
disconnection for non-payment of the bill in question during the period that
the bill in question is under consideration for adjustment pursuant to this
section.
   2.   A customer shall pay the adjusted water bill within the timeframe set
forth in a payment plan authorized by the water director.
   3.   All normal water department remedies shall apply after the expiration
or termination of the payment plan, including without limitation delinquent
fees and disconnection for non-payment.
Ordinance 2025.019 amended paragraph E of section 14-6-4 to provide a payment
plan for excessive water leak bills
CHAPTER 14-7.
EMERGENCY WATER CONSERVATION RESPONSE
14-7-1 Declaration of policy
It is hereby declared that because of varying conditions related to water
resource supply and distribution system capabilities operated by the town, it
is necessary to establish and enforce methods and procedures to ensure that in
time of emergency shortage of the local water supply, (1) the water resources
available to the customers of the water system are put to the maximum
beneficial use, (2) the unreasonable use, or unreasonable method of use is
prevented, and (3) the conservation of water is accomplished in the interests
of the customers of the town water utility, customers of other water utilities
located within the town and for the public health, safety, and welfare of the
residents of the town.
14-7-2 Definitions
A.   In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
   1.   “Economic hardship” means a threat to an individual’s or business’
primary source of income.
   2.   “Notification to the public” means notification through local media,
including interviews, and issuance of news releases.
   3.   “Outdoor watering day” means a specific day, as described in a specific
outdoor watering plan, during which irrigation with sprinkler systems or
otherwise may take place.
14-7-3 Application
A.   This chapter applies to all municipal and industrial water utility
customers who own, occupy, or control water used on any premises as defined in
this chapter. This chapter shall not apply to any agricultural use of water
furnished by an irrigation district.
B.   No person shall make, cause, use, or permit the use of water received from
the town water utility or any other municipally owned or privately owned water
utility providing water service within the town for residential, commercial,
industrial, governmental or any other purpose in any manner contrary to any
provision in this chapter.
C.   Mandatory emergency conservation measures shall be implemented based upon
the declaration of an emergency pursuant to section
14-7-4.
14-7-4 Declaration of water emergency authorized
The council, or in the absence of a quorum, the mayor or the vice mayor, upon
the recommendation of the town manager, is hereby authorized to declare a water
emergency and to implement mandatory conservation measures as set forth in this
chapter.
14-7-5 Implementation; termination
A.   The town manager shall develop guidelines which set forth general criteria
to assist the council, or in the absence of a quorum the mayor or the vice
mayor, in determining when to declare a water emergency. Upon declaration of a
water emergency, the town manager shall report in writing to the council
providing the reasons for and expected duration of the emergency and describing
implementation of emergency water conservation measures.
B.   A water emergency may be declared for a specific water utility system,
such as, but not limited to, the town water utility system, the city of Tucson
water utility system located within the town, or any other public or private
water utility system located within the town, which is unable to provide
adequate quantities, qualities or pressure of water delivery in compliance with
Arizona department of environmental quality standards or regulations, or fire
flow requirements, and which constitutes a danger to the public health, safety
and welfare of the residents of that water utility system.
C.   The declaration of a water emergency shall be specific to the water
utility system which is unable to provide adequate quantities, qualities or
pressure of water delivery in compliance with Arizona department of
environmental quality standards or regulations, or fire flow requirements, and
to the water customers of that water utility system.
D.   The owner or operator of a water utility system located within the town
boundaries may request, in writing, that the town declare a water emergency
pursuant to this chapter for its water utility system, setting forth the
reasons and justification for it.
E.   The water emergency shall be declared terminated when the condition or
conditions giving rise to the water emergency end. The declaration terminating
the emergency shall be adopted by the agency with jurisdiction over the
emergency, or if none, upon majority vote of the council, or in the absence of
a quorum, the mayor or the vice mayor. Upon termination, the mandatory
conservation measures shall no longer be in effect.
14-7-6 Mandatory emergency water conservation measures
A.   Upon declaration of a water emergency and notification to the public, the
mandatory restrictions upon nonessential users set forth in the adopted drought
preparedness plan and/or the following restrictions shall be enforced as to the
customers of the water utility system for which the water emergency was
declared.
   1.   All outdoor irrigation is prohibited, except for irrigation water
provided by an irrigation district for agricultural use. If the town manager
deems it appropriate, a schedule designating certain outdoor watering days may
be implemented in place of the irrigation ban.
   2.   Washing of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios,
or other paved areas with water, except to alleviate immediate health or safety
hazards, is prohibited.
   3.   The outdoor use of any water-based play apparatus is prohibited.
   4.   The operation of outdoor misting systems used to cool public areas is
prohibited.
   5.   The filling of swimming pools, fountains, spas, or other related
exterior water features is prohibited.
   6.   The washing of automobiles, trucks trailers and other types of mobile
equipment is prohibited, except at facilities equipped with wash water
recirculation systems, and for vehicles requiring frequent washing to protect
public health, safety and welfare.
14-7-7 Variance
The town manager, or the town manager’s designee, is authorized to review
hardship cases and special cases within which strict application of this
chapter would result in serious hardship to a customer. A variance may be
granted only for the reasons involving health, safety, or economic hardship.
Application for a variance from requirements of this chapter must be made on a
form provided by the town manager.
14-7-8 Violation
A.   If there is any violation of this chapter, the water utility for which the
emergency was declared shall:
   1.   Place a written notice of violation on the property where the violation
occurred; and
   2.   Mail a duplicate notice to:
      a.   The person who is regularly billed for the service where the
violation occurred; and
      b.   Any person responsible for the violation, if known to the town or
the water utility.
B.   The notice of violation shall:
   1.   Order that the violation be corrected, ceased, or abated within a
specified time the town or water utility determines is reasonable under the
circumstances, and
   2.   Contain a description of the fees and penalties associated with the
violation.
C.   The town or the water utility may disconnect the service where the
violation occurred for failure to comply with the order set forth in the notice
of violation.
D.   Nothing in this section shall conflict with the rules and regulation and
approved tariffs of the Arizona corporation commission as they may apply to
public service corporations furnishing water service within the town.
14-7-9 Enforcement
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by employees of the water
utility that serves the property where the violation occurred.
CHAPTER 14-8.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
14-8-1 Purposes
A.   To protect the public potable water supply from the possibility of
contamination or pollution.
B.   To promote the elimination and control of actual or potential customer
cross-connections.
C.   To provide for a continuing program of cross-connection control.
14-8-2 Backflow prevention required
A.   An approved backflow prevention method or device shall be utilized or
installed at every water system service connection and usage point when
required by applicable state and federal regulations.
B.   The town shall determine the backflow prevention method based on the
degree of hazard.
14-8-3 Definitions
A.   Contamination: An impairment of the quality of the water which creates an
actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of
disease by sewage, industrial fluids, waste, etc.
B.   Cross-connection: Any unprotected actual or potential connection or
structural arrangement between a public or a consumer’s potable water system
and any other source or system through which it is possible to introduce into
any part of the potable system any used water, industrial fluid, gas, or
substance other than the intended potable water with which the system is
supplied. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel
or change-over devices and other temporary or permanent devices through which
or because of which backflow can occur are considered to be cross-connections.
   1.   Direct cross-connection: A cross-connection which is subject to both
backsiphonage and backpressure.
   2.   Indirect cross-connection: A cross-connection which is subject to
backsiphonage only.
C.   Degree of hazard: Either a pollutional (non-health) or contamination
(health) hazard, derived from the evaluation of conditions within a system.
D.   Hazard: An actual or potential threat which could damage public water
utility infrastructure or negatively affect potable water quality.
   1.   Plumbing hazard: An internal or plumbing type cross-connection in a
consumer’s potable water system that may be either a pollutional or a
contamination type hazard. Plumbing type cross-connections can be located in
many types of structures including homes, apartment houses, hotels and
commercial or industrial establishments. Such a connection, if permitted to
exist, must be properly protected by an appropriate type of backflow prevention
assembly.
   2.   System hazard: An actual or potential threat of severe danger to the
physical properties of the public or the consumer’s potable water system or of
a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the
quality of the potable water in the system.
E.   Pollution: An impairment of the quality of the water to a degree which
does not create a hazard to the public health but which does adversely and
unreasonably affect the esthetic qualities of such waters for domestic use.
14-8-4 Backflow prevention methods or devices
A.   A backflow prevention method or device is any assembly or other means that
prevents backflow. The following are recognized backflow prevention methods the
town may require under section
14-8-2 or
14-8-5.
   1.   Air gap: A physical separation between the free flowing discharge end
of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or non-pressure receiving
vessel. An approved air gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply
pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim of the vessel, and in no case
less than one inch.
   2.   Reduced pressure principle assembly (“RPA”): An assembly containing two
independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically
operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located
between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The
unit shall include properly located resilient seated test cocks and tightly
closing resilient seated shut off valves at each end of the assembly.
   3.   Double check valve assembly (“DCVA”): An assembly composed of two
independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing
resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted
with properly located resilient seated test cocks. This assembly shall only be
used to protect against a non-health hazard (i.e., pollutant).
   4.   Double check-detector assembly (“DCDA”): A specially designed assembly
composed of a line-size approved double check valve assembly with a bypass
containing a specific water meter and an approved double check valve assembly.
The meter shall register accurately for only very low rates of flow up to three
gallons per minute and shall show a registration for all rates of flow. This
assembly shall only be used to protect against a non-health hazard (i.e.,
pollutant). The DCDA is primarily used on fire sprinkler systems.
   5.   Pressure vacuum breaker assembly (“PVB”): An assembly containing an
independently operating internally loaded check valve and an independently
operating loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check
valve. The assembly shall be equipped with properly located resilient seated
test cocks and tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each
end of the assembly. This assembly is designed to protect against a non-health
hazard (i.e., pollutant) or a health hazard (i.e., contaminant) under a
backsiphonage condition only.
B.   The water director may approve a backflow prevention method not listed
above if it has received the approval of the foundation for cross-connection
control and hydraulic research of the University of Southern California.
Ordinance 2015.015 modified paragraph B by changing “utilities director” to
“water director”
14-8-5 Backflow prevention methods required
A.   The activities listed below require an RPA at each service connection to
the potable water system:
   1.   Cooling tower, boiler, condenser, chiller, or other cooling system
   2.   Tank, water vessel, water receptacle, and any other water connection
without an approved air gap, including a mobile unit (except emergency vehicles
and private swimming pools)
   3.   Commercial ice maker
   4.   Water cooled equipment, booster, pump or autoclave
   5.   Commercial or industrial water treatment facility or water processing
equipment
   6.   Commercial or industrial washer for bottles, bedpans, garbage cans, and
the like
   7.   Commercial or industrial pesticide, herbicide, fertilizer, or chemical
applicator
   8.   Aspirator
   9.   Commercial dishwasher, food processing or preparation equipment,
carbonation equipment, or other food service process
   10.   Decorative fountain, baptismal, or similar feature where water is
exposed to the air (except at a private residence)
   11.   X ray equipment, plating equipment, or photographic processing
equipment
   12.   Auxiliary water supply or connection to a water supply system other
than the town potable water system
   13.   Recreational vehicle sewer dump station or any other location where
potable water may be exposed to bacteria, viruses, or gas
   14.   Any premises where chemicals, oils, solvents, pesticides,
disinfectants, cleaning agents, acids or other pollutants and/or contaminants
may come in direct contact with potable water (other than normal, infrequent
residential applications)
   15.   Any material or piping system not approved by the uniform plumbing
code or the environmental protection agency for potable water usage
   16.   Any premises with a cross-connection that requires internal backflow
protection under the uniform plumbing code
   17.   Any on-site water system served by more than one meter
   18.   Any structure having any portion of the water distribution system
located 34 feet or more above, or three or more stories above, where the
potable water supply enters the structure
   19.   Any fire system falling within American water works association
classes 3 through 6
B.   The activities listed below require the following specified method or
methods of backflow prevention at each service connection to the potable water
system.
   1.   Separately metered or unprotected irrigation systems and construction
water services: RPA or PVB.
   2.   Unless exempted by an applicable fire code, any fire system falling
within American water works association classes 1 and 2 or constructed of a
piping material not approved for potable water pursuant to the UPC as adopted
by the town: DCVA or DDCVA
   3.   Where backflow protection is required on premises containing both
industrial and domestic service, backflow protection shall be provided on the
fire service connection for the highest degree of hazard affecting either
system.
C.   When two or more of the activities listed above are conducted on the same
premises and serviced by the same service connection or multiple service
connections, the most restrictive backflow prevention method required for any
of the activities conducted on the premises shall be required at each service
connection. The order of most restrictive to least restrictive backflow
prevention methods shall be as follows:
   1.   Air gap
   2.   RPA
   3.   DCVA
   4.   PVB
14-8-6 Backflow assembly installation requirements
A.   Each backflow prevention assembly shall have a diameter at least equal to
the diameter of the service connection.
B.   Each backflow prevention assembly shall be in an accessible location
approved by the water department.
C.   Each RPA, PVB, and DCVA backflow prevention assembly shall be installed at
least 12 inches above ground.
D.   When a continuous water supply is required, two parallel backflow
prevention assemblies shall be installed at the service connection to avoid
interruption of water supply during backflow prevention assembly testing.
E.   No person shall alter, modify, bypass or remove a backflow prevention
assembly or method without the approval of the water department.
Ordinance 2015.015 modified paragraphs B and E by changing “utilities
department” to “water department”
14-8-7 Installation of backflow prevention assemblies for fire systems
In addition to the requirements of section
14-8-5, the following shall also apply:
A.   Fire protection systems consist of sprinklers, hose connections, and
hydrants. Sprinkler systems may be dry or wet, open or closed. Systems of
fixed-spray nozzles may be used indoors or outdoors for protection of
flammable-liquid and other hazardous processes. It is standard practice,
especially in towns, to equip automatic sprinkler systems with fire department
pumper connections.
B.   A meter (compound, detector check) should not normally be permitted as
part of a backflow prevention assembly. An exception may be made, however, if
the meter and backflow prevention assembly are specifically designed for that
purpose.
C.   For cross-connection control, fire protection systems shall be classified
on the basis of water source and arrangement of supplies as follows:
   1.   Class 1: direct connections from public water mains only; no pumps,
tanks, or reservoirs; no physical connection from other water supplies; no
antifreeze or other additives of any kind; all sprinkler drains discharging to
atmosphere, dry wells, or other safe outlets.
   2.   Class 2: same as class 1, except that booster pumps may be installed in
the connections from the street mains. Booster pumps do not affect the
potability of the system; it is necessary, however, to avoid drafting so much
water that pressure in the water main is reduced below 20 psi.
   3.   Class 3: direct connection from public water supply main plus one or
more of the following: elevated storage tanks; fire pumps taking suction from
above-ground covered reservoirs or tanks; and pressure tanks (all storage
facilities are filled or connected to public water only, the water in the tanks
to be maintained in a potable condition.) Otherwise, class 3 systems are the
same as class 1 systems. Class 3 systems will generally require minimum
protection (approved double check valves) to prevent stagnant waters from
backflowing into the public potable water system.
   4.   Class 4: directly supplied from public mains similar to classes 1 and
2, and with the auxiliary water supply on or available to the premises; or an
auxiliary supply may be located within 1,700 feet of the pumper connection.
Class 4 systems will normally require backflow protection at the service
connection. The type (air gap or RPA) will generally depend on the quality of
the auxiliary supply.
   5.   Class 5: directly supplied from public mains, and interconnected with
auxiliary supplies, such as pumps taking suction from reservoirs exposed to
contamination, or rivers and ponds; driven wells, mills or other industrial
water systems; or where antifreeze or other additives are used. Class 4 and 5
systems normally would need maximum protection (air gap or RPA) to protect the
public potable water system.
   6.   Class 6: combined industrial and fire protection systems supplied from
the public water mains only, with or without gravity storage or pump suction
tanks. Class 6 system protection would depend on the requirements of both
industry and fire protection, and could only be determined by a survey of the
premises.
D.   When a backflow prevention assembly is required for a water service
connection supplying water only to a fire system, the assembly shall be
installed on the service line in compliance with standard specifications
adopted by the town. (Installation of DCVAs or DDCVAs in a vertical position on
the riser may be allowed on fire systems with the approval of the water
director.)
Ordinance 2015.015 modified paragraph D by changing “utilities director” to
“water director”
14-8-8 Inspections
A customer’s water system shall be available at all times during business
operations for premises inspection by the water department. The inspection
shall be conducted to determine whether any cross-connection or other hazard
potentials exist and to determine compliance with this chapter.
Ordinance 2015.015 modified section
14-8-8 by changing “utilities department” to “water department”
14-8-9 Backflow permit required
A.   Installation: Unless included as a component of a building permit for new
construction, a separate backflow permit shall be obtained from the water
department for the installation of each backflow prevention assembly required
by this chapter, including a replacement assembly.
B.   Notification: The person performing work authorized by a backflow permit
shall notify the water department at least 24 hours before the work is ready to
be inspected.
C.   Permit suspension or revocation: The water department may suspend or
revoke a permit issued in error or in violation of any applicable ordinance or
regulation.
Ordinance 2015.015 modified section
14-8-9 by changing three instances of “utilities department” to “water
department”
14-8-10 Test; maintenance; records
A.   The customer shall test and service backflow prevention assemblies at
least once a year. If the testing reveals that the assembly is defective, the
customer shall repair, replace, or overhaul the assembly to satisfactory
operating condition.
B.   If the water department or a customer learns or discovers between tests
that an assembly is defective, the customer shall repair, replace, or overhaul
the assembly to satisfactory operating condition.
C.   The annual testing shall be performed by an individual certified by an
entity approved by the water department to test backflow prevention assemblies.
The water department will maintain and make available upon request a list of
individuals certified to test backflow prevention assemblies.
D.   The customer shall maintain records of all test results and all servicing,
repairs, overhauls or replacements of the backflow prevention assembly. The
records shall be maintained on forms approved by the water department. A copy
of the records shall be promptly submitted to the water department after
completion of the activity for which the record is made.
E.   Fire systems shall not be out of service for more than eight consecutive
hours due to testing, maintenance, or repairs. The local fire department shall
be notified immediately of any changes in fire service status.
Ordinance 2015.015 modified section
14-8-10 by changing four instances of “utilities department” to “water
department”
14-8-11 Modification of backflow prevention requirements
Ordinance 2015.015 modified section
14-8-11 by changing “utilities department” to “water department”
The water department may modify the requirements of section
14-8-5 if both of the following apply:
A.   Inspection of the customer’s system indicates that a backflow prevention
method less restrictive than required in section
14-8-5 will provide adequate protection of the public potable water supply from
the degree of hazard potential by the customer’s water system.
B.   The less restrictive method is supported by industry best management
practices.
Ordinance 2015.015 modified section
14-8-12 by changing two instances of “utilities department” to “water
department”
14-8-12 Discontinuance of water service
A.   If a required backflow prevention method is not installed or has been
bypassed or removed, or an unprotected cross-connection exists in the
customer’s water system, the water service to that service connection shall be
disconnected. The water department shall take reasonable steps to notify the
customer before, and if unable to do so, after the disconnection. The service
shall not be restored until the condition is corrected.
B.   If a required backflow prevention method is not properly tested or
maintained, the water department shall issue a notice to the customer requiring
the condition to be corrected within the time specified in the notice, which
shall be not less than seven days. If not corrected within the time specified
in the notice, water service shall be disconnected. The service shall not be
restored until the condition is corrected.
C.   Water service to a fire sprinkler system shall not be disconnected unless
a cross-connection exists and presents an imminent threat to the public potable
water supply.
14-8-13 Fees
The fee for any permit required pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be
established by a fee schedule adopted by the council and amended from time to
time.
14-8-14 Violation
It shall be a civil offense, punishable by a $250 fine, for any person to
violate any of the requirements of this chapter. Each day a violation continues
shall be considered a separate offense.
CHAPTER 14-9.
VIOLATIONS
14-9-1 Unauthorized installation and repair prohibited
Town utilities shall be connected only by authorized town employees or agents.
It is unlawful for any person to connect to or repair any town utility service.
14-9-2 Turning on water without authority prohibited
It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to connect to the town water utility
a water service that the water department has disconnected.
Ordinance 2015.015 modified section
14-9-2 by changing “utilities department” to “water department”
14-9-3 Escaping water prohibited; applicability; exceptions
Ordinance 2012.12 comprehensively revised section
14-9-3, formerly entitled “Escaping water flow or runoff prohibited”
A.   No person shall allow water to escape from his or her premises onto public
property, such as drainageways, alleys, roads or streets.
B.   No person shall allow water to escape from his or her premises onto any
other person’s property without that other person’s express written permission.
C.   This section shall apply to all property located within the Marana town
limits and to all property located outside the Marana town limits that is
served by the Marana water utility.
D.   This section shall not apply to the following:
   1.   Stormwater runoff.
   2.   Irrigation of landscaping on public property as expressly authorized by
the owner of the public property.
   3.   Reasonable, short-duration runoff from the washing of vehicles.
   4.   Broken or malfunctioning irrigation equipment, provided that the escape
of water is halted promptly and in any event not more than 24 hours after the
responsible party has actual notice of the break or malfunction.
   5.   Disposal of pool or spa backwash water in conformance with section 314
of the 2006 Marana pool and spa code.
   6.   Any escape of water which is, in the opinion of the investigating code
compliance officer, similar in nature or scope to the exceptions set forth in
this section.
Ordinance 2015.015 modified the introductory paragraph of section
14-9-4 by changing “utilities department” to “water department”
14-9-4 Interference, tampering with utility facilities
No person shall do any of the following without a permit from the water
department or in violation of permit conditions, except under the fire
department’s direction during a fire:
A.   Open or close any fire hydrant or valve connected to the town’s water
system.
B.   Lift or remove any valve, shutoff cover, or manhole lid.
C.   Tap into the town water distribution system or wastewater collection
system.
D.   Otherwise remove water from the town water utility system.
E.   Otherwise discharge into the town wastewater collection system.
14-9-5 Damaging or defacing facilities
It is unlawful for any person to destroy, deface, impair, damage, or force open
any gate, door, reservoir, building, storage tank, manhole, treatment facility,
pump station, fence, fixture, or other property appertaining to town utilities.
14-9-6 Penalties
A.   Any violation of this title shall be a civil offense punishable by a fine
of not more than $250. This shall be in addition to any other available remedy.
Each day a violation continues is a separate offense.
B.   Under appropriate circumstances a violation of this title may also be
prosecuted under the public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and
response act of 2002.
CHAPTER 14-10.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER ORDINANCE
Ordinance 2015.004 added
chapter 14-10
14-10-1 Purpose and authority
A.   The purpose of this chapter is to manage the acceptance of industrial
wastewater into the sewerage system to provide for the protection of the town’s
sanitary system and the process being utilized; groundwater resources;
effluent; surface water resources; wastewater sludge disposal methods; and
operating personnel through adequate regulation of industrial wastewater
discharges including septage.
B.   This regulation is accomplished in compliance with a publicly owned
treatment works (POTW) pretreatment program mandated by the Arizona pollutant
discharge elimination system (AZPDES) permits issued by the Arizona department
of environmental quality (ADEQ) to the town in conformity with Arizona
administrative code (AAC) R18-9-A905(A)(3)(d) adopting by reference 40 CFR §
122.44.j, A.R.S. § 49-391 and the federal clean water act (CWA), federal water
pollution control act amendments of 1972 (P.L. 92-500; 86 Stat. 816; 33 U.S.C.
§§ 1251 through 1376); and AAC R18-9-A905(7) and R18-9-A906.
C.   It applies to all users discharging non-domestic wastewater to the POTW.
14-10-2 Title of ordinance
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “industrial
wastewater ordinance.”
14-10-3 Administration
The water director shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of
the industrial wastewater ordinance.
Ordinance 2015.015 modified section
14-10-3 by changing “utilities director” to “water director”
14-10-4 Incorporation by reference
The industrial wastewater ordinance codified in this chapter incorporates the
federal categorical pretreatment standards codified at 40 CFR § 403.6 and § 405
through 471 adopted by reference in AAC R18-9-A905(A)(8)(b) and R18-9-A905(A)
(9).
14-10-5 Definitions
A.   The following terms as used in this chapter have the following meanings:
   1.   Act or “the act”: The federal water pollution control act, also known
as the clean water act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
   2.   Authorized representative: A person is a duly authorized representative
only if:
      a.   The authorization is made in writing by a person described in
subparagraph
14-10-13 A. 5 below; and
      b.   The authorization specifies either a named individual or any
individual occupying a named position having responsibility for the overall
operation of the regulated facility or activity such as plant manager, operator
of a well, a well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent
responsibility for environmental matters for the user.
   3.   Best management practices (BMPs): Include:
      a.   Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance
procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed
in sections
14-10-6 and
14-10-7 below; and
      b.   Treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to
control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or
drainage from raw materials storage; and
      c.   For food service facilities, those BMPs outlined in the grease
management program (section
14-10-30 below).
   4.   Biosolids: Sewage sludge, also known as biosolids, is the solid
material separated during treatment at a domestic or municipal wastewater
treatment plant and treated to stabilize and reduce pathogens.
   5.   Blowdown: The minimum discharge of recirculating water for the purpose
of discharging materials contained in the water, the further buildup of which
would cause concentration in amounts exceeding established limits.
   6.   Bypass: The intentional diversion of a wastestream from any portion of
a treatment facility.
   7.   Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard: Any
regulations defining pollutants or setting pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by the EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the clean
water act (33 U.S.C. § 1317), that apply to specific categories of users (40
CFR § 403.6 and 405 – 471) adopted by reference in AAC R18-9-A905(A)(8)(b) and
R18-9-A905(A)(9). This term includes prohibitive discharge standards under 40
CFR § 403.5, including local limits 40 CFR § 403.5(d).
   8.   Compliance schedule: Increments of progress, in the form of dates, for
the commencement or completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of pretreatment facilities.
   9.   Composite sample: A combination of no fewer than four individual
samples obtained at equal time intervals for 24 hours or for the duration of
the discharge, whichever is shorter. In the case of a batch discharge with flow
duration of less than 15 minutes, a single grab sample will meet the intent of
a composite sample.
   10.   Days: Any specific reference to a number of days shall be calendar
days unless otherwise specified.
   11.   Department or water department: The Marana water department.
   12.   Director or water director: The director of the Marana water
department or the director’s designated representative.
   13.   Discharge: The intentional or unintentional release of a substance
into the POTW.
   14.   Discharge limit: A limit on the amount or concentration of a regulated
waste that is discharged to the POTW.
   15.   Domestic user: Any person who discharges only domestic wastewater.
   16.   Domestic wastewater: Any water-borne wastes, derived from the ordinary
living processes in a residential dwelling unit, of such character as to permit
satisfactory disposal without special treatment by conventional POTW processes.
   17.   Existing source: A source that is not a new source or a new indirect
discharger.
   18.   Fats, oils and grease (FOG): A polar material either liquid or solid
composed primarily of fat, oil and grease from animal or vegetable origin. The
terms oils and grease, and oil and grease substances shall be included in this
definition.
   19.   Food service facility: Any facility that prepares or packages food or
beverages for sale or consumption on or off-site, with the exception of private
residences. The term includes, but is not limited to: restaurants, bakeries,
grocery stores, cafeterias, food courts, food manufacturers, food packagers,
bars, lounges, hotels, movie theaters, sororities, fraternities, social clubs,
private clubs, and schools.
   20.   Grab sample (discrete): An individual sample collected over a period
of time not to exceed 15 minutes.
   21.   Gravity grease interceptor (GGI): A device that is installed in a
sanitary drainage system to intercept nonpetroleum fats, oils, and grease from
a wastewater discharge and is identified by volume, a minimum 30-minute
retention time, baffles, a minimum of two compartments, a minimum total volume
of 300 gallons, and gravity separation.
   22.   Hazardous substance: Any substance meeting the definition of
“hazardous substance” found in the comprehensive environmental response,
compensation, and liability act (CERCLA) § 101(14) (42 U.S.C. § 9601(14))
including but not limited to, those substances listed at 40 CFR § 300.5.
   23.   Hazardous waste: As defined in 40 CFR § 261.3.
   24.   Hydromechanical grease interceptor (HGI): A device installed in a
sanitary drainage system to intercept nonpetroleum fats, oils, and grease from
a wastewater discharge and is identified by flow rate, separation and retention
efficiency. The design incorporates air entrainment, hydromechanical
separation, interior baffling, and/or barriers in combination or separately,
and one of the following: external flow control with air intake (vent) directly
connected; external flow control without air intake (vent) directly connected;
without external flow control directly connected; and without external flow
control indirectly connected.
   25.   Indirect discharge: The introduction of pollutants into the POTW by
any non-domestic source.
   26.   Industrial user: A source of indirect discharge, the introduction of
pollutants into the POTW by any non-domestic source.
   27.   Industrial wastewater: Wastewater generated in a commercial or
industrial process.
   28.   Industrial wastewater discharge permit: An individual control
mechanism, authorization letter, or contract issued by the director, which
allows a discharge into the POTW of industrial wastewater.
   29.   Interference: A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, both:
      a.   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
      b.   Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s
AZPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance
with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued
hereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): § 405 of the clean
water act, the solid waste disposal act, clean air act, toxic substances
control act, and the marine protection, research and sanctuaries act.
   30.   Liquid waste hauler: Any person carrying on or engaging in the
vehicular transport of wastewater or wastes as part of, or incidental to, any
business for the purpose of discharging such waste into the POTW.
   31.   New source:
      a.   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there
is (or may be) a Discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c)
of the act that will be applicable to such source if such standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
         i.   The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed
at a site at which no other source is located; or
         ii.   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         iii.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these sources are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing facility, and the extent to which the new
facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing
source, should be considered.
      b.   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
criteria of subparagraph
14-10-5 A. 31. a. ii or iii above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to
existing process or production equipment.
      c.   Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has
commenced if the owner or operator has done either of the following:
         i.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite
construction program
            a)   any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            b)   significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which
is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or
         ii.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment intended to be used within a reasonable time.
Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without
substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design
studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph.
   32.   Oil and sand interceptor: A tank designed to intercept and collect
sand, grit, petroleum, oil, and grease, and prevent their entry into the
sanitary sewer system.
   33.   Operator: A person who operates a business and therefore controls the
operation and indirect discharge.
   34.   Owner: The property or business owner.
   35.   Pass through: A discharge that exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations that, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of
any requirement of the POTW’s AZPDES permit, including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation.
   36.   Person: An individual, firm, company, association, partnership,
corporation, joint stock company, trust, estate, municipality, state or federal
agency, or an agent or employee of any of the foregoing.
   37.   Petroleum, oil and grease (POG): A nonpolar material either liquid or
solid and is composed primarily of petroleum or mineral origin.
   38.   Pollutant: Something that causes pollution, including but not limited
to: dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock,
sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste, pesticides,
and certain characteristics of wastewater (pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity,
color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor) discharged into the POTW.
   39.   Pollution: The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological or radiological integrity of water.
   40.   Pretreatment: The reduction of the amount of industrial wastewater,
the elimination of industrial wastewater, or the alteration of the nature of
industrial wastewater properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such waste into a POTW. The reduction or
alteration may be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes,
process changes or by other means, except by dilution as a substitute for
Pretreatment.
   41.   Pretreatment standards: Prohibited discharge standards, categorical
pretreatment standards, and local limits.
   42.   Publicly owned treatment works (POTW): All of the wastewater
collection, treatment, and disposal systems that are owned, operated or
contracted in part or in whole by the town of Marana, Arizona.
   43.   Representative sample: A sample portion of material or wastestream
that is as nearly identical in content and consistency as possible to that in
the material or industrial Wastewater being sampled.
   44.   Satellite collection system: Any upstream collection system under the
ownership and operational control of a separate jurisdictional government
agency or native American nation.
   45.   Septage: An anaerobic wastewater originating from a residential,
commercial, or industrial facility that is not a hazardous waste and is
compatible with the biological Wastewater treatment plant process.
   46.   Septage discharge permit: An individual control mechanism,
authorization letter, or contract issued by the director, which allows a
discharge into the POTW of septage.
   47.   Significant industrial user:
      a.   Except as provided for in subparagraphs b and c of this definition,
an industrial user that:
         i.   Is subject to categorical pretreatment standards;
         ii.   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of
process wastewaters (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler
blowdown wastewater);
         iii.   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW; or,
         iv.   Has a potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or
for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40
CFR § 403.8(f)(6).
      b.   The director may determine that an industrial user subject to
categorical pretreatment standards under § 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I,
subchapter N is a non-significant categorical industrial user rather than a
significant industrial user on a finding that the industrial user never
discharges more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater
(excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater unless
specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the following
conditions are met:
         i.   The industrial user, prior to the director’s finding, has
consistently complied with all applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements;
         ii.   The industrial user annually submits the certification statement
required in 40 CFR § 403.12(q) together with any additional information
necessary to support the certification statement; and,
         iii.   The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated
wastewater.
      c.   Upon finding that a user meeting the criteria in subparagraph a ii
of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the
director may at any time, on the director’s own initiative or in response to a
petition received from an industrial user, and in accordance with the
procedures in 40 CFR § 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be
considered a significant industrial user.
   48.   Significant noncompliance: An industrial user is in significant
noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria:
      a.   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant
parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined
in 40 CFR § 403.3(l).
      b.   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of all of the measurements for the same pollutant parameter
during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits as defined
in 40 CFR § 403.3(l) multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS,
and FOG, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH).
      c.   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by 40 CFR § 403.3(l) (daily maximum, longer-term average, instantaneous
limit, or narrative standard) that the director determines has caused, alone or
in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through (including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public).
      d.   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to human health, welfare or the environment or has resulted in the director’s
exercise of emergency authority under section
14-10-21 below to halt or prevent such a discharge.
      e.   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance.
      f.   Failure to provide, within 45 days after due date, required reports
such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-
monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules.
      g.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
      h.   Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a
violation of best management practices, which the director determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
   49.   Slug load: Any industrial wastewater discharged at a volume or
concentration that will cause interference or upset of the POTW; any sample,
the concentration of which exceeds five times the allowable discharge
limitation; or any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but
not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge.
   50.   Solid waste: any garbage, or refuse, sludge from a wastewater
treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control
facility and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semi-solid, or
contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and
agricultural operations, and from community activities, but does not include
solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage, or solid or dissolved
materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point
sources subject to permit under 33 U.S.C. § 1342, or source, special nuclear,
or by-product material as defined by the atomic energy act of 1954, as amended
(68 Stat. 923).
   51.   Source: Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which
there is or may be a discharge of pollutants.
   52.   Spill protection facilities: A physical barrier that provides
protection from accidental discharge or spill into the POTW of prohibited,
hazardous, or other industrial Wastewaters that are regulated through this
ordinance.
   53.   Toxic pollutant: Any pollutant listed as toxic under § 307(a)(1) of
the CWA of 1977, 40 CFR 122.2 definitions, or, in the case of “sludge use or
disposal practice,” any pollutant identified in regulations implementing § 405
(b) of the CWA.
   54.   Upset: An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with discharge limits because of factors beyond the
reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the
extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, and lack of preventive maintenance or careless
or improper operation.
   55.   User: An industrial user or a significant industrial user.
   56.   Wastewater: The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic waste
from dwellings, commercial establishment, industrial facilities, and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and storm water
that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or
permitted to enter the POTW.
   57.   Wastewater sludge: The solids or semisolids, residues, and precipitate
separated from or created in wastewater.
Ordinance 2015.015 modified paragraphs 11 and 12 to reflect the change from
“utilities department” to “water department”
14-10-6 Regulated wastes—general prohibitions
A.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any sewer that
directly or indirectly connects to the POTW, any waste which:
   1.   may have an adverse or harmful effect on the POTW, POTW personnel or
equipment, POTW effluent quality, or public or private property;
   2.   may otherwise endanger the public, the environment or create a public
nuisance;
   3.   exceeds limitations as set by this chapter or the director;
   4.   causes the POTW to violate state or federal regulations or permits.
B.   These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not
they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national,
state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
C.   Prohibited wastes described in this chapter shall not be discharged to the
POTW. Included within the prohibition is the discharge of any wastes that
adversely affect water reclamation, water reuse, sludge disposal, or air
quality.
D.   The director, in determining the acceptability of specific wastes, shall
consider the nature of the waste and the adequacy and nature of the collection,
treatment and disposal system available to accept the waste.
E.   The director may establish discharge limitations for industrial users that
have a reasonable potential to degrade wastewater quality to the level that it
prevents or inhibits the POTW’s efforts to reclaim the water, for sludge
disposal, or causes any unusual operation or maintenance problems in the POTW.
F.   The director may grant a variance from this chapter for any technological
standard as outlined in section
14-10-9 below.
G.   The current water quality standards for phenolics, codified at AAC R18-11-
101 through 304, are suspended, pending further administrative rule making
proceedings by the director of ADEQ, and shall not be enforced against any user
pursuant to A.R.S. title 49. Until such further administrative rule making
proceedings are concluded, no person shall discharge phenol compounds to
surface waters at levels or in combinations sufficient to be toxic to humans or
local animal, plant or aquatic life. Phenol (total) is an indicator and, in and
of itself, is not a violation unless there is a corresponding violation of the
appendix A numeric water quality standards for surface waters table 1, water
quality criteria by designated use, found in AAC R18-11.
14-10-7 Prohibited wastes
Except as provided elsewhere in this Article, prohibited wastes shall include:
A.   Industrial wastewater that may be adverse or harmful to the POTW, the
sewerage conveyance system, POTW personnel, POTW equipment, or POTW effluent
quality, including, but not limited to:
   1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, solvent, fuel oil or any other liquids,
solids, or gases which may create or tend to create a fire or explosion hazard
in the POTW, or may be injurious in any other way to the POTW, including, but
not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flash point of less than 140° F
using the test method specified in 40 CFR § 261.21;
   2.   Any solids or viscous substances of such size or in such quantities
that they may cause obstruction to flow in the sewer or be detrimental to POTW
operations. These objectionable substances include, but are not limited to,
asphalt, dead animals, ashes, sand, mud, straw, industrial process shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, grass clippings, tar, plastic resins, wood,
blood, manure, grease, bones, hair, fleshings, entrails, paper cups, paper
dishes, milk cartons or other similar paper products, either whole or ground;
   3.   Any amounts of petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or
products of mineral oil origin in amounts that would cause or tend to cause
interference or pass through;
   4.   Any biodegradable fats, oils, or greases, such as lard, tallow or
vegetable oil, in concentrations that may cause adverse effects on the POTW;
   5.   Any wastes containing a concentration in excess of the discharge
limitations specified in section
14-10-8 below or in any permit;
   6.   Any waste in such concentration or volume that is toxic to humans,
animals, and the local environment or to biological Wastewater treatment
processes or which causes interference, upset, or pass-through at the POTW;
   7.   Any waste having a pH lower than 5.0 or greater than 11 standard units;
or which causes incrustations, scale, or precipitates on sewer walls; or having
any corrosive or detrimental characteristics that may cause injury to the POTW
or service and maintenance personnel;
   8.   Any waste having a temperature of 140° F or higher at the discharge
point, or which causes the POTW influent to exceed 104° F;
   9.   Any waste containing substances that may precipitate, solidify, gel,
polymerize, or become viscous under conditions normally found in the sewerage
system, causing reduced capacity;
   10.   Any waste producing discoloration of treatment plant effluent, which
may violate water quality standards;
   11.   Any solid waste, other than that normally found in domestic
wastewater, that is not ground sufficiently to pass through a 3/8-inch mesh
screen;
   12.   Any waste containing detergents, surface active agents, or other
substances, which may cause excessive foaming in the sewerage system;
   13.   Any sludge from a water or wastewater treatment plant not owned or
operated by the town. The director may issue an industrial wastewater discharge
permit for a user to discharge this substance upon a finding that the discharge
will not adversely affect the operation of the POTW and that the pollutant
concentrations do not exceed those in the sludge produced by the POTW. No such
permit shall be issued that would violate any other federal, state or local
rule, regulation or standards;
   14.   Any hazardous wastes discharged to any portion of the POTW by truck,
rail or dedicated pipeline;
   15.   Any trucked or hauled pollutants except at discharge points designated
within the POTW by the director, or septage receiving facility;
   16.   Any slug load; or,
   17.   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released
in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either
alone or in combination with other pollutants, may cause interference with the
POTW.
B.   Industrial wastewater which may be dangerous to the public, the
environment, or which creates a public nuisance, including, but not limited to:
   1.   Radioactive materials;
   2.   Any waste containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in
such quantities that, alone or in combination with other waste substances, may
create a hazard for humans, animals, or the local environment; interfere
detrimentally with wastewater treatment processes; cause a public nuisance; or
cause any condition requiring emergency response in the POTW;
   3.   Any pollutants which can result in the formation or presence of toxic
gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW that may cause or tend to cause worker
health and safety problems;
   4.   Any strongly odorous waste or waste tending to create odors;
   5.   Any industrial wastewater in such concentration or volume that may
cause failure in effluent toxicity testing; or,
   6.   Any recognizable portions of the human anatomy.
C.   Industrial Wastewater that may cause dilution or POTW hydraulic loading
problems, including, but not limited to:
   1.   Any water added for the purpose of diluting wastes which would
otherwise exceed maximum concentration limits;
   2.   Any rainwater, stormwater runoff, groundwater, street drainage, roof
drainage, yard drainage, water from yard fountains, ponds, lawn sprays or
uncontaminated water;
   3.   Any deionized water, steam condensate or distilled water in amounts
which could cause problems with hydraulic loading;
   4.   Any blowdown or bleed water from heating, ventilating, air conditioning
or other evaporative systems exceeding one-third of the makeup water in a 24-
hour period; or,
   5.   Any single pass cooling or heating water.
14-10-8 Discharge limits
A.   The amount and nature of allowable discharges will be specified in the
permit, and the characteristics of any discharge shall not exceed those
specified in this chapter.
   1.   Discharge limits for regulated substances—composite sample:
 Substance Limit (mg/l)
   Substance         Limit (mg/l)
a. Arsenic – total 0.4
b. Barium – total  10.0
c. Boron – total   5.0
d. Cadmium – total 0.10
e. Chromium – total1.20
f. Copper – total  1.2
g. Lead – total    0.5
h. Manganese – tota83.0
i. Mercury – total 0.05
j. Nickel – total  3.98
k. Silver – total  5.0
l. Zinc – total    2.6
m. Cyanide – total 0.61
n. Selenium – total0.5
o. Oil and grease    2001
p. Sulfide – total 2.01
q. Chlorine – total10.01
1  Based on a grab sample
 
   2.   Discharge limits based upon fume toxicity (mg/l) (based on grab
samples):
 Compound Limit (mg/l)
   Compound                                   Limit (mg/l)
 a.Acrylonitrile                              1.24
b.  Benzene                                    0.13
c.  Bromomethane                               0.002
d.  Carbon disulfide                           0.06
e.  Carbon tetrachloride                       0.03
f.  Chlorobenzene                              2.35
g.  Chloroethane                               0.42
h.  Chloroform                                 0.42
i.  Methylchloride (chloromethane)             0.007
j.  1,2-Dichlorobenzene                        3.74
k.  1,4-Dichlorobenzene                        3.54
l.  1,1-Dichloroethane                         4.58
m.  1,2-trans-Dichloroethene                   0.28
n.  1,2-Dichloropropene                        3.65
o.  1,3-Dichloropropene                        0.09
p.  Ethylbenzene                               1.59
q.  1,2-Dichloroethane (ethylene dichloride)   1.05
r.  Heptachlor                                 0.003
s.  Hexachloro-1,3-butadiene                   0.0002
t.  Hexachloroethane                           0.96
u.  Methyl ethyl ketone (2-butanone) (MEK)     249.0
v.  Methylene chloride (dichloromethane)       4.15
w.  Tetrachloroethylene                        0.53
x.  Toluene                                    1.35
y.  1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene                     0.43
z.  1,1,1-Trichloroethane                      1.55
aa. Trichloroethylene                          0.71
bb. Vinyl chloride                             0.003
cc. 1,1-dichloroethylene (vinylidene chloride) 0.003
dd  Aroclor 1242                               0.01
ee. Aroclor 1254                               0.005
 
14-10-9 Variances
A.   The Director may allow variances in this Ordinance when strict adherence
would less adequately provide for the protection of the POTW. The variance
shall secure substantially the objectives of the portion of the Ordinance to
which the variance is granted. Variances may be allowed when:
   1.   A substitution for or change in a standard material results in the use
of a material which can be clearly demonstrated to be of equal or superior
quality;
   2.   A strict adherence to a design standard or standard details would be
impractical or impossible because of field conditions such as existing utility
facilities or incompatible existing sewerage facilities; or
   3.   An emergency situation prohibits strict adherence to a design standard
or standard detail.
14-10-10 Additional discharge limits
A.   Quantitative or other limitations intended for application to general
users and not for inclusion only on individual permits, shall be proposed to
the council by the director after a public hearing. The director shall provide
notification at least 45 days prior to the public hearing by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation in the town and by a written notice to any
person who has filed a request for notification with the director. The notice
shall contain a brief description of the nature of the proposal to be
considered, the time and place of the hearings, and the projected date that a
proposal shall be made to the council for approval of discharge limits.
B.   When the director determines that a user is discharging to the POTW any
waste not previously identified as prohibited in such amounts as may interfere,
pass through, or upset the operation of the POTW, the director shall: (1)
advise the user of the impact of the contribution on the POTW; (2) develop a
discharge limitation for such user to correct the interference with the POTW;
and (3) require the user to comply with the discharge limits.
14-10-11 Health care related wastes
A.   Regulated facilities. Hospitals, clinics, offices of medical doctors and
dentists, mortuaries, morgues and long-term health care facilities:
   1.   May Discharge through a waste grinder after director approval as a
condition of the industrial wastewater discharge permit. The installation will
have inlet size and design features suitable for its intended use and
constructed such that all particles pass through a maximum 3/8-inch mesh
opening;
   2.   Shall not Discharge to the sewer by any means:
      a.   Solid wastes generated in the rooms of patients who are isolated
because of a suspected or diagnosed communicable disease;
      b.   Recognizable portions of the human anatomy;
      c.   Equipment, instruments, utensils and other materials of a disposable
nature that may harbor or transmit pathogenic organisms and that are used in
the rooms of patients having a suspected or diagnosed communicable disease
which by the nature of the disease is required to be isolated by public health
agencies;
      d.   Wastes excluded by other provisions of this chapter.
B.   Limit of authority. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit
the authority of public health authorities to define wastes as being infectious
and, with the concurrence of the director, to require that they will not be
discharged to the POTW.
14-10-12 Septage disposal
A.   Approval to discharge
   1.   No hauler shall discharge septage to the POTW without first obtaining a
septage discharge permit.
   2.   Haulers of septage will discharge at the town POTW site designated in
their permit.
B.   Discharge requirements
   1.   The hauler shall use the POTW septage tracking form specified in the
permit to record each load that is delivered to the POTW.
   2.   Prior to discharge of septage, the hauler shall allow the director to
sample and analyze the contents to ensure compliance with discharge limits and
requirements. The hauler shall provide a suitable sampling tap or equivalent
appurtenance. The hauler may be required to suspend discharging septage until
the analysis is complete. The director shall refuse authorization to discharge
any septage that does not provide for the protection of the POTW, groundwater
resources, effluent and wastewater sludge disposal methods, and operating
personnel.
C.   Sanitation and safety standards. The hauler shall discharge wastes in way
that keeps the area clean and free from spills or other debris, and shall
promptly clean up all spills.
D.   General requirements and applicability.
   1.   The hauler is responsible for protecting the POTW by ensuring that the
hauled septage is not hazardous waste and is compatible with the biological
wastewater treatment process.
   2.   The hauler shall comply with all requirements, rules, and regulations
established by public health and environmental regulatory agencies.
E.   Septage discharge permit application.
   1.   A septage discharge permit is required to discharge hauled septage
waste into the POTW.
   2.   The permit application, or reapplication, shall contain at least the
following information:
      a.   A completed septage discharge permit application/questionnaire form
signed and dated by a person described in subparagraph
14-10-13 A. 5 below or by a duly authorized representative;
      b.   Type of waste sources serviced: Domestic/commercial, industrial,
septic tank, cesspool, chemical toilet, airline sewage cart, or grease traps;
      c.   Vehicle information including year, make, model, license plate and
tank capacity information for each vehicle in the fleet that will be carrying
septage to the septage receiving station.
   3.   The application fee for a septage wastewater discharge permit
application is in the amount set forth in the current comprehensive fee
schedule, and shall be paid to the town at the time of application.
   4.   The director may require the submittal of other information to assist
in the determination of permit requirements.
   5.   The director shall issue a written or electronic notice of
administrative completeness or deficiencies to a permit applicant within 15
business days. If the director determines that the application is not
administratively complete, the director shall include a comprehensive list of
the specific deficiencies. The administrative completeness review time frame
and the overall time frame are suspended from the date the notice is issued
until the date the director receives the missing information from the
applicant. The director may issue an additional written or electronic notice of
administrative completeness or deficiencies based on the applicant’s submission
of missing information. Once the application is administratively complete, the
substantive review time frame begins and the director shall respond to permit
applications within 30 business days of receipt of a completed permit
application. During the substantive review time frame, the director may make
one comprehensive written or electronic request for additional information. The
substantive review time frame and overall time frame are suspended from the
date the request is issued until the date that the town receives the additional
information from the applicant. The total overall timeframe for the permit
application process shall be 45 business days not counting time response time
by the applicant. By mutual written or electronic agreement, the director and
an applicant for a permit may extend the substantive review time frame and the
overall time frame. An extension of the substantive review time frame and the
overall time frame may not exceed 25% of the overall time frame.
F.   All users shall reply to the director and submit any permit application or
questionnaire forms and any other related lists, plans, analyses, flow
information or other materials, as requested by the director, within 30 days of
receipt of any such forms or requests unless given an extension by the
director.
G.   Permit decisions may be appealed to the director by responding in writing
to the director within 33 days of the issuance of the permit decision. The
appeal should include a detailed description of the portion of the permit and/
or permit decision the applicant is appealing and their justification for the
requested revision of the permit. The director shall respond to the applicant
in writing within 30 business days.
H.   After an appeal to the director, an appeal may be made to the council by
filing a request with the town clerk.
14-10-13 Industrial wastewater discharge permit application
A.   A permit is required to discharge industrial wastewater.
   1.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any industrial
wastewater directly or indirectly to the POTW without first obtaining an
industrial wastewater discharge permit. The director shall set requirements at
least as stringent as applicable state or federal rules, regulations or
pretreatment standards.
   2.   A permit shall be required for all food service facilities. Facilities
shall be responsible for ensuring that the discharges from their operations are
in compliance with the provisions set forth in this chapter. Any food service
facility found to be in violation with any part of this chapter may be required
to obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit and correct the
deficiencies.
   3.   The director shall require a separate permit for each connection to the
POTW.
   4.   The director may require a separate permit from each tenant as well as
the owner or manager of any multi-tenant property, including, but not limited
to: shopping centers, medical centers, and industrial or commercial parks.
   5.   All permit applications shall be signed as follows:
      a.   For a corporation: by a responsible corporate officer. For the
purpose of this section, a responsible corporate officer means:
         i.   A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
         ii.   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management
decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility, including
having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations; to initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure
long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; to
ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and to
whom authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated in accordance
with corporate procedures.
      b.   For a partnership or sole proprietorship: By a general partner or
the proprietor, respectively; or,
      c.   For a municipality, state, federal or other public agency: By either
a principal executive officer or ranking elected official. For purposes of this
section, a principal executive officer of a federal agency includes:
         i.   the chief executive officer of the agency, or,
         ii.   a senior executive officer having responsibility for the overall
operations of a principal geographic unit of the agency.
   6.   All reports required by permit and other information requested by the
director shall be signed by a person described in subparagraph
14-10-13 A. 5 above or by a duly authorized representative of that person. If
an authorization under this section is no longer accurate because a different
individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the
facility, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of subparagraph
14-10-13 A. 5 above must be submitted to the director prior to or together with
any reports to be signed by the individual.
   7.   Any person signing a document shall make the following certification:
      I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations.
B.   Application submittal: All users.
   1.   All users required to obtain a permit shall file with the director an
application in the form prescribed by the director and accompanied by the
permit application fee.
   2.   The permit application, or reapplication, shall contain at least the
following information:
      a.   A completed industrial wastewater discharge permit application/
questionnaire form signed and dated by a person described in subparagraph
14-10-13 A. 5 above or by a duly authorized representative;
      b.   Any drawing, plan, diagram, site plan, or plumbing plan of the
property requested by the director showing accurately all plumbing and sewerage
necessary to satisfy permitting requirements;
      c.   Wastewater discharge flow information and water consumption
information;
      d.   The north American industry classification system (NAICS) code and
standard industrial classification (SIC) code required by state law or 40 CFR
which best characterizes the industrial discharge activities undertaken on the
property;
      e.   Identification and listing of all hazardous materials or hazardous
substances that are, or are expected to be generated, consumed, used or stored
on the property including the quantities thereof, storage and spill prevention
facilities, and method of disposal for any such materials or wastes.
   3.   In addition to the information in subparagraph
14-10-13 B. 2 above, significant industrial users shall provide:
      a.   Chemical analysis of any industrial wastewater constituent that may
be discharged to the POTW for the determination of permit requirements;
      b.   Identification and listing of all environmental control permits held
by the applicant that are applicable to the property or to any operation,
process, or facility located on the property;
      c.   Any applicable U.S. EPA categorical determination made by the
applicant using 40 CFR § 405 to 471 as adopted in AAC R18-9-A905(A)(9). If the
applicant is regulated under the above provisions, the applicant shall identify
all applicable pretreatment standards (for existing or new sources as
appropriate) by section. If the applicant determines that it is not so
regulated it shall so state. At least 90 days prior to commencement of
discharge, new sources shall submit a report which contains the information in
a baseline monitoring report as required by 40 CFR § 403.12(b) as adopted in
AAC R18-9-A905(A)(8)(b). Within 90 days following commencement of the
introduction of wastewater into the POTW, new sources shall submit a 90-day
compliance report as required in 40 CFR § 403.12(d) as adopted in AAC R18-9-
A905(A)(8)(b).
   4.   The director may require the submittal of other information to assist
in the determination of permit requirements.
   5.   The director shall issue a written or electronic notice of
administrative completeness or deficiencies to a permit applicant within 15
business days.
      a.   If the director determines that the application is not
administratively complete, the director shall include a comprehensive list of
the specific deficiencies.
      b.   The administrative completeness review time frame and the overall
time frame are suspended from the date the notice is issued until the date the
director receives the missing information from the applicant.
      c.   The director may issue an additional written or electronic notice of
administrative completeness or deficiencies based on the applicant’s submission
of missing information.
      d.   Once the application is administratively complete, the substantive
review time frame begins and the director shall respond to permit applications
within 30 business days of receipt of a completed permit application.
      e.   During the substantive review time frame, the director may make one
comprehensive written or electronic request for additional information.
      f.   The substantive review time frame and overall time frame are
suspended from the date the request is issued until the date that the county
receives the additional information from the applicant.
      g.   The total overall timeframe for the permit application process shall
be 45 business days not counting time response time by the applicant.
      h.   By mutual written or electronic agreement, the director and an
applicant for a permit may extend the substantive review time frame and the
overall time frame. An extension of the substantive review time frame and the
overall time frame may not exceed 25% of the overall time frame.
   6.   All users shall reply to the director and submit any permit application
or questionnaire forms and any other related lists, plans, analyses, flow
information or other materials, as requested by the director, within 30 days of
receipt of any such forms or request unless the director grants an extension.
   7.   Permit decisions may be appealed to the director by responding in
writing to the director within 33 days of the issuance of the permit decision.
The appeal should include a detailed description of the portion of the permit
and/or permit decision the applicant is appealing and their justification for
the requested revision of the permit. The director shall respond to the
applicant in writing within 30 business days.
   8.   After an appeal to the director, an appeal may be made to the council
by filing a request with the town clerk.
14-10-14 Industrial wastewater discharge permit fees
Fees in amounts set forth in the comprehensive fee schedule shall be paid to
the town upon application for, or renewal or modification of, all wastewater
discharge permits.
14-10-15 General requirements
A.   State and federal requirements. All users shall comply with all applicable
federal rules, regulations or pretreatment standards, or any applicable more
stringent state or local rules, regulations or standards, whether or not
contained in a permit.
B.   Separation of wastes. All domestic wastewater from restrooms, showers,
drinking fountains, and similar sources shall be kept separate from all
industrial wastewaters until the industrial wastewaters have passed through any
required pretreatment facility or device and the industrial wastewater
monitoring facility. The director may waive this condition if the combined
wastewater formula at paragraph
14-10-15 E is utilized.
C.   Sample location. As a condition of the permit, all discharged industrial
wastewater shall pass through a designated sampling location where the director
has unrestricted physical access.
D.   Accidental discharge protection (spill protection and slug discharge
control). Each user shall provide and maintain, at the user’s expense,
protection from the accidental discharge or spill into the POTW of prohibited,
hazardous or other waste materials which are regulated through this chapter. No
user shall commence discharge to the POTW without accidental discharge
protection facilities or procedures. The user shall notify the POTW immediately
of any changes at its facility affecting potential for a slug discharge.
E.   Combined wastewater formula.
   1.   The combined wastewater formula will be used by users that mix
regulated wastewaters with other regulated or unregulated wastewaters prior to
pretreatment. The alternative concentration limits shall be derived using the
formula found in 40 CFR § 403.6(e):
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-44.png]
Where:
      CT = the alternative concentration limit for the combined wastestream.
      Ci = the Categorical Pretreatment Standard concentration limit for a
pollutant in the regulated stream i.
      Fi = the average daily flow (at least a 30-day average) of stream i to
the extent that it is regulated for such pollutant.
      FD = the average daily flow (at least a 30-day average) from: (a) boiler
blowdown streams, noncontact cooling streams, stormwater streams, and
demineralizer backwash streams; provided, however, that where such streams
contain a significant amount of a pollutant, and the combination of such
streams, prior to pretreatment, with an industrial user’s regulated process
wastestream(s) will result in a substantial reduction of that pollutant, the
control authority, upon application of the industrial user, may exercise its
discretion to determine whether such stream(s) should be classified as diluted
or unregulated. In its application to the control authority, the industrial
user must provide engineering, production, sampling and analysis and such other
information so that the control authority can make its determination; or (b)
sanitary wastestreams where such are not regulated by a categorical
pretreatment standard; or (c) from any process wastestreams which were or could
have been entirely exempted from categorical pretreatment Standards pursuant to
paragraph 8 of the NRDC v. Costle (568 F.2d 1369 (DC Cir. 1977)) consent decree
for one or more of the following reasons: (1) the pollutants of concern are not
detectable in the effluent from the industrial user; (2) the pollutants of
concern are present only in trace amounts and are neither causing or likely to
cause toxic effects; (3) the pollutants of concern are present in amount too
small to be effectively reduced by technologies known; or, (4) the wastestreams
contain only pollutants which are compatible with the POTW.
      FT = the average daily flow (at least a 30-day average) through the
combined treatment facility (includes Fi and FD and unregulated streams).
      N = the total number of regulated streams.
   2.   An alternative discharge limit may not be used if the alternative limit
is below the analytical detection limit for any of the regulated pollutants. As
a result, the combined wastewater formula cannot be used, and wastestreams must
be segregated.
F.   Duty to reapply. The user shall submit a new application with the
appropriate fee 90 days before the existing permit expires.
G.   Duty to comply.
   1.   The user must comply with all conditions of the permit. Any permit
noncompliance constitutes a violation of this chapter and is grounds for
enforcement action.
   2.   The user shall comply with effluent standards or prohibitions
established under § 307(a) of the clean water act for toxic pollutants within
the time provided in the regulations that establish these standards or
prohibitions.
H.   Need to halt or reduce activity not a defense. It shall not be a defense
for a user in an enforcement action that it would have been necessary to halt
or reduce the permitted activity in order to maintain compliance with the
conditions of the permit.
I.   Duty to mitigate. The user shall take all reasonable steps to minimize or
prevent any discharge in violation of the permit which has a reasonable
likelihood of adversely affecting human health or the environment.
J.   Proper operation and maintenance. The user shall at all times properly
operate and maintain all facilities and systems of treatment and control (and
related appurtenances) which are installed or used by the user to achieve
compliance with the conditions of a permit or this chapter. Proper operation
and maintenance also include adequate laboratory controls and appropriate
quality assurance procedures. This provision requires the operation of back-up
or auxiliary facilities or similar systems which are installed by a user only
when the operation is necessary to achieve compliance with the conditions of
the permit.
K.   Duty to provide information. The user shall furnish within 30 days, any
information the director may request to determine whether cause exists for
modifying, revoking and reissuing, or to determine compliance with the permit.
The user shall also furnish to the director upon request, copies of records
required to be kept by the permit.
L.   Inspection and entry.
   1.   Upon the town’s compliance with A.R.S. § 9-833, the user shall allow
the director to:
      a.   Enter upon the user’s premises, at reasonable times, where a
regulated facility or activity is located or conducted, or where records must
be kept under conditions of the permit.
      b.   Have access to and copy, at reasonable times, any records that must
be kept under conditions of the permit.
      c.   Inspect, at reasonable times, any facilities, equipment (including
monitoring and control equipment), practices, or operations regulated or
required under the permit.
      d.   Sample or monitor at reasonable times, for the purposes of assuring
permit compliance or as otherwise authorized by this chapter, any substances or
parameters at any location.
      e.   The user has the right to a split or duplicate of any samples taken
during the inspection if the split or duplicate of any samples, where
appropriate, would not prohibit an analysis from being conducted or render an
analysis inconclusive.
   2.   The director shall have the right to set up on the user’s property, or
require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/
or metering of the user’s operations.
   3.   The director may require the User to install monitoring equipment as
necessary.
      a.   The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own
expense.
      b.   All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be
calibrated based on manufacturer recommendation to ensure their accuracy.
   4.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the director access to the user’s
premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
   5.   Where a user has security measures in place which require proper
identification and clearance before entry onto its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with its security group so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, the director shall be permitted to enter without
delay for the purposes of performing inspections and monitoring.
M.   Monitoring and records.
   1.   Samples and measurements taken for the purpose of monitoring shall be
representative of the permitted activity.
   2.   The user shall retain records of all monitoring information, including
all calibration and maintenance records and all original strip chart recordings
for continuous monitoring instrumentation, documentation associated with best
management practices (BMPs), copies of all reports required by the permit, and
records of all data used to complete the application for the permit, for a
period of at least three years from the date of the sample, measurement, report
or application. This period may be extended by request of the director at any
time.
   3.   Records of monitoring information shall include all of the following:
      a.   The date, exact place, and time of sampling or measurements.
      b.   The individual(s) who performed the sampling or measurements.
      c.   The date(s) analyses were performed.
      d.   Laboratory(ies) which performed the analyses.
      e.   The analytical techniques or methods used.
      f.   Chain of custody forms.
      g.   Any comments, case narrative or summary of results produced by the
laboratory. These comments should identify and discuss QA/QC analyses performed
concurrently during sample analyses and should specify whether analyses met
project requirements and 40 CFR 136. The summary of results must include
information on initial and continuing calibration, surrogate analyses, blanks,
duplicates, laboratory control samples, matrix spike and matrix spike duplicate
results, sample receipt conditions, holding times and preservation.
      h.   The results of such analyses.
   4.   Collection, preservation and analysis of compliance samples must be
conducted according to test procedures approved by 40 CFR § 136 as adopted in
AAC R18-9-A905(A)(7), unless other test procedures have been specified in the
permit.
      a.   Except as indicated in subparagraphs b and c below and unless time-
proportional composite or grab sampling is approved by the director (sampling
must be representative of the discharge), the user must collect wastewater
samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling techniques.
      b.   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, sulfides, and
volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques.
Samples collected may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for
cyanide, and sulfides, the sample may be composited in the laboratory or in the
field; for volatile organic compounds and oil and grease, the samples may be
composited in the laboratory.
      c.   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day
compliance reports in 40 CFR § 403.12(b) and (d), a minimum of four grab
samples must be used for pH, cyanide, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile
organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not
exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the
director may authorize a lower minimum. For reports required by 40 CFR § 403.12
(e) and (h), the user is required to collect the number of grab samples
necessary to assure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements.
   5.   All compliance samples shall be analyzed by an environmental laboratory
licensed in conformance with Arizona revised statutes title 36, chapter 4.3,
article 1 (A.R.S. § 36-495 through -495.16).
N.   Compliance schedule. The director shall require the development of a
compliance schedule by users for the installation of technology required to
meet applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements. When a new
requirement is placed upon a user, a compliance schedule may be established to
allow the user to come into compliance.
O.   Signatory requirement. All applications, reports, or information submitted
to the director shall be signed and certified by a person meeting the
requirements of subparagraph
14-10-13 A. 5 above or by an authorized representative.
P.   Re-opener clause. A permit shall be modified to incorporate an applicable
standard or limitation promulgated or approved after the permit is issued if
that standard or limitation is more stringent than the limitation in the
permit, or controls a pollutant not limited in the permit.
Q.   Minor modification of permit. The director may modify a permit to make
corrections or allowances for changes in the permitted activity listed in this
paragraph. Any permit modification not processed as a minor modification under
this paragraph must be made for cause. Minor modifications may only:
   1.   Correct typographical errors;
   2.   Change an interim compliance date in a schedule of compliance, provided
the new date is not more than 120 days after the date specified in the existing
permit and does not interfere with attainment of the final compliance date
requirement;
   3.   Allow for a change in ownership or operational control of a facility
(after notice to the director) where the director determines that no other
change in the permit is necessary, provided that a written agreement containing
a specific date for transfer of permit responsibility, coverage, and liability
between the current and new user has been submitted to the director; or,
   4.   Implement the compliance schedule for a user which is a new source. No
such change shall affect a user’s obligation prior to discharge.
R.   Major modification or termination of permit. The director may modify or
terminate a permit for cause. The following are causes for modifying or
terminating a permit during its term, or for denying a permit renewal
application:
   1.   Significant noncompliance (as defined in paragraph
14-10-5 A. 48 above) by the user with any condition of the permit;
   2.   The user’s failure in the application or during the permit issuance
process to disclose fully all relevant facts, or the user’s misrepresentation
of any relevant facts at any time;
   3.   A determination that the permitted activity endangers human health or
the environment and can only be regulated to acceptable levels by modification
or revocation; or,
   4.   A change in any condition that requires either a temporary or a
permanent reduction or elimination of any discharge controlled by the permit.
S.   Availability of reports. Except for data determined to be confidential by
40 CFR § 2.201 subpart B, all reports prepared in accordance with the terms of
the permit shall be available for public inspection at the water department
after director approval. Permit applications, permits, and effluent data shall
not be considered confidential. Environmental audit reports prepared in
accordance with A.R.S. § 49-1401 et seq. shall be held as confidential and not
disclosed as provided for in A.R.S. § 49-1404.
T.   Removed substances. Regulated wastes or other pollutants removed in the
course of treatment or control of wastewaters shall be properly disposed of in
a manner such as to prevent any pollutant from such materials from entering the
POTW.
U.   Severability of permit conditions. The provisions of the permit are
severable, and if any provision of the permit, or the application of any
provision of the permit to any circumstance, is held invalid, the application
of such provision to other circumstances, and the remainder of the permit,
shall not be affected thereby.
V.   Civil and criminal liability. Except as provided in permit conditions on
by-pass and upset, nothing in the permit shall be construed to relieve the user
from civil or criminal penalties for noncompliance.
W.   Permit actions. The permit may be modified, suspended or revoked for
cause. The filing of a request by the user for a permit modification,
reissuance, or a notification of planned changes or anticipated noncompliance
does not stay any permit condition.
X.   Property rights. The permit does not convey any property rights of any
sort, or any exclusive privilege.
Y.   Comment period. The permit holder has 33 days from the date the permit is
mailed to the permit holder to comment in writing to the director.
Z.   Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not
to exceed five years.
Ordinance 2015.015 modified paragraph S by changing “utilities department” to
“water department”
14-10-16 Notification requirements
A.   Notification of accidental discharge, spill, slug loading, bypass, upset
or other noncompliance.
   1.   Notification of bypass, upset, accidental discharge, spill, or slug
load.
      a.   In the event of bypass, upset, accidental discharge, spill, or slug
load that may endanger health, the environment, or the POTW, the user shall
notify the water department by telephone immediately upon discovery of the
occurrence.
      b.   The user shall notify the water department by telephone within 24
hours after the user becomes aware of that any discharge exceeds any effluent
limitation in the permit, or exceeds a maximum discharge limitation for any of
the pollutants listed in this chapter.
      c.   The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste,
discharge concentration and volume, and corrective actions taken by the user.
      d.   Within five days following initial notification, the user shall
submit to the director a detailed written report containing such information
and describing the cause of the discharge and measures to be taken by the user
to prevent similar future occurrences. This notification shall not relieve the
user of any expense, loss, damage, fines, civil penalties or other liability
which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW or any other person or
property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil
penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other
applicable law.
      e.   The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the
results of the repeat analysis to the director within 30 days after becoming
aware of the exceedance.
   2.   Other noncompliance notification. The user shall report all instances
of noncompliance at the time monitoring reports are submitted. The reports
shall contain the information listed in subparagraphs 14-10-16 A. 1. c and d
above.
   3.   Other information. Immediately upon discovery, the user shall promptly
submit facts or information it failed to submit or incorrectly submitted in a
permit application or in any report to the director.
B.   Bypass.
   1.   Bypass not exceeding limitations: The user may allow any bypass to
occur which does not cause effluent limitations to be exceeded, but only if it
is also for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses
are not subject to the provisions of subparagraphs 14-10-16 B. 3 and 4 below.
   2.   Notice
      a.   Anticipated bypass: If the user knows in advance of the need for a
bypass, it shall submit prior notice, at least ten days before the date of the
bypass.
      b.   Unanticipated bypass: The user shall submit notice of an
unanticipated bypass as required in paragraph
14-10-16 A. 1 above.
   3.   Prohibition of bypass: Bypass is prohibited, and the director may take
enforcement action against a user for bypass, unless:
      a.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or
severe property damage. Severe property damage means substantial physical
damage to property, damage to treatment facilities which causes them to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can be
reasonably expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage
does not mean economic loss by delays in production;
      b.   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use
of auxiliary treatment facilities or retention of untreated wastes or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and,
      c.   The user submitted notices as required under subparagraph
14-10-16 B. 2 above.
   4.   Anticipated bypass. The director may approve an anticipated bypass,
after considering its adverse effects, if the director determines that it will
meet the three conditions listed in subparagraph
14-10-16 B. 3 above.
C.   Upset.
   1.   Effect of an upset: An upset constitutes an affirmative defense to an
action brought for noncompliance with such technology-based permit effluent
limitations if the requirements of subparagraph
14-10-16 C. 2 below are met.
   2.   Conditions necessary for a demonstration of upset: A user who wishes to
establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly
signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:
      a.   An upset occurred and that the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
      b.   The permitted facility was at the time being properly operated;
      c.   The user submitted notice of the upset as required in paragraph A. 1
of this section; and,
      d.   The user properly operated and maintained all facilities and systems
of treatment and control as required under paragraph
14-10-15 J above.
   3.   Burden of proof: In any enforcement proceeding, the user, seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset, has the burden of proof.
Ordinance 2015.015 modified subparagraphs a and b by changing “utilities
department” to “water department”
14-10-17 Reporting requirements
A.   Planned changes. The user shall give notice to the director as soon as
possible of any planned physical alterations or additions to the permitted
facility in one of the following circumstances:
   1.   The alteration or addition to a permitted facility may meet one of the
criteria for determining whether a facility is a new source.
   2.   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject
to categorical pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
director a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in
the discharge from the regulated process.
      a.   The report shall state whether the applicable categorical
pretreatment standards or requirements are being met and, if not, what
additional operations and maintenance or pretreatment is necessary.
      b.   This statement shall be reviewed by an authorized representative of
the user and certified.
   3.   Any anticipated facility expansions, production increases, or process
modifications which will result in new, different, or increased discharges of
pollutants must be reported by submission of a new permit application or, if
such changes will not violate the discharge limitations specified in the
permit, by notice to the water department.
      a.   Following such notice, the permit may be modified to specify and
limit any pollutants not previously limited or change existing limits or other
requirements.
      b.   Approval must be obtained prior to any new discharges.
      c.   The user shall allow 45 business days for review.
B.   Anticipated noncompliance. The user shall give advance notice to the
director of any planned changes in the permitted facility or activity which may
result in noncompliance with permit requirements.
C.   Transfers. Permits are not transferable to any person except after notice
to the director. The director may require modification or reissuance of the
permit to change the name of the user and incorporate such other requirements
as may be necessary under this chapter.
D.   Monitoring reports. Monitoring results shall be reported at the intervals
specified in the permit.
   1.   Monitoring results must be reported on a self-monitoring report form
(SMRF), or a form approved by the director to the extent that the information
reported may be entered on the form for the report period.
   2.   If the user monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the
permit, using test procedures approved under 40 CFR § 136 or as specified in
the permit, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the calculation
and reporting of the data submitted in the SMRF.
   3.   Calculations for all limitations which require averaging of
measurements shall utilize an arithmetic mean unless otherwise specified by the
director in the permit.
   4.   In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a
best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user must
submit documentation required by the director or the pretreatment standard
necessary to determine the compliance status of the user.
E.   Reduced periodic reporting. The director may reduce the requirement for
periodic compliance reports to a requirement to report no less frequently than
once a year, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by
the EPA or the state, where the industrial user’s total categorical wastewater
flow does not exceed 5,000 gallons per day.
   1.   Reduced reporting is not available to industrial users that have in the
last two years been in significant noncompliance, as defined in paragraph
14-10-5 A. 48 above.
   2.   Reduced reporting is not available to an industrial user with daily
flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary so significantly
that, in the opinion of the director, decreasing the reporting requirement for
this industrial user would result in data that are not representative of
conditions occurring during the reporting period.
F.   Compliance schedules. Reports of compliance or noncompliance with, or any
progress reports on, interim and final requirements contained in any compliance
schedule of the permit shall be submitted no later than 14 days following each
scheduled date.
Ordinance 2015.015 modified paragraph 3 by changing “utilities department” to
“water department”
14-10-18 Issuance of notification of violation
A.   Notification of violation. Whenever the director finds that a user is in
violation of this chapter, any part of a permit, or any order for corrective
action, the director shall serve or cause to be served upon such user, a
written notification of violation describing the nature of the alleged
violation. The notification of violation may include, but is not limited to:
   1.   An order for corrective action;
   2.   A schedule to attain compliance;
   3.   An order to show cause why the matter should not be referred to the
town’s legal department for appropriate legal action;
   4.   An order to cease discharge;
   5.   A suspension or revocation of the user’s permit; or
   6.   An order to respond in writing to the allegations.
B.   Additional orders after notification of violation. Additional orders and
changes to a suspension or revocation may follow the initial order at the
discretion of the director or as additional information becomes available.
C.   Response to notification of violation.
   1.   The user shall respond in writing to the director within the time
specified in the notification of violation, or if not specified, within ten
days of the user’s receipt of the notification.
   2.   The user’s response shall be complete, containing all information and
data required by the notification of violation.
   3.   If the response to a notification of violation requires an order to
show cause, the user shall respond by demonstrating why the director should not
ask the town’s legal department to file an action in superior court requesting
injunctive relief and penalties.
D.   Resolution of notification of violation. Upon review of a response to a
notification of violation, the director may accept the response as complete and
satisfactory, and consider the notification of violation closed. In that event,
the Director shall notify the user in writing that the notification of
violation has been closed. Closure of a notification of violation does not
preclude further enforcement action.
E.   Deficient response to notification of violation. If the director
determines a response to a notification of violation is deficient, the director
may take any one or more of the following actions:
   1.   Require submission of additional or incomplete information;
   2.   Suspend or revoke the user’s permit;
   3.   Order the user to cease discharge;
   4.   Seek penalties as justified by the violations; or
   5.   Any other action the director determines to be appropriate.
F.   Compliance schedule. When the user is found to be in noncompliance, a
compliance schedule may be made part of an enforcement order. The deadline
dates in the enforcement order will be subject to the same civil penalties and
will be as enforceable as a discharge limit.
G.   Published list of significant violators. To comply with the public
participation requirements of 40 CFR Part 25 as outlined in A.R.S. § 49-391(C)
for the enforcement of national pretreatment standards, the director shall at
least annually publish notification, in a newspaper of general circulation that
provides meaningful public notice in the town, of industrial users in
significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment requirements at any time
during the previous 12 months. For purposes of this provision, a significant
industrial user (or any industrial user that violates 40 CFR § 403.8 paragraphs
(f)(2)(viii)(C), (D), or (H)) is in significant noncompliance if its violation
meets the definition of significant noncompliance set forth in paragraph
14-10-5 A. 48 above.
14-10-19 Notification of permit suspension
A.   Reason for permit suspension. The director shall use the emergency
authority specified below as reason to suspend a permit when:
   1.   The suspension is necessary to cease a discharge that may present a
hazard to the public health, safety or welfare, or to the environment or pass-
through, interference, or upset to the POTW; or
   2.   The suspension is necessary to cease the discharge of a user that has
displayed a pattern of noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B.   User response to permit suspension. When notified of a permit suspension,
the user shall immediately cease discharge of all industrial wastewater to the
POTW.
C.   Failure to comply with permit suspension. If the user fails to comply
voluntarily with the notification of permit suspension, the director shall take
such steps as necessary to ensure compliance up to and including termination of
service by court order or physical barrier.
D.   Reinstatement of suspended permit. The director shall, by written
statement, reinstate the user’s permit upon proof of satisfactory compliance
with all requirements of the notification of permit suspension. Before the
director reinstates the permit, the user shall pay damages and costs incurred
by the town in suspending the permit and disconnecting the industrial sewer.
14-10-20 Notification of permit revocation
A.   Reason for revocation of permit. The director may revoke a permit upon
finding that the user has violated any provision of this chapter, including but
not limited to any of the following:
   1.   Failure to notify the director of significant changes to the wastewater
prior to the changed discharge.
   2.   Failure to comply with the reporting requirements of section 14-10-17
above.
   3.   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application.
   4.   Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements.
   5.   Tampering with monitoring equipment.
   6.   Refusing to allow timely access to the facility premises or records.
   7.   Failure to meet effluent limitations.
   8.   Failure to pay penalties.
   9.   Failure to pay sewer user fees as required by the users industrial
wastewater discharge permit.
   10.   Failure to meet compliance schedules.
   11.   Failure to provide advanced notice of transfer of business ownership
of a permitted facility.
   12.   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, BMP or any
other terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.
B.   Transfer of facility ownership. Individual wastewater discharge permits
shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business
ownership.
C.   User response to permit revocation. Any user whose permit has been revoked
shall immediately cease all discharge of any industrial wastewater to the POTW.
D.   Failure to comply with permit revocation. If the user fails to comply
voluntarily with the notification of permit revocation, the director shall take
such steps as necessary to ensure compliance up to and including termination of
service by court order or physical barrier.
E.   Resolution of permit revocation. Before re-commencing discharge of
industrial wastewater, the user whose permit was revoked must apply for and
obtain a new industrial wastewater discharge permit, pay all charges that would
be required upon initial application, and pay all delinquent fees, charges and
such other sums the user may owe to the town. Before the director issues a new
permit, the user shall pay damages and costs incurred by the town in revoking
the permit and disconnecting the industrial sewer.
14-10-21 Emergency termination of service
A.   The director may suspend wastewater treatment service to any person when
it is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents or may
present any imminent and substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons or the environment, or will cause Interference to the POTW.
B.   A person notified of the suspension of wastewater treatment service shall
immediately stop or eliminate the discharge.
   1.   If the person fails to comply with the suspension notification, the
director shall take necessary steps, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damages to the POTW, endangerment to
individuals or the environment.
   2.   The director may reinstate wastewater treatment service upon proof of
the elimination of the noncompliant discharge.
C.   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a show cause
hearing prior to any emergency termination of service under this section.
14-10-22 User enforcement appeal
A user may appeal any enforcement action to the council by filing a request
with the town clerk.
14-10-23 Liability of user
Any user who discharges or causes the discharge of wastewater which causes
damage to the POTW, interference, pass-through, upset, bypass or SSO or any
other damages resulting in costs to the POTW shall be liable for all damages
occasioned thereby.
14-10-24 Judicial proceedings
A.   Initiation of legal action. Whenever the director finds that a user has
violated any provision of this chapter, the director may request the town’s
legal department to take appropriate legal action. The town’s legal department
is authorized to take legal action to enforce this chapter. This legal action
may include, among other things, one or more of the following:
   1.   Prohibitive injunctions.
   2.   Mandatory injunctions for corrective action and cleanup.
   3.   Civil penalties in accordance with this chapter and A.R.S § 49-391.
   4.   Criminal penalties pursuant to paragraph
14-10-24 B. 3 below.
   5.   Recovery of civil damages, penalties, and costs to the POTW;
   6.   Recovery of expenses experienced by the POTW in responding to or
repairing damages for which the user is liable under section
14-10-23 above.
B.   Civil and criminal penalties for violation.
   1.   Except as set forth in subparagraph
14-10-24 B. 2 below, civil penalties for violation of any article of this
chapter, any part of a permit written and issued in compliance with this
chapter, or any requirement of a notification of violation issued in compliance
with this chapter, shall not exceed $25,000 for each violation. For continuing
violations, each day constitutes a separate offense.
   2.   Civil penalties for non-submittal of reports, noncompliance with the
reporting or application requirements required in this chapter or permit, or
failure to complete an increment of progress of a compliance schedule, shall
not exceed $1,000 for each day the requirements are not satisfied.
   3.   Any person who attempts to deceive a government agency by submitting
documents to the agency or by making statements to a representative of the
agency which the person knows to be false, or by destroying or concealing or
refusing to deliver papers or records required by the agency to be kept for its
information, is subject to prosecution for tampering with a public record, or
fraudulent schemes and practices. Tampering with a public record is a class 6
felony (A.R.S. § 13-2407), and carries a maximum penalty of 1.5 years
imprisonment and/or a $150,000.00 fine. Fraudulent schemes and practices is a
class 5 felony (A.R.S. § 13-2311), and carries a maximum penalty of 2.0 years
imprisonment and/or a $150,000.00 fine.
14-10-25 Levels of action
A.   Enforcement of judicial action. Participation in any communication
concerning violations will not exempt a user from formal enforcement or
judicial action.
B.   Written permission requirement. All final determinations from the director
will be in writing.
C.   Separate actions. Any judicial proceedings initiated to enforce a
violation of any section of this chapter shall not exempt a user from judicial
proceedings to enforce a violation of any other provision of this chapter.
14-10-26 Notices
Any notice required to be given by the director under this chapter shall be in
writing and served in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested.
The notice shall be served upon a representative of the user, at the last
address known to the director, or the occupants or owners of record of the
property where the alleged violation occurred.
14-10-27 Time limits
Any time limit provided in any written notice or in any provision of this
chapter or in any regulation adopted by the water department to carry out the
provisions of this chapter shall be extended only by written directive of the
director, in response to a written request of the affected user containing
adequate justification for the extension of the time limit.
Ordinance 2015.015 modified section
14-10-27 by changing “utilities department” to “water department”
14-10-28 Severability
If any provision of this chapter is invalidated by judicial action, the
remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and
effect.
14-10-29 Hazardous waste discharge
A.   The user shall notify the POTW and ADEQ waste management division in
writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise
disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR § 261.
B.   The user shall make notification of any hazardous waste discharges. By
lack of this notification, the user is asserting that it is not discharging a
waste that, if otherwise disposed of, would be considered a hazardous waste as
defined by 40 CFR 261. The user shall comply with 40 CFR § 403.12(p), which
sets forth reporting and notification requirements for the discharge into the
POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be defined as a
hazardous waste by 40 CFR § 261.
C.   At no point shall discharge covered by this domestic sewer exclusion for
discharge of hazardous waste exceed the local discharge limits set forth in
section
14-10-8 above.
14-10-30 Grease management program
A.   Statement of policy.
Ordinance 2015.015 modified subparagraph A 1 by changing “utilities department”
to “water department”
   1.   The water department is authorized to determine the compliance status
of food service facilities (FSF) where fats, oils and grease (FOG) of vegetable
or animal origin are discharged directly or indirectly to the POTW. These
discharges can contribute to line blockages or sanitary sewer overflows.
   2.   For the purpose of this chapter and pretreatment requirement
determination, FSFs are defined as those facilities required by applicable
state or local health regulations to install and utilize a manual ware-washing
three compartment sink.
   3.   The purpose of these rules is to set forth uniform requirements for all
food service facilities that discharge into any public or private collection
system connected to the POTW.
      a.   Any new FSF or existing facility making a modification requiring the
submittal of plans for construction or tenant improvements must meet the
requirements of the grease management program set forth in this section.
      b.   Facilities without pretreatment, or whose grease-bearing
wastestreams are not connected to a pretreatment device, must upgrade their
system to the requirements of the grease management program set forth in this
section or obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit.
   4.   An existing facility that was built in conformance with standards in
the then-applicable plumbing code need not bring current its pretreatment
system unless the director finds that the facility caused or contributed to
grease accumulation in the line or odor generated by grease accumulation.
B.   Operation and maintenance of pretreatment devices.
   1.   All pretreatment devices shall be maintained in efficient operation at
all times by the owner or operator at their expense.
   2.   Food service facilities are required to have a suitable and adequate
pretreatment device, and must regularly inspect, clean and maintain the device
in accordance with the grease management program set forth in this section or
in the manufacturer’s recommendations for the device.
   3.   In maintaining pretreatment devices, the owner/ shall be responsible
for the proper removal and disposal of the captured material and shall maintain
records of the dates, name of person/company, and the amount of material
removed.
   4.   Pretreatment device maintenance performed by liquid waste haulers shall
consist of removing the FOG, solids and water from the device and properly
disposing of the material in accordance with all federal, state and local laws.
Proper maintenance practices include evacuating the entire contents in the
following manner:
      a.   Remove floatable FOG material;
      b.   Remove settled solids;
      c.   Remove and scrape baffles, baffle slots, interior walls and other
detachable components;
      d.   Remove remaining FOG, solid material and water (“pump-in-full”—no
“skimming”); and
      e.   Reinstall all components removed during the cleaning process.
   5.   Under no circumstances shall any liquid removed from any pretreatment
device be placed back into any pretreatment device.
C.   Hydromechanical and gravity grease interceptor and other alternative
pretreatment device design criteria. Pretreatment devices shall be designed and
installed in accordance with the sizing criteria found in this paragraph. A
sampling port/box/T, which will accommodate the collection of a valid oil and
grease sample, shall be included on all pretreatment device installations.
   1.   Hydromechanical grease interceptors (HGI), which are generally
installed inside, may be used when there are four or fewer fixtures.
      a.   The minimum size HGI installed shall be rated no less than 25
gallons per minute with a 50 pound grease retention capacity.
      b.   A flow control device shall be installed so that the flow through
the device shall at no time be greater than the rated flow.
      c.   If a dishwasher or food waste disposal unit is used in the facility,
an HGI cannot be used and an appropriately sized GGI or alternative
pretreatment device capable of accepting these wastes must be installed.
      d.   Each HGI must be cleaned at least monthly.
      e.   An HGI located indoors should be cleaned during non-business hours
to prevent objectionable odors/germs from being released into the facility.
   2.   A gravity grease interceptor (GGI) is typically installed outside and
in the ground when a FSF has greater than four fixtures, or when dishwasher or
food waste disposal units are used in the facility.
      a.   The minimum sized GGI to be installed shall be 300 gallons.
      b.   A GGI shall be installed so that it is easily accessible for
inspection, cleaning and the removal of FOG and solid material.
      c.    A GGI shall meet the following minimum criteria:
         i.   No obstruction to prevent the proper access and cleaning of the
GGI.
         ii.   Access covers located such that the influent and effluent
sanitary “T” and compartment transition points (if applicable) are accessible
for proper cleaning and inspection.
         iii.   An access cover for each chamber and constructed with the
appropriate traffic rating.
      d.   The GGI must be pumped-in-full at least every six months or when the
total accumulation of surface FOG (including floating solids) and settled
solids reaches 25% of the GGI’s overall depth.
      e.   The GGI shall be sized to meet the following equation: V(min) = F x
R x S
         Where:
            V(min)=minimum gravity grease interceptor operating volume, in
gallons
            F=flow rate (maximum), in gallons per minute
            R=retention time of 30 minutes
            S=storage factor of 25%
            Thus: V(min) = F x 30 x 1.25
      f.   To calculate flow rate (F), use drainage fixture units (DFU) values
found in the accompanying GGI fixture counts tables. The flow rate shall be
determined based on the total flow rate from all equipment and plumbing
fixtures connected to the gravity grease interceptor using one of the following
equations:
         i.   Drainage Fixture Units less than or equal to 40: F = (0.8 x DFU)
         ii.   Drainage Fixture Units greater than 40: F = (0.3 x DFU) + 20
            a)   Where: DFU = drainage fixture units, defined by the
accompanying GGI fixture counts tables.
GGI fixture counts tables
DFUs for food service facilities
Fixture type DFU value
GGI fixture counts tables
DFUs for food service facilities
Fixture type                                   DFU value
2-Compartment Sink                             2
3-Compartment Sink                             3
Automatic Dishwasher greater than 2 inch Drain 6
Automatic Dishwasher less than 2 inch Drain    3
Food Prep Sink                                 2
Food Waste Grinder                             4
Hand Sink                                      1
Mop Sink/Mop Basin                             2
Pre-Rinse Sink                                 3
Pre-Rinse Sink w/Food Waste                    4
Rotisserie w/Drain                             3
Tilt Soup Kettle                               3
Wok Stove                                      4
For fixtures not listed, use table 709.2 of the 2012 international plumbing
code
 
DFUs for fixture drains or traps
Fixture drain or trap size DFU value
DFUs for fixture drains or traps
Fixture drain or trap size DFU value
1 ½ inches                1
1 ½ inches                2
2 inches                   3
2 ½ inches                4
3 inches                   5
4 inches                   6
 
GGI sizing summary
Number of DFUs Minimum size (gallons)
GGI sizing summary
Number of DFUs   Minimum size (gallons)
Up to 10 DFUs    300
11-16 DFUs       500
17-25 DFUs       750
26-33 DFUs       1000
34-44 DFUs       1250
45-66 DFUs       1500
67-111 DFUs      2000
112 or more DFUs Contact director
 
   3.   If an alternative pretreatment device is used instead of an HGI or GGI,
the design must be submitted to the director for prior approval. The
information submitted to the director must include, but not be limited to, the
number of DFUs the device is going to service, and the manufacturer’s
recommended sizing criteria.
   4.   The introduction of emulsifying agents such as chemicals, solvents or
enzymes, either directly or indirectly into the pretreatment device, other than
what is considered typical business operational practices such as dishwashing
or sanitation, is strictly prohibited.
   5.   Products that reduce FOG, such as bacteria, may be used in the
pretreatment device, in addition to the regular maintenance program, but shall
not be a consideration in determining sizing or maintenance frequency.
D.   Fats, oils and grease sources.
   1.   All fixtures, equipment and drain lines located in a facility’s food
preparation or clean-up areas, which are sources of FOG, shall be connected to
a pretreatment device except as outlined in section
14-10-30 above.
      a.   Dishwashers or other fixtures discharging emulsifying agents, such
as detergents, should be located such that their potential to adversely impact
the operation is minimized.
      b.   All wastestreams containing FOG within FSF shall be directed to a
pretreatment device.
   2.   The following types of equipment or fixtures have been identified as
sources of FOG and shall be connected to a pretreatment device (with applicable
exceptions and supplemental requirements noted for the respective device):
         i.   Pre-rinse and or pre-wash sinks.
         ii.   Two, three or four compartment sinks.
         iii.   Meat prep sinks.
         iv.   Wok stoves.
         v.   Kitchen floor drains.
         vi.   Floor sinks.
         vii.   Mop sinks. Depending on the use of the mop sink, the
requirement to drain through a pretreatment device may be the subject of a
variance from the director under section
14-10-9 above.
         viii.   Food prep sinks.
         ix.   Hand wash sinks. A hand wash sink located in the kitchen area
shall either discharge through a pretreatment device or have a sign posted
above it stating clearly in all employees’ primary languages: “HANDWASH SINK
ONLY! NO FOOD PREPARATION OR DISHWASHING ALLOWED.”
         x.   Dishwashers.
         xi.   Self cleaning ventilation/exhaust hood.
         xii.   Food waste disposal units. Discharges from food waste disposal
units must drain through a minimum 3/8 inch screen or solids separator prior to
the pretreatment device.
E.   Best management practice requirements. Best management practices (BMPs)
are policies, practices, or procedures implemented to mitigate the adverse
effects of FOG. All FSFs must develop and implement BMPs which, at minimum,
shall include the following:
   1.   Pouring all grease and oil from pots and pans into a waste grease
container stored in close proximity to the pot washing sink and not down the
drain.
   2.   Scraping off of all solids or FOG on plates, pots and pans into the
garbage can.
   3.   Pre-washing plates with cold water over a small screened catch basin
positioned over the drain and disposing the contents of the catch basin in a
garbage can.
   4.   Disconnecting all food waste disposal devices, unless the discharge is
screened or goes through a solids separator prior to discharge.
   5.   The posting of signs above vegetable prep sinks not protected by a
grease pretreatment device, stating clearly in all employees’ primary
languages: “NO WASHING OF POTS, PANS, DISHES OR UTENSILS – VEGETABLE PREP SINK
ONLY.”
   6.   Periodic training of current and new employees regarding the effective
use of the BMPs.
F.   Record-keeping requirements.
   1.   All pretreatment device maintenance, compliance reports and related
correspondence must be retained on-site by the user for a minimum of three
years.
      a.   A separate maintenance log shall be maintained on-site for each
device.
      b.   Maintenance logs shall include all of the following information:
         i.   Device location and volume.
         ii.   Maintenance dates.
         iii.   Volume removed in gallons.
         iv.   The name of the company and the person performing the
maintenance.
         v.   Identification of the facility where the material was disposed.
   2.   Records associated with waste cooking oil collection and disposal shall
be kept on-site by the user for a minimum of three years. Waste cooking oil
collection logs shall include all of the following information:
      a.   Collection date.
      b.   Volume collected in gallons.
      c.   The name of the company and the person performing the collection.
      d.   The disposal methods.
   3.   Records of compliance with BMP training shall be maintained by each
FSF.
14-10-31 Satellite collection systems
A.   Applicability. All entities owning or operating a satellite collection
system shall comply with the requirements of this section.
B.   Publicly-owned satellite collection systems. A satellite collection system
under control of a separate jurisdictional governmental agency or native
American nation shall enter into an agreement with the town that addresses the
following requirements:
   1.   Agreement by the contributing jurisdiction to adopt a pretreatment
sewer use ordinance that is no less stringent than the town’s ordinance.
   2.   Compliance with industrial wastewater ordinance requirements by
industries that would be subject to the town’s ordinances if they discharged to
the collection system owned and operated by the town. Specifically, the
contributing jurisdiction shall agree to adopt local limits for industrial
discharges into its collection system that are at least as stringent as the
town’s local limits, or should agree to a specific maximum total mass loading
of pollutants for discharge to the town’s POTW.
   3.   Indication of whether the contributing jurisdiction or the town is
responsible for issuing control mechanisms to industrial users located within
the contributing jurisdiction. If joint control mechanisms are to be issued,
the agreement should indicate which party will take the lead in preparing the
draft control mechanisms.
   4.   Agreement by the contributing jurisdiction to providing the town access
to all records compiled as part of the contributing jurisdiction’s pretreatment
program activities, including notice to the town of key activities such as
enforcement actions and permit issuances.
   5.   Granting the town the power to enter into the facilities of industrial
users to periodically verify compliance with applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements. Procedures and responsibility for conducting inspections and
other compliance evaluation activities should be established explicitly.
   6.   Agreement as to whether the contributing jurisdiction or the town has
primary responsibility for enforcing pretreatment standards and requirements
against industrial users located within the contributing jurisdiction. If the
contributing jurisdiction has primary responsibility for enforcing the
ordinance, the agreement should specify that the town can enforce if the
contributing jurisdiction fails to do so.
   7.   Where it has primary responsibility for permitting, compliance
monitoring, and/or enforcement, the contributing jurisdiction should agree that
the town has the right to take legal action as necessary to enforce the terms
of the agreement and/or to take action directly against noncompliant industrial
users in the event that the contributing municipality is unable or unwilling to
do so. The agreement should also provide for remedies available against the
noncomplying municipality, including indemnification and specific performance
of pretreatment activities.
   8.   If no industrial users are located within the contributing
jurisdiction, or if the only existing nondomestic users are light commercial
establishments, the agreement should state:
      a.   No industrial users are currently located within the contributing
jurisdiction, and
      b.   No industrial users shall be allowed to operate unless prior
notification is provided to the town and a new agreement is entered into
addressing implementation and enforcement of the pretreatment program.
   9.   Operation of the contributing jurisdiction’s collecting system so as to
comply with the requirements of the town’s CMOM permit.
   10.   Prevention or reduction to the extent possible of stormwater or
infiltration of groundwater from entering the town’s sewer collection system.
   11.   Notification of new connections to the town’s sewer collection system,
and assurance of compliance with the town’s capacity assurance program.
   12.   Assurance of the payment of town-adopted connection and user fees.
   13.   Provision for spill-reporting systems.
   14.   Operations and maintenance provisions that protect the system,
including proper operations and maintenance as required by 40 CFR § 122.41(d).
   15.   Reporting of unpermitted discharges from satellite systems to waters
of the United States or storm sewer systems owned or controlled by the town.
   16.   All reasonable steps to minimize or prevent any discharge in violation
of the town’s permit that have a reasonable likelihood of adversely affecting
human health or the environment.
CHAPTER 14-11.
NON-POTABLE WATER SERVICE WITHIN CORTARO-MARANA IRRIGATION DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
Ordinance 2022.012 added chapter 14-11
14-11-1 Background
The use of non-potable water for landscaping reduces demands on the potable
water system and, where operated using water supplies not otherwise available
to the town's water department, maximizes renewable resources in the town's
water resource portfolio. The long-term best interests of the town and its
residents, businesses, and water utility require evaluation and consideration
of the use of non-potable water for each proposed project where non-potable
water facilities are available or can reasonably be made available.
14-11-2 Applicability and definitions
A.   Geographic limitation; CMID defined. The requirements of this chapter
apply only within the district boundaries of the Cortaro-Marana Irrigation
District (CMID).
B.   Proposed project defined. For purposes of this chapter, the term "proposed
project" means a proposed public project or a proposed industrial, commercial,
or residential development, including all proposed, planned, or required
landscaping, park, and/or recreational features of the proposed public project
or proposed industrial, commercial or residential development.
C.   CMID waiver. The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any
proposed project where CMID, in its sole discretion, has provided the applicant
or the town with a signed, written waiver stating that CMID is unable to
feasibly provide non-potable service to the proposed project.
D.   Coordination of responsibilities; MOU defined. The Town's water director
is authorized and directed to enter into a memorandum of understanding (MOU)
with CMID and/or its managing agent, the Cortaro Water Users' Association, to
ensure consistency in the provision of service to residents and customers and
to coordinate compliance with town code and state laws and regulations,
including, for example, planning factors used to calculate proposed water use,
conservation requirements, and Tucson active management area management plan
goals. The MOU shall be reviewed annually and updated as needed.
14-11-3 Investigation and consultation
A.   Before submission to the town of any subdivision plat or development plan
for a proposed project, an applicant shall prepare and provide a written report
that includes, at a minimum, all of the following;
   1.   The quantity of water the proposed project will use each year for uses
not requiring potable water, including landscaping, manufacturing, and other
similar purposes, using planning factors for intended water use consistent with
those found in the MOU.
   2.   The location and availability of potential and existing non-potable
sources of water on and within one mile of the site of the proposed project,
including without limitation all of the following:
      a.   The existing non-potable water system within the CMID boundaries.
      b.   Existing and historic wells that could be used or rehabilitated for
non- potable water use.
      c.   Existing and historic irrigation canals, laterals, and other
irrigation water delivery infrastructure.
   3.   In cases where the use of non-potable is not otherwise required as a
condition of rezoning (see subparagraph
14-11-4 A. 1 below) or by council determination of environmental impacts (see
subparagraph
14-11-4 A. 3 below), the applicant's analysis and supporting documentation of
the longterm cost savings of using non-potable water versus the initial cost of
installing the necessary non-potable infrastructure (see subparagraph
14-11-4 A. 2 below).
   4.   Dates and times and summaries of consultations with CMID's manager or
authorized management representative regarding the feasibility of using non-
potable water sources for uses not requiring potable water.
B.   Before the town's final approval of a proposed project, the applicant
shall provide to the town an updated report of the estimated use of non-potable
water to account for any changes to the proposed project since the submission
of the original report.
C.   The original report and the updated report shall be reviewed and approved
by CMID and by the water director or designee.
14-11-4 Non-potable water service
A.   The owner or developer shall install all infrastructure necessary to serve
a proposed project with non-potable water service in any of the following
circumstances:
   1.   Where connection to the non-potable water system is required as a
condition of rezoning.
   2.   Where the water director determines that the long-term cost savings of
using non-potable water exceeds the initial cost of installing the necessary
non-potable infrastructure.
      a.   In making this determination, the water director shall use the
equation A≤B-C
      b.   "A" in the equation is a water director-approved registered civil
engineer's estimate of the cost to install all infrastructure necessary to
serve a proposed project with non-potable water service.
      c.   "B" in the equation is a water director-approved registered civil
engineer's estimate of the cost to use potable water to serve the project,
including all of the following;
         i.   All meter fees, connection fees, development impact fees, and
other fees and costs required to serve the project with potable water.
         ii.   The cost of the quantity of potable water needed to serve the
entire built-out project for 20 years.
      d.   "C" in the equation is a water director-approved registered civil
engineer's estimate of the cost to use non-potable water to serve the project,
including all of the following:
         i.   All meter fees, connection fees, development impact fees, and
other fees and costs required to serve the project with non-potable water.
         ii.   The cost of the quantity of non-potable water needed to serve
the entire built-out project for 20 years.
   3.   Where the town council determines that the use of non-potable water is
necessary to offset the environmental impacts or burdens associated with a
project.
B.   The water director shall promptly send written notice of a determination
under subsection A. 2 above (requiring or not requiring the owner or developer
to install all infrastructure necessary to serve a proposed project with non-
potable water service) to all of the parties set forth in subparagraphs
14-11-5 A. 1 through 3 below.
14-11-5 Appeal
A.   A determination under subsection
14-11-4 A. 2 above to require or not to require the owner or developer to
install all infrastructure necessary to serve a proposed project with non-
potable water service may be appealed by any of the following parties to the
board of adjustment within 30 days after the date of the water director's
notice of determination:
   1.   The CMID manager.
   2.   The owner or developer.
   3.   The mayor or a member of the town council.
   4.   Any other aggrieved party.
B.   The board of adjustment's decision may be appealed as provided by law.
TITLE 15
MARANA REGIONAL AIRPORT
Ordinance 2017.015 comprehensively rewrote title 15. For prior history, see
Ordinances 2004.10, 2004.13, and 2005.22.
CHAPTER 15-1.   GENERAL
CHAPTER 15-2.   GENERAL USE OF AIRPORT
CHAPTER 15-3.   FUELING, FLAMMABLE FLUIDS, AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 15-4.   AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS
CHAPTER 15-5.   VEHICLES AND PEDESTRIANS
CHAPTER 15-1.
GENERAL
15-1-1 Short title
This title may be cited as the Marana regional airport rules and regulations.
15-1-2 Purpose and application of rules and regulations
A.   The provisions of this title are intended for the safe, orderly and
efficient operation of the airport and apply to all tenants, commercial
aeronautical activity providers, and other persons using the airport for any
reason.
B.   Unless a particular regulation states otherwise, the regulations set forth
in this title shall apply only on the airport property.
C.   Violations of federal aviation regulations shall fall under the
jurisdiction of the FAA.
15-1-3 Definitions
A.   All definitions contained within the federal aviation regulations, 14 CFR
part 1, shall be considered as included in this section.
B.   The following definitions shall apply throughout this title unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise.
   1.   “Air traffic” means aircraft operations anywhere in the airport traffic
area and in the movement area.
   2.   “Air traffic control” means a service operated by a duly designated
authority to direct air traffic movements and promote the safe, orderly, and
expeditious flow of air traffic.
   3.   “Aircraft accident” or “aircraft incident” means a collision or other
contact between a part of an aircraft and another aircraft, vehicle, person,
stationary object or other thing that results in bodily injury, death or
property damage; or an entry into or emerging from an aircraft or vehicle by a
person that results in bodily injury or death of any person or property damage.
   4.   “Aircraft fuel” means all flammable liquids composed of a mixture of
selected hydrocarbons expressly manufactured and blended for the purpose of
effectively and efficiently operating an internal combustion engine or a jet or
turbine engine.
   5.   “Aircraft maintenance” means all maintenance performed on an aircraft,
including major aircraft alterations and repairs, and aircraft preventive
maintenance.
   6.   “Aircraft operation” means an aircraft arrival at or departure from the
airport.
   7.   “Aircraft owner” means any person holding legal title to an aircraft,
as evidenced by an appropriate certificate of title if applicable, or any
person authorized by the legal title holder to use or possess the aircraft.
   8.   “Aircraft parking area” means a hangar and apron location on the
airport designated by the airport director for the parking and storage of
aircraft.
   9.   “Aircraft preventive maintenance” means aircraft maintenance that is
not a major aircraft alteration or repair, and does not involve complex
assembly operations, and is similar to the types of work listed in 14 CFR part
43, appendix A, paragraph (c), except that for the purpose of this title,
replacing prefabricated fuel lines shall be considered a major aircraft repair.
   10.   “Airport” means all of the town-owned or leased real and or personal
property comprising the Marana regional airport as it now exists or as may
hereafter be expanded and developed, including all of the facilities as shown
on the most current FAA-approved airport layout plan (ALP).
   11.   “Airport director” means the person designated as the town of Marana’s
airport director, any person directed by the town manager to act as the airport
director, or the airport director’s authorized representative.
   12.   “Airport grant agreement” means an agreement between the FAA and an
airport sponsor through which the airport sponsor received grant money from the
FAA in exchange for committing to fulfill certain obligations related to the
airport operated by the sponsor.
   13.   “Airport operations area” or “AOA” means all restricted ground areas
of the airport, including taxiways, runways, loading ramps, and parking areas;
the AOA is divided into two distinct areas: the “movement” area and the “non-
movement” area.
   14.   “Airside” means the portion of an airport that contains the facilities
necessary for the operation of aircraft.
   15.   “Apron” or “ramp” means an area designed for loading or unloading
passengers and/or cargo, refueling, catering, parking or maintenance of
aircraft.
   16.   “AWOS” means automated weather observation system.
   17.   “Based aircraft” means an aircraft that meets all of the following
criteria:
      a.   The owner physically locates the aircraft at the airport with the
intent and purpose for the aircraft to remain for an undetermined period; and
      b.   Whenever absent from the airport, including for a limited or
seasonal duration, the aircraft’s owner intends to return the aircraft to the
airport for permanent storage; and
      c.   The aircraft’s presence on the airport is not transitory in nature.
   18.   “Based commercial aeronautical activity provider” means a commercial
aeronautical activity provider that has been given permission by the airport
director to conduct its business using an airport hangar or other airport
facility as the primary location for its business.
   19.   “Commercial activity” means the conduct of any aspect of a business,
concession or service in order to provide goods or services to any person for
compensation, including any such activity conducted by a charitable or non-
profit organization.
   20.   “Commercial aeronautical activity” means any commercial activity that
involves, makes possible, or is required for the operation of aircraft or an
airport, or that contributes to or is required for the safety of such
operations, including, but not limited to, the following activities:
      a.   Aircraft sales and services
      b.   Airframe and power plant repair services
      c.   Aircraft rental services
      d.   Flight training services
      e.   Aircraft charter or on-demand air taxi services
      f.   Air ambulance services
      g.   Airborne mineral exploration
      h.   Aircraft management services
      i.   Radio, instrument or propeller repair services
      j.   Aerial applications (e.g., crop-dusting, fire suppression)
      k.   Aviation fuels and petroleum product sales
      l   .Sale of aviation parts
      m   .Lease, sublease, or rental permit of any aircraft hangar, shade,
tie-down, or other parking space
      n.   Banner towing and aerial advertising
      o.   Aerial photography or survey
      p   .Powerline or pipeline patrol
      q.   Aircraft washing and cleaning services
      r.   Any other commercial activity that is directly related to the
operation, maintenance, repair, or storage of aircraft or the operation of the
airport
   21.   “Commercial aeronautical activity provider” means any person that
provides a commercial aeronautical activity on the airport.
   22.   “Commercial operating permit” means a permit that has been approved
and issued by the airport director, prior to conducting any commercial business
at the airport.
   23.   “Disabled aircraft” means an aircraft that remains in the movement
area following an aircraft accident or incident or other event that renders it
non-airworthy.
   24.   “FAA” means the federal aviation administration.
   25.   “FAA certificate of aircraft registration” means the FAA form that
shows aircraft type and current ownership.
   26.   “FAR” means federal aviation regulations.
   27.   “Federal airport grant assurance obligations” means provisions within
a federal airport grant agreement with which the recipient of federal airport
development funding has agreed to comply in exchange for the assistance
provided.
   28.   “Fixed base operator” or “FBO” means the company that conducts the
servicing of general aviation within the airport restricted area.
   29.   “Foreign object debris” or “FOD” means any loose item (trash, metal,
rocks, etc.) lying on the ground having the potential to cause significant
damage to property or injury to aircraft and personnel in the AOA.
   30.   “Fuel handling” means the transportation, delivery, and draining of
fuel or fuel waste products, and the fueling/defueling of aircraft.
   31.   “Fuel storage area” means any portion of the airport designated
temporarily or permanently by the town as an area in which fuel may be stored
or loaded.
   32.   “General aviation” means all types of civil aviation operations other
than those conducted as a commercial aeronautical activity.
   33.   “Ground support equipment” or “GSE” means the support equipment at an
airport used to service or support the operation of aircraft on the ground.
   34.   “Hangar” means an aircraft hangar used primarily for aircraft storage
or aircraft maintenance.
   35.   “Hazardous materials” means any chemical, substance, material, waste
or similar matter defined, classified, listed or designated as harmful,
hazardous, extremely hazardous, dangerous, toxic or radioactive, or as a
contaminate or pollutant, or other similar term, by, and/or that is subject to
regulation under, any federal, state or local environmental or hazardous
materials statute, regulation, or ordinance presently in effect or that may be
promulgated in the future, and as they may be amended from time to time.
   36.   “Helipad” means an apron that is designated solely for rotorcraft
operations; the helipad is part of the airport movement area.
   37.   “Hold short line” means a pavement marking consisting of two solid
yellow stripes followed by two dashed stripes extending across the width of the
taxiway or runway indicating where an aircraft is required to stop as the
marking indicates the close proximity of an active runway.
   38.   “Landside” means the portion of an airport that provides the
facilities necessary for the processing of passengers, cargo, freight, vehicle
parking, and ground transportation vehicles.
   39.   “Lease” means an agreement granting the right to occupy or use
property during a certain period in exchange for a specified rent.
   40.   “Major aircraft alterations and repairs” means major aircraft
alterations and/or repairs of the types listed in 14 CFR part 43 appendix A,
paragraphs (a) and (b).
   41.   “Minimum operating standards” means those standards adopted by the
town as the minimum requirements to be met as a condition for the privilege of
conducting commercial activities at the airport, as such standards may be
amended from time to time, and containing detailed provisions outlining the
minimum building size and other standards acceptable by the airport for a
business operating on the airport.
   42.   “Movement area” means the runways, taxiways, helipad, and other areas
of an airport that are used for taxiing, takeoff, and landing of aircraft.
   43.   “Non-movement area” means all parking areas, tie-down areas, perimeter
roads, aprons/ramps and other areas within the AOA that are not specifically
designated as within the movement area.
   44.   “Non-tenant operator” means a person with no established office,
station, or location on airport property and not having a lease agreement with
the airport.
   45.   “NOTAM” means notice to airmen.
   46.   “NTSB” means the national transportation safety board.
   47.   “Perimeter roads” means gravel or paved roadways that circumnavigate
the AOA.
   48.   “Permit” means a written document issued by the airport director,
authorizing the recipient to conduct one or more commercial activities at the
airport that the recipient would not otherwise be authorized (e.g., by a
commercial lease) to conduct.
   49.   “Road” or “roadway” means any roadway within the boundaries of the
airport and designated for use by vehicles, whether improved or unimproved and
whether dedicated or not.
   50.   “Rules and regulations” means the version of this title in effect at
any given time.
   51.   “Runway” means a defined rectangular surface on an airport prepared
and suitable for the landing and takeoff of aircraft; runways have markings in
white with white lights.
   52.   “Safety area” means a defined area comprised of either a runway or
taxiway and the surrounding surfaces that is prepared or suitable for reducing
the risk of damage to aircraft in the event of an undershoot, overshoot, or
excursion from a runway or the unintentional departure from a taxiway.
   53.   “Shade port” means an area used for the storage of aircraft or other
items permitted by the airport director or for activities permitted by the
airport director that is covered by a roof but no sides.
   54.   “Specialized aviation service operator” or “SASO” means a person that
conducts one or more of the types of commercial aeronautical activities
described in the airport minimum operating standards.
   55.   “Taxilane” means the portion of the aircraft parking areas used for
access between taxiways and aircraft parking areas.
   56.   “Taxiway” means a paved and marked area established for taxiing of
aircraft from one place on an airport to another; taxiways have markings in
yellow with blue lights.
   57.   “Tenant” means any person authorized to occupy or use any portion of
the airport on the basis of either a written lease or permit directly with or
from the town, or a sublease with an entity that has a lease directly with the
town; includes any entity that has an ownership interest in a hangar located on
airport property, since that ownership interest is subject to both the lease
under which the underlying land was leased from the town, and the sublease
under which that land was subleased from the entity (such as the FBO) that
leased the land directly from the town.
   58.   “Tie-down” means an area used for the storage of aircraft or other
items permitted by the airport director or for activities permitted by the
airport director that is not covered by a roof.
   59.   “Traffic pattern” means the traffic flow that is established for
aircraft landing at, taxiing on, or taking off from the airport.
   60.   “UAS” means unmanned aircraft system, commonly referred to as a drone.
   61.   “UNICOM” means a universal communication radio frequency used at
uncontrolled airports for pilot communication, and to communicate with the FBO
to arrange services such as parking, fuel, and general information.
   62.   “Vehicle” means a device other than an aircraft in, upon, or by which
any person or property is or may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a roadway.
   63.   “Vehicle parking area” means any portion of the airport designated and
made available temporary or permanently by the town for the parking of
vehicles.
   64.   “Vehicular accident” means a collision or other contact between a part
of one vehicle and another vehicle, or a person, stationary object or other
thing that results in bodily injury, death or property damage; or an entry into
or emerging from any vehicle by a person that results in bodily injury or death
of any person or property damage.
15-1-4 Incorporation of rules and standards by reference
The following, as they may be amended from time to time, are hereby
incorporated by reference as if set out at length in this title:
A.   Marana regional airport minimum operating standards
B.   Marana regional airport rates and fees, as established by a fee schedule
adopted by the town council and amended from time to time
C.   Marana regional airport ultra-light aircraft operating rules
D.   Marana regional airport architecture and landscape design standards
E.   Marana regional airport commercial leasing policy and application
15-1-5 Conflicting laws, ordinances, regulations, and contracts
A.   In any case where a provision of this title is in conflict with any other
provision of this title, or in conflict with a provision of any zoning,
building, fire, safety, health or other ordinance, code, rule, or regulation of
the town, the provision that establishes the higher standard for the promotion
and protection of the health and safety of people shall apply.
B.   No existing or future town contract, lease agreement or other contractual
arrangement, or any payment or performance thereunder, shall excuse any failure
of full and complete compliance with this title.
C.   Compliance with this title shall not excuse any failure of full and
complete compliance with any obligations to the town under any existing or
future town contract, lease agreement, or other contractual arrangement.
D.   If any part of this title conflicts with federal or state law or
regulation, then such federal or state authority shall take precedence.
15-1-6 Airport director’s authority
In addition to other powers and duties set forth elsewhere in this title, the
airport director has the following authority:
A.   To issue rules, regulations, orders, and instructions necessary to
administer this title, including posting signs at the airport which state or
apply those rules, regulations, orders, or instructions.
B.   To waive any portion of this title for up to 30 days to ensure public
safety or the efficient use of the airport.
C.   To close the airport or any portion of it using applicable FAA procedures,
as appropriate, upon determining that conditions are unfavorable for aircraft
operations.
D.   To inspect all areas under lease to or occupied by tenants, including all
hangars, at all reasonable times.
15-1-7 Airport staff’s authority
Each member of the staff of the airport director, as a representative of the
airport director, and any party acting under the direction of the airport
director based on a contract with the town, is empowered to enforce the
provisions of this title and all orders and regulations issued by the airport
director.
15-1-8 Classification; enforcement; continuing violations; effect of revocation
or suspension on prosecution
A.   Whenever in this title any act is prohibited or declared to be unlawful or
the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be
unlawful, the violation of that provision is a class one misdemeanor.
B.   The provisions of this title and any resolutions, minimum standards or
other rules and regulations promulgated under this title, and the provisions of
any other ordinance or law related to the airport, may be enforced in any
manner provided for by town ordinances and state or federal laws.
C.   No delay or failure on the part of the town in enforcing any aspect of
this title shall impair the town’s enforcement action, nor shall any delay be
construed as a waiver of such enforcement action.
D.   No single or partial exercise of an enforcement action shall preclude any
further exercise of enforcement right, or privilege of the town.
E.   No waiver of any aspect of this title shall be valid unless made in
writing and signed and dated by the airport director, and then only to the
extent expressly specified in such writing and expressly permitted by this
title.
F.   Each day any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
G.   Revocation or suspension of any license or permit required by this title
or any state or federal law shall not be a defense against prosecution.
15-1-9 Administrative penalties
In addition to any other remedy available as a matter of law, violations of
this title or of any rule, regulation, order, or instruction issued by the
airport director may result in withdrawal of permission to use the airport and/
or loss of unescorted AOA access privileges.
CHAPTER 15-2.
GENERAL USE OF AIRPORT
15-2-1 Conditions of use
A.   The conditions under which the airport or any of it facilities may be used
shall be as established pursuant to this title or otherwise by the town
council.
B.   Any permission directly, indirectly, expressly or implicitly granted by
the town to enter upon or use the airport or any part of it is conditioned upon
compliance with this title, and any rules, regulations, or minimum operating
standards promulgated under this title, this code, and all other applicable
state and federal laws, rules and regulations.
C.   Entry upon the airport property by any person shall be deemed to
constitute an agreement by that person to comply with all of the following:
   1.   This title
   2.   The requirements of any grant agreement to which the town is bound
relating to the airport
   3.   Any and all orders or regulations promulgated by the town or the
airport director
   4.   Any and all signs posted by or under the authority of the town or the
airport director.
   5.   Any and all applicable laws and regulations of the United States and
the state.
D.   The town reserves the right to deny any or all use of or access to the
airport to any person for any reasonable cause.
E.   Unless expressly provided otherwise, any consent or permission of the town
required under this title must be obtained in advance, in writing and signed
and dated by the airport director.
F.   Unless expressly provided otherwise, any notice or application to the town
required under this title must be given in writing to the airport director
during normal business hours at the airport office.
G.   The privilege of using the airport and its facilities is conditioned upon
the user’s assumption of full responsibility and risk for that use. The town
assumes no responsibility for injury or damage to persons or property of
persons, stored on, or using the airport facilities, by reason of fire, theft,
vandalism, weather, storm, flood, earthquake, or collision, nor does the town
assume any liability for injury to persons while on the airport or while using
airport facilities. By using the airport and its facilities, the user releases
and agrees to hold harmless and indemnify the town and its officers, employees
and agents from and against any liability or loss resulting from that use.
H.   Any person accessing the airport shall be responsible for their actions
and the actions of any person to whom they provide access, whether directly or
indirectly.
I.   No person other than those in an aircraft operating on the airport or in
vehicles authorized to service or support such aircraft shall enter the AOA
except with written approval of the airport director or other authorized
representative. All persons authorized access to the AOA shall have suitable
identification on their person when in the area.
J.   No person may use the airport or its facilities, or engage in any conduct
on or related to the airport, in any way that would cause the town to be in
non-compliance with any of the town’s federal and/or state airport grant
assurance obligations.
K.   All children under the age of 13 years must be accompanied by an adult 18
years of age or older at all times.
15-2-2 Commercial business operations
A.   No person shall use any portion of the airport for any commercial
activities unless the commercial activities are conducted by the person
pursuant to a business license issued by the town and either a written
commercial lease or sublease authorizing the commercial activity or a permit
issued by the airport director authorizing the commercial activity.
B.   The airport director may issue permits for commercial activities at the
airport to persons whose commercial activities do not require a formal lease or
sublease, provided that such permits are effective for no more than 30 days or
are terminable by the town without cause upon no less than 30 days’ notice, or
are immediately terminable by the town for cause.
C.   No commercial business operations shall be permitted in storage hangars.
D.   No person shall engage in any commercial aeronautical activity at the
airport except in conformity with all federal aviation regulations, the
applicable provisions of title 28, chapter 25, Arizona revised statutes, the
applicable provisions of this code, and this title.
E.   Prior to commencing any commercial activity at the airport a person must
present to the airport director satisfactory information and proof that he or
she meets the minimum operating standards established by the town for engaging
in such commercial activity.
F.   All commercial business operations shall be performed in accordance with
the provisions of the certificate of occupancy issued to the business and in
compliance with all applicable local building and fire codes.
15-2-3 Closing the airport during emergencies
During an emergency at the airport, the airport director shall have absolute
control of the airport. If the airport director believes conditions at the
airport are unsafe for aircraft operations, the airport director shall have the
authority to close the entire airport or any part of the airport, and issue a
NOTAM describing the closure.
15-2-4 Aircraft parking
A.   Transient aircraft parking overnight or longer shall be on the open tie-
down parking ramp, in a designated parking space, and subject to applicable
parking fees.
B.   Transient aircraft parking short term (no overnight) shall be on the FBO/
terminal ramp or the open tie-down ramp, in a designated parking space.
C.   Overnight parking on the FBO/terminal ramp is prohibited unless authorized
by the airport director or an authorized representative of the FBO.
D.   No person shall park or allow to remain stationary any aircraft at the
airport except within a designated aircraft parking area.
E.   No person shall park an aircraft in a reserved aircraft parking area
without prior permission from the town or a tenant authorized to provide an
aircraft parking area to other persons.
F.   No person shall leave an aircraft parked in a shade port or tie-down
without first having ensured that the aircraft is adequately secured to the
pavement.
G.   Aircraft must not be parked so as to block or obstruct any of the
following:
   1.   Fire, police, or other emergency vehicle access
   2.   Taxi lanes
   3.   Hangars
H.   Inoperable, abandoned or junked aircraft, and aircraft awaiting major
repair and/or missing external parts (e.g., propeller), shall be temporarily
stored in a fully enclosed hangar, subject to aircraft hangar rules that
prohibit the indefinite storage of nonoperational aircraft, or will be removed
from the airport property by the airport director at the aircraft owner’s
expense.
I.   If any aircraft is parked in violation of this section, or, in the
determination of the airport director, presents an operational or safety hazard
in any area of the airport, the airport director may cause the aircraft, at the
owner’s/operator’s expense, and without liability for damage that may result in
the course of such moving, to be moved and delivered into the care of a
representative of an FBO or SASO authorized to do business on the airport.
J.   To avoid being considered abandoned and being removed from the airport
property by the airport director at the aircraft owner’s expense, aircraft
parked or stored outside must:
   1.   Have a current annual certification; and
   2.   Be supported by its own landing gear with fully inflated tires and in a
condition to tow.
K.   Aircraft parked or stored outside shall not leak fuel, oil, or other
materials on the ground or aprons.
15-2-5 Parking permits and payments
A.   All persons parking aircraft at the airport overnight or longer shall
register the aircraft with the office of the airport director as soon as
possible after landing.
B.   All persons parking aircraft at the airport for 30 days or less shall pay
the daily transient parking fees, as established in a fee schedule adopted by
the town council and amended from time to time.
C.   All persons parking aircraft at the airport for 30 days or longer shall
enter into a parking agreement and obtain a monthly parking permit from the
town and shall pay all applicable monthly parking fees, as established in a fee
schedule adopted by the town council and amended from time to time. All
applicable daily parking fees shall be paid until such time as the person
obtains the monthly parking permit.
D.   All persons parking aircraft at the airport shall comply with the terms
and conditions of any parking permit or parking agreement.
E.   Failure to comply with the provisions of this section or the terms and
conditions of any parking permit or parking agreement may result in
cancellation of any parking permits and agreements.
F.   Upon receiving notice of cancellation of a parking permit or agreement, an
aircraft owner shall have 60 days to remove the aircraft in question from the
airport. If the aircraft is not removed within 60 days, or other arrangements
made with the airport director, a peace officer may seize the aircraft and
notify the state of the seizure pursuant to A.R.S. § 28-8243 or the town may
sell the aircraft pursuant to A.R.S. § 33-1023.
G.   Non-payment of any hangar rent, lease payments, or parking fees owed to
the airport or FBO will result in the deactivation of user’s gate access card
or and/or access code.
15-2-6 Aircraft owner’s performance of maintenance and use of commercial
aeronautical activities providers
A.   An aircraft owner is permitted to fuel, wash, apply limited touch up
small-scale paint or finish, and provide aircraft preventive maintenance only
to the owner’s own aircraft, and only if the aircraft is based at the airport,
provided that the owner complies with this title and all applicable laws,
federal aviation regulations, and town code provisions.
   1.   Limited touch-up, small-scale painting, or refinishing is permitted
only in areas designated for such activities and supplied with appropriate fire
protection equipment such as the aircraft maintenance hangars.
   2.   Any spray apparatus application of any size and brush/roll applications
exceeding one gallon are prohibited outside of dedicated approved flammable
finish application areas, except when utilizing water-miscible solutions in
accordance with the international fire code.
   3.   Large-scale painting is prohibited unless approved by the airport
director.
   4.   Fueling may only be conducted outside of the hangar and in compliance
with all applicable fire codes, FAA guidance regarding aircraft fuel storage,
handling and dispensing on airports, the requirements of this title, and all
other applicable laws and standards.
   5.   Any person applying any finish shall ensure compliance with all
applicable environmental regulations and shall not cause damage to hangars or
nearby aircraft.
B.   An owner of a based aircraft may hire or allow a person who is not a based
commercial aeronautical activity provider to provide any of the services
described in this section, or major aircraft alterations and repairs.
   1.   The person providing the services must obtain a SASO permit from the
airport director prior to engaging in the services.
   2.   The services shall be provided:
      a.   In the presence and under the direct supervision of the aircraft
owner, unless the service provider has his or her own airport security gate
access identification badge
      b.   At the based location of the aircraft at the airport
      c.   In conformance with this title and all applicable laws, federal
aviation regulations, and town code provisions.
C.   Where the services are provided as a commercial aeronautical activity for
the benefit of the aircraft owner, the provider must be a direct employee or
authorized independent contractor of the aircraft owner, or for certificated
aircraft, an FAA-certified technical specialist or a mechanic. All such
providers must hold a permit to conduct commercial activities and a town
business license, and pay all applicable fees for performing such activity.
15-2-7 Major aircraft alterations and repairs
Major aircraft alterations and repairs may be conducted on the airport only:
A.   By a based commercial aeronautical activity provider authorized by the
airport to perform major aircraft alterations or repairs; or
B.   By the owner of the aircraft being altered or repaired, and in accordance
with applicable provisions of this title.
C.   In areas of the airport designated and designed for major alterations and
repairs in accordance with applicable building and fire codes.
15-2-8 Aircraft hangars
A.   This section applies to all aircraft hangars regardless of whether the
hangar occupant leases the hangar or the hangar occupant constructed the hangar
at the occupant’s own expense while holding a ground lease with the town.
B.   When land designated for aeronautical use is made available for
construction of hangars, the hangars built on the land are subject to the
airport’s obligations to use aeronautical facilities for aeronautical use.
C.   Aircraft hangars shall be used for aeronautical purposes, or shall be
available for use for aeronautical purposes, except as otherwise approved by
the FAA. Non-aeronautical use of hangars shall be the exception and must be
approved by the airport director.
D.   Notwithstanding the general rule that aircraft hangars shall be used for
aeronautical purposes, in accordance with FAA policy, the airport director may
request FAA approval of non-aeronautical uses of aircraft hangars when there
are vacant hangars and no current aviation demand for the hangars. This
paragraph does not create nor constitute a right to use aircraft hangars for
non-aeronautical purposes.
E.   For purposes of this section, aeronautical uses of aircraft hangars
include:
   1.   Storage and parking of active aircraft
   2.   Minor maintenance, repair, or refurbishment of aircraft, but not the
indefinite storage of nonoperational or derelict aircraft or parts
   3.   Storage of aircraft handling equipment, workbenches, and tools and
materials used in the servicing, maintenance, repair, or outfitting of aircraft
   4.   Final assembly of aircraft under construction
   5.   Non-commercial construction of amateur-built or kit-built aircraft
F.   Non-aeronautical items may be stored in aircraft hangars provided that the
hangar is used primarily for aeronautical purposes and the non-aeronautical
items do not interfere with the aeronautical use of the hangar. Items will not
be considered to interfere with the aeronautical use of the hangar unless the
items:
   1.   Impede the movement of the aircraft in and out of the hangar
   2.   Impede access to aircraft or other aeronautical contents of the hangar
   3.   Displace the aeronautical contents of the hangar
   4.   Are used for the conduct of a non-aeronautical business from the
hangar, including storage of inventory
   5.   Are stored in violation of this title, lease provisions, building
codes, or other local ordinances
G.   The following items may be stored in aircraft storage hangars:
   1.   Any aircraft assigned to the hangar on the airport director’s list of
based aircraft, including any aircraft that are being restored or assembled
   2.   Aeronautical items associated with an aircraft in the hangar, including
the parts, tools, equipment and support items necessary to maintain and operate
an aircraft
   3.   Items associated with an aeronautical activity, including balloon and
skydiving equipment and teaching tools
   4.   Vehicles operated by gate access card permittees and their authorized
guests, only when the hangar lessee is either present on the airport, or using
the aircraft normally stored in the hangar
   5.   Prefabricated metal shelving, workbenches, and cabinets
   6.   A reasonable amount of functional furniture only for use in the hangar
such as a table and chairs
   7.   Spare aircraft tires, batteries, and battery chargers stored and
maintained in accordance with fire codes
   8.   Refrigerators, air conditioners, fans and similar devices, as long as
they are elevated 18 inches above the hangar floor and use no extension cords
   9.   Non-aeronautical items that comply with paragraph F above
   10.   Other items determined by the airport director to be allowable, based
on their function and the personal needs of the occupant
H.   Use of aircraft storage hangars shall be subject to the following
restrictions:
   1.   Hangars shall not be used as a residence.
   2.   Hangars shall not be used for the operation of a business or a business
office, whether the business is aeronautical or non-aeronautical in nature.
   3.   Hangars shall not be used for storage of household items that can be
stored in commercial storage facilities.
   4.   Welding, cutting and all other hot work operations must comply with
applicable fire codes. Doping work involving a flammable coating/finish process
cannot be applied via spray apparatus, and if being applied by brush or roller,
the agent cannot exceed one gallon unless being applied in an area compliant
with the requirements of chapter 24 of the international fire code. Welding, or
any repair requiring the use of open flames, spark-producing devices, or the
heating of parts above 500° F shall only be done outdoors.
   5.   No equipment or materials may be stored in hangars unless used for the
operation and maintenance either of the based aircraft or of the hangar.
   6.   There shall be room for the aircraft in the aircraft hangar for the
based aircraft at all times, even when the aircraft is temporarily not located
in the hangar.
   7.   Oily rags, oil waste, rags and other rubbish and trash may only be
stored in hangars in metal containers with self-closing, tight-fitting lids as
approved by the airport director.
   8.   Fueling, defueling and fuel system maintenance shall comply with all
applicable fire codes and with the following:
      a.   Fueling or defueling within an aircraft storage hangar or within 25
feet thereof is prohibited.
      b.   Major fuel system maintenance within an aircraft storage hangar is
prohibited.
      c.   Open fuel cells are allowed within the hangars if they are new and
have never held fuel, or existing tanks have been purged of flammable vapors so
there are no hazardous vapors off-gassing in the space.
      d.   No flammable or combustible liquids shall be dispensed into or
removed from a container, tank, vehicle or aircraft except in a location
approved by the fire department.
   9.   Flammable and combustible liquids stored inside hangars must comply
with the following:
      a.   Flammable liquids with flash points less than 100° F are prohibited.
This includes aviation fuel and most volatile solvents.
      b.   Combustible liquids with flash points greater than 100° F are
limited to two gallons maximum. This includes diesel fuel, hydraulic fluid,
motor oil and most lubricating oil.
      c.   Fuel in the tanks of aircraft or aircraft related equipment (tugs,
etc.) are exempt from these limitations.
      d.   All combustible liquids must be stored within safety containers
designed for such use, or in the original manufacturers’ containers.
   10.   Oxygen or any combustible or non-combustible compressed gas in a
cylinder or portable tank shall be secured. Compressed gas cylinders or tanks
shall have pressure relief devices installed and maintained. Cylinders or tanks
not in use shall have a transportation safety cap installed. Compressed gas
cylinders are subject to maximum allowable quantities per control area
depending on their contents.
   11.   Portable aircraft and vehicle batteries may only be charged within an
aircraft hangar while the aircraft owner or occupant is present, except for
trickle type chargers with an automatic shutoff. Stationary storage battery
systems must be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable fire
codes.
I.   Hangars shall be subject to annual and periodic inspections by the airport
director, the fire department, building officials, and code compliance officers
to ensure compliance with all laws, ordinances, and this title. Each occupant
shall take reasonable steps to make the hangar available for inspections.
J.   No tenant or lessee shall store any objects, parts, or any other items
except within their own hangar or a screened outside storage facility approved
by the airport director.
K.   No tenant or lessee shall knowingly allow leased or sub-leased property or
hangars to be used or occupied for any purpose prohibited by this title or by
any applicable lease agreement.
15-2-9 Aircraft shade ports and tie-downs
A.   Aircraft shade ports and tie-downs may only be used for the following
purposes:
   1.   Storing and parking of a based aircraft assigned to the shade or tie-
down and listed on the airport director’s list of based aircraft, and storing
of aeronautical items that are approved by the airport director. Aircraft
parked in a shade or tie-down shall be parked so as to be completely contained
within the aircraft parking space and to not obstruct adjacent aircraft parking
area, taxi lanes, or fire department or other emergency vehicle access, except
for the purpose of immediate and temporary staging and fueling of such
aircraft.
   2.   Parking of vehicles operated by gate card permittees and their
authorized guests.
B.   Use of aircraft shade ports and tie-downs shall be subject to the
following restrictions:
   1.   No aircraft maintenance shall be performed in the open tie-downs, shade
ports, or any aprons without the approval of the airport director. This
subparagraph does not apply to minor maintenance activities, such as air filter
replacement, and emergency repairs.
   2.   No equipment or materials may be stored in shade ports or tie-downs
unless used for the operation and maintenance of the based aircraft assigned to
the shade port or tie-down. The airport director may approve the storage of
additional items on a case-by-case basis.
   3.   Oily rags, oil waste, rags and other rubbish and trash may only be
stored in shade ports or tie-downs in metal containers with self-closing,
tight-fitting lids that are approved by the airport director or the fire
department and must be secured to prevent spillage.
   4.   Disabled or otherwise non-airworthy aircraft may not be parked in the
shade ports or on open tie-down parking ramp. This includes but is not limited
to aircraft with deflated tires, missing external parts (e.g., propeller,
cowling), and expired registration. Aircraft in this condition must be removed
from the airport or temporarily relocated to a hangar, subject to aircraft
hangar rules that prohibit the indefinite storage of nonoperational and
derelict aircraft.
   5.   Portable aircraft and vehicle batteries may be charged in shade ports
or tie-downs only while the based aircraft owner, operator, or occupant is
present, except for trickle type chargers with an automatic shutoff. Stationary
storage battery systems must be installed and maintained in accordance with
applicable fire codes.
   6.   Tenants may have a tool box, ladder or container adjacent to their
aircraft. These items must be secured by chain and lock under the aircraft.
   7.   Oxygen or any combustible or non-combustible compressed gas in a
cylinder or portable tank may be stored in shade ports or tie-downs only if the
cylinder or tank is secured and has pressure relief devices installed and
properly maintained. Compressed gas cylinders or tanks not in use shall have a
transportation safety cap installed. Compressed gas cylinders are subject to
maximum allowable quantities per control area depending on their contents.
C.   Aircraft shade ports and tie-downs shall be subject to annual and periodic
inspections by the airport director, the fire department, building officials,
and code compliance officers to ensure compliance with all laws, ordinances,
and this title.
15-2-10 Airport perimeter roads
A.   The use of airport perimeter roads is restricted to airport management,
operations, and maintenance employees, authorized FBO personnel, fuel trucks or
other vehicles, police and fire personnel, and authorized town staff, town
vendors and town contractors.
B.   Airport perimeter roads shall not be used as a shortcut between ramps on
the airport.
C.   Perimeter roads shall remain clear and unobstructed at all times.
15-2-11 Operational and restricted areas
A.   No person may enter upon the movement area without the permission of the
airport director, except persons assigned duty in the movement area, authorized
employees or contractors of the town, and fire, police, and other emergency
personnel and vehicles.
B.   No person may enter the airside area, except as necessary for the lawful
operation or maintenance of an aircraft, or to conduct a commercial activity,
or to conduct any other activity authorized by the airport director.
C.   No person may enter any area posted as being restricted except as
authorized by the airport director.
D.   No person may enter into, remain in, place in, or remove any object from,
any hangar, shade port or other building or facility at the airport without
consent of the town or the person with the legal right of possession of such
space, building, or facility.
15-2-12 Airport smoking areas
Smoking is not permitted:
A.   Within 50 feet of an aircraft, fuel truck and/or fuel storage area
B.   On any apron, taxiway, taxilane, or runway
C.   Where specifically prohibited by the town and/or state law
D.   Inside any aircraft storage or maintenance hangar.
15-2-13 Use of shop areas
All of a tenant’s shops, garages, equipment and facilities are solely for the
conduct of that tenant’s authorized aeronautical or commercial activities. No
person other than employees or agents of that tenant shall make use of such
facilities without individual and specific permission of that tenant.
15-2-14 Maintenance of premises
A.   All tenants at the airport shall at all times maintain their premises in
serviceable, safe and operable condition and repair, and in a condition of
repair, cleanliness and general maintenance.
B.   All tenants at the airport shall keep the floors of hangars, shade ports
and tie-downs leased by them, or used in their operations, clean and clear of
fuel, oil, grease and other similar materials.
15-2-15 Waste containers and disposal
A.   All airport tenants, users, or visitors shall dispose of all waste in
waste containers appropriate for that purpose, and in appropriate locations, as
designated by the airport director, and no other containers or areas shall be
used.
B.   Containers for recyclable materials shall be used in strict compliance
with any rules for use posted by the airport director.
C.   No household waste shall be disposed of in any airport waste container.
D.   No petroleum products, industrial waste matter or other hazardous
materials shall be dumped or otherwise disposed of except in accordance with
local, county, state and federal law. Hazardous materials shall be the
responsibility of the originator under all applicable laws.
15-2-16 Storage
A.   No person shall store or stock materials or equipment in such a manner as
to be unsightly or constitute a hazard to personnel or property, as determined
by the airport director.
B.   Individual containers, cartons or packages shall be conspicuously marked
or labeled in an approved manner.
C.   Rooms or cabinets containing compressed gases shall be conspicuously
labeled: “COMPRESSED GAS.”
15-2-17 Storage, transfer and cleanup charges
A.   The town may remove and impose storage, removal and transfer charges upon
any property or material unlawfully placed or otherwise deposited at the
airport.
B.   The town or the fire department may clean up any material unlawfully
spilled, placed or otherwise deposited at the airport, and may charge the
responsible person(s) for the cost of the cleanup, any required environmental
remediation, and any expenses, fines, or damages incurred by the town as a
result thereof.
15-2-18 Unmanned aircraft systems (UAS)
A.   All persons operating unmanned aircraft systems or drones at or near the
airport for commercial, non-recreational purposes shall comply with FAA all
rules regarding such use.
B.   All persons operating unmanned aircraft systems or drones for recreational
purposes within five miles of the airport shall notify the airport director
prior to operation.
   1.   If the airport director objects to the operation, it is expected that
the operator will not conduct the proposed flight.
   2.   Flying model aircraft over the objections of the airport director may
be considered to be endangering the safety of the national airspace system
(NAS).
15-2-19 Model airplanes, model helicopters, kites, and fireworks
No person shall fly or release a model airplane, model helicopter, rocket,
kite, fireworks, balloon, parachute, or the like within two miles of the
airport if such activity would create a hazard to aircraft operations or as
otherwise determined by the airport director.
15-2-20 Commercial photography or filming
No person may engage in filming activity, as defined in
chapter 9-12 of this code, at the airport, for commercial purposes, without
first applying for a film permit pursuant to
chapter 9-12 and paying applicable fees for the activity.
Section 15-2-20 was amended by Ordinance 2019.002 to reference town code
chapter 9-12
15-2-21 Signs, advertisements, printed or written materials
No person may post, distribute or display signs, advertisements, circulars, or
other printed or written materials at the airport except in locations
designated by the airport director.
15-2-22 Weapons, explosives, and radioactive substances
A.   No person shall carry, possess or exercise control over any unauthorized
firearms or explosives on the airport premises in violation of town code, state
statute, federal law, or federal aviation regulations.
B.   No person, except an authorized law enforcement officer or member of the
armed forces of the United States on official duty, may possess any explosives
on the airport.
C.   No person, except an authorized law enforcement officer or member of the
armed forces of the United States on official duty, may store, handle, use,
dispense or transport at, in, or upon the airport, any radioactive substance or
material, except for materials with a minimum of radioactive substances, such
as radioactive paint illuminating instrument dials, without prior written
permission from the airport director.
15-2-23 Disorderly conduct and intoxicating liquors
No person may:
A.   Commit any disorderly, obscene or unlawful act, or create a nuisance, on
the airport.
B.   Consume any alcoholic beverage upon any portion of the airport open to the
public, except in lawfully established restaurant facilities and in accordance
with all applicable laws, or in some other place authorized by a special event
permit from the airport director authorizing the consumption of such alcoholic
beverages.
C.   Become intoxicated on any portion of the airport.
D.   Enter upon or loiter on or about the airport without the airport
director’s or designee’s permission.
15-2-24 Property damage; injurious, or detrimental activities
A.   No person shall destroy, injure, deface, or disturb any building, sign,
equipment, marker or other structure, or any tree, flower, or lawn, or any
other public property.
B.   No person may conduct activities at the airport that are injurious,
detrimental or damaging to the airport or to airport property or to commercial
activities at the airport.
C.   Any person causing, or responsible for causing, any such injury,
detriment, or damage shall pay the airport, upon the airport’s demand, the full
cost of repairs.
D.   Any person who fails to comply with this section shall be in violation of
this title, and the airport director may prohibit the person from any or all of
the airport facilities until the airport has been fully reimbursed for the
damage caused.
15-2-25 General rules of conduct
No person shall do any of the following on any portion of the airport:
A.   Camp.
B.   Ignite a fire.
C.   Maintain a temporary or permanent residence.
D.   Hunt, pursue, trap, catch, injure, or kill any bird or animal, except in
connection with pest control activities authorized by the airport director.
E.   Solicit fares or funds for any purpose without the written permission of
the airport director.
F.   Walk in a picket line or take part in a labor or other public
demonstration except in a place specifically assigned for that purpose by the
airport director.
15-2-26 Alteration of airport property
A.   No person may make any alterations to any signs, buildings, aircraft
parking areas, leased areas or other airport property, or erect or construct
any buildings or other structures at the airport without first receiving
written permission of the airport director.
B.   Persons undertaking such alterations or construction shall comply with all
building codes and permit procedures of the town, and shall deliver to the
airport director as-built plans upon completion.
15-2-27 Lost articles
A.   Any person finding lost articles in public areas of the airport shall
immediately deposit them at the office of the airport director or, if after
hours, with an airport staff member or FBO employee on duty at the airport, if
available.
B.   Articles unclaimed after 90 days will be disposed of in a lawful manner.
15-2-28 Abandoned property
No person may abandon any personal property on airport property or in any
building on the airport.
15-2-29 Flying clubs
A flying club shall comply with this title and the minimum operating standards.
15-2-30 Payment of fees
All billings by the town are due and payable upon presentation unless otherwise
noted on the bill, or otherwise provided by the terms of a written lease,
license, permit or agreement from or with the town.
15-2-31 Dogs and other animals
A.   No person may enter the airport with a dog or other animal unless the
animal is restrained by a leash or properly confined as determined by the
airport director.
B.   No person in charge of a dog or other animal may permit the animal to
wander unrestrained on any portion of the airport.
C.   No person may ride a horse at the airport without the written permission
of the airport director.
D.   Animal owners are responsible for cleaning up after their pets on the
airport.
15-2-32 Based aircraft information
A.   All based aircraft must be registered with the airport director.
B.   Tenants shall provide to the airport director their name, address and
phone number along with the aircraft owner’s aircraft make, model and FAA
certificate of aircraft registration number or other proof of ownership.
C.   All tenants are required to update changes of based aircraft within 30
days of change.
D.   The airport director may request confirmation of based aircraft on an as-
needed basis. This information will be provided to the Arizona department of
transportation on a quarterly basis.
CHAPTER 15-3.
FUELING, FLAMMABLE FLUIDS, AND SAFETY
15-3-1 Fuel safety
A.   All transportation, storage and other handling of aircraft and vehicle
fuel shall comply with applicable fire codes, FAA guidance regarding aircraft
fuel storage, handling and dispensing on airports, the requirements of this
title, and all other applicable laws and standards.
B.   Aircraft fueling vehicles shall be provided and maintained with a
substantial heavy duty electrical cable of sufficient length to be bonded to
the aircraft to be serviced. Such cable shall be metallically connected to the
transfer apparatus or chassis of the aircraft-fueling vehicle on one end and
shall be provided with a suitable metal clamp on the other end, to be fixed to
the aircraft.
C.   The bonding cable shall be bare or have a transparent protective sleeve
and be stored on a reel or in a compartment provided for no other purpose. It
shall be carried in such a manner that it will not be subjected to sharp kinks
or accidental breakage under conditions of general use.
D.   Transfer apparatus shall be metallically interconnected with tanks,
chassis, axles and springs of aircraft-fueling vehicle.
E.   Employees of fuel agents who fuel aircraft, accept fuel shipments, or
otherwise handle fuel shall receive fire safety training approved by the fire
department.
F.   Personnel assigned to and engaged in fuel-servicing operations shall not
carry matches or lighters on or about their person. Matches or lighters shall
be prohibited in, on, or about aircraft fueling equipment.
15-3-2 Restrictions on commercial fueling activities
No person or company may conduct any commercial fueling activities for aircraft
at the airport, except for a tenant operating as a fixed base operator and in
accordance with the express terms of such tenant’s lease with the town.
15-3-3 Storage of aircraft fuel trucks, trailers and other aircraft refueling
devices
A.   Aircraft refueling vehicles and other movable aircraft fuel containers and
refueling devices shall be stored outside, and not less than 25 feet from an
occupied structure, or such other distance from any occupied structures as may
be approved by the airport director.
B.   Aircraft refueling vehicles shall be parked in a manner that provides a
minimum of ten feet of separation between each aircraft refueling vehicle and
any other vehicle or aircraft refueling device.
C.   No aircraft refueling vehicle, other movable aircraft fuel container, or
other aircraft refueling device, empty or otherwise, may be brought into, kept
or stored within any building at the airport unless the building is used
exclusively for that purpose.
D.   This section does not apply to vehicle fuel approved containers with a
capacity of not more than five gallons, provided no more than five such
containers may be located within a single vehicle.
15-3-4 Aircraft refueling and defueling locations
All aircraft fueling shall be performed outdoors. Aircraft being fueled shall
be positioned so that aircraft fuel system vents or fuel tank openings are not
closer than 25 feet from any building or structure.
15-3-5 Maintenance of fuel servicing vehicles
A.   Maintenance and servicing of aircraft fuel servicing vehicles shall be
performed outdoors or in a building approved for that purpose by the airport
director.
B.   Aircraft fueling vehicles and all related equipment shall be properly
maintained and kept in good repair. Accumulations of oil, grease, fuel and
other flammable or combustible materials is prohibited. Maintenance and service
of such equipment shall be accomplished in areas approved by the fire
department.
C.   Tanks, pipes, hoses, valves and other fuel delivery equipment shall be
maintained leak free at all times.
15-3-6 Open flames
A.   There shall be no open flames or lighted open-flame devices in any of the
following locations:
   1.   The airside area
   2.   Within 50 feet of any aircraft, fuel truck, and/or fuel storage area
   3.   In any other area where open flames are specifically prohibited by the
town
B.   Lighted open-flame devices shall include, but shall not be limited to, the
following:
   1.   Exposed flame heaters
   2.   Liquid, solid or gaseous devices, including portable and wheeled
gasoline or kerosene heaters
   3.   Gas or charcoal cooking grills
   4.   Heat producing, welding, or cutting devices, and blowtorches
   5.   Flare pots or other open-flame lights
15-3-7 Removal of gasoline, oil, and grease
A.   If there is spillage of gasoline, oil, grease or any material that may be
unsightly or detrimental to the airport, the spilled material shall be removed
immediately, either by the operator or owner of the equipment causing the
spillage, or by the tenant, commercial aeronautical service provider, or other
person responsible for the spillage.
B.   If the equipment operator or other responsible person fails to restore the
area to its original, safe, and environmentally sound status, the town may
clean up any material spilled, placed or otherwise deposited at the airport,
and may charge the responsible person(s) for the cost of the cleanup, any
required environmental remediation, and any expenses, fines, or damages
incurred by the town as a result thereof.
C.   Spillage events may constitute grounds for the equipment operator or
responsible person being denied access to the airport.
D.   Activities in the affected area not related to the mitigation of the spill
shall cease until the spilled material has been removed or the hazard has been
mitigated. Aircraft or other vehicles shall not be moved through the spill area
until the spilled material has been removed or the hazard has been mitigated.
E.   All spills shall be reported to airport management, documented, and
mitigated.
F.   The fire department shall be notified of any fuel spill which is
considered a hazard to people or property, or which meets one or more of the
following criteria:
   1.   Any dimension of the spill is greater than ten feet.
   2.   The spill area is greater than 50 square feet.
   3.   The fuel flow is continuous in nature.
G.   The fueling-system operator shall conduct an investigation of all spills
that require notification to the fire department.
15-3-8 Lubricating oils
A.   Lubricating oils that are necessary for minor aircraft maintenance and
have a flash point at or above 100° F, may be stored in hangars or suitable
storage devices as approved by the airport director, provided they are stored
in their original container and have the original manufacturer’s labeling.
B.   No more than 30 gallons of such lubricating oils may be stored by any
person, except that an aircraft maintenance shop authorized by the airport
director to operate on the airport may store more than 30 gallons of
lubricating oils, in accordance with applicable fire code provisions.
15-3-9 Fire extinguishers
A.   All airport tenants shall supply and maintain adequate and readily
accessible fire extinguishers as required by the fire department. Each fire
extinguisher shall carry a placard showing the date of the most recent
inspection.
B.   Any discharge of any fire extinguisher equipment on airport property,
regardless of the circumstances, shall be reported to the airport director
immediately after use, in accordance with state statutory requirements.
C.   At least two fire extinguishers, each having a rating of 20-BC, shall be
readily available for use in connection with any aircraft fueling operations.
D.   Aircraft fuel-servicing tank vehicles shall be equipped with a minimum of
two listed portable fire extinguishers, each having a rating of 20-BC. A
portable fire extinguisher shall be readily accessible from either side of the
vehicle.
E.   Aircraft towing vehicles shall have a minimum of one listed 20-BC fire
extinguisher.
F.   All welding apparatus shall be equipped with a minimum of one listed 2-A:
20-BC fire extinguisher.
G.   Use of a fire extinguisher shall be immediately reported to the fire
department.
15-3-10 Movable aircraft fuel storage tanks or containers
Unless otherwise approved by the airport director and the fire department,
movable aircraft fuel storage tanks or containers are prohibited at the airport
except for:
A.   Aircraft fuel trucks and trailers constructed, operated and maintained in
all respects as required by local, state or federal law.
B.   Permanent fuel tanks in an operable aircraft.
C.   Containers not exceeding one-gallon capacity used solely for sampling and
testing of fuel, engines, and fuel handling apparatus.
D.   No more than one tank per person, with a capacity of not more than 55
gallons, used by that person to fuel their own aircraft pursuant to a self-
fueling permit.
E.   Fuel transport vehicles authorized by the town, and lawfully transporting
fuel for immediate dispensing into a fuel storage tank. Such vehicles shall
access the airport at a point approved by the airport director and remain under
escort by the representative of the person on the airport receiving the fuel.
15-3-11 Self-fueling
A.   Except as may be prohibited by other provisions of this title and any
other applicable law, owners of a based aircraft who desire to self-fuel their
aircraft, shall apply for a self-fueling permit from the airport director.
B.   Paragraph A above does not apply to the use of a self-service fuel
facility provided by a fixed base operator.
C.   Self-fueling of vehicles other than aircraft is strictly prohibited.
D.   Rotorcraft may not use the self-fuel facilities.
15-3-12 Fueling of fuel vehicles
Transferring fuel from vehicle to vehicle on airport property is prohibited
unless the fuel is transferred from an approved fuel loading device.
15-3-13 Vehicle fuel
No person shall possess vehicle fuel on the airport except:
A.   Within the permanently installed fuel tank of a vehicle for use by that
vehicle
B.   Within movable containers designed for storage of vehicle fuel, subject to
the following conditions:
   1.   The containers have a maximum capacity of five gallons.
   2.   No more than five such containers are located in a single vehicle.
C.   Within underground or above-ground vehicle fuel storage tanks that have a
capacity of not more than 2,000 gallons, and are lawfully installed and
maintained in accordance with this title.
15-3-14 Fuel farms
Only full-service fixed base operator(s) who have a lease with express terms
authorizing them to conduct commercial fueling activities on the airport will
be permitted to install a permanent fuel farm. Any such installation must be
approved by the airport director and the fire department.
CHAPTER 15-4.
AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS
15-4-1 Restricted runway operations
A.   Except in an emergency, all fixed wing aircraft landings and takeoffs
shall be made on a paved runway.
B.   Landings and/or takeoffs from dirt surfaces are strictly prohibited.
C.   Except in an emergency, no rotorcraft equipped with skid type landing gear
shall perform run-on landings, or any other maneuvers that would cause the
skids to slide upon the runway surface.
D.   Landing aircraft shall clear the runway as soon as practical, consistent
with safety, and taxi ahead to the nearest turn-off.
15-4-2 Aircraft wingspan and weight restrictions
Aircraft shall not be placed in a hangar, shade port or tie-down, nor shall
aircraft be operated in areas of the airport:
A.   Where the aircraft’s wingspan exceeds the maximum wingspan designated for
that area by the airport director.
B.   Where the aircraft’s weight exceeds the maximum weight designated for that
area by the airport director
15-4-3 Traffic pattern /pattern altitudes
The recommended minimum traffic pattern altitude above ground level (AGL) for
aircraft operations at the airport is 800 feet (2,800 feet MSL). All traffic
shall be left for runways 12 and 21 and right for runways 30 and 3. The calm
wind (four knots or less) runway is Runway 12.
15-4-4 Disabled aircraft
A.   Unless otherwise permitted by the airport director, aircraft owners/
operators and pilots shall be responsible for the prompt removal of their
disabled aircraft and parts thereof from the movement area, unless such
aircraft owners or pilots are required or directed by the airport director, the
FAA, or the NTSB to delay removal pending an investigation of an aircraft
accident or incident.
B.   Aircraft owners/operators and pilots shall remain with a disabled aircraft
until the aircraft is removed from the movement area.
C.   If the aircraft owner/operator or pilot fails to promptly remove a
disabled aircraft, the airport director may cause the aircraft to be removed,
and bill the aircraft owner for all charges incurred in the removal of the
aircraft.
D.   The town, the FBO, and other airport businesses and personnel shall not be
responsible for any damage to disabled aircraft removed or towed from any
airport surface.
15-4-5 Negligent and reckless operation of aircraft
No aircraft shall be operated in any of the following ways:
A.   In a careless, negligent or reckless manner
B.   In disregard of the rights and safety of others
C.   In an improperly maintained, or otherwise hazardous, condition
D.   At a speed or in a manner that endangers, or is likely to endanger
persons, or property.
15-4-6 Required aircraft radio
No aircraft shall land or take off at the airport unless the aircraft is
equipped with a functioning radio capable of direct two-way communications,
except in the case of a radio failure or an emergency.
15-4-7 Hang gliders, paragliders, gliders, powered parachutes, and ultra-light
aircraft; hot air balloons
A.   No person shall operate a hang glider, powered paraglider, glider, ultra-
light aircraft, powered parachutes, or any other device falling under 14 CFR
part 103 at, onto or from the airport without the prior written approval of the
airport director except in an emergency.
B.   Hot air balloons shall not be operated at the airport without the prior
written approval of the airport director except in an emergency.
15-4-8 Rotorcraft
A.   No person shall operate or move a rotorcraft while its rotors are turning
unless there is a clear area of at least 50 feet from the outer tip of each
rotor.
B.   No person shall hover taxi a rotorcraft on taxi lanes between the hangars,
aircraft shades, or open tie-down areas.
C.   Rotorcraft shall only take off and land on an approved helipad or the
helicopter ramp unless otherwise authorized by the airport director or
authorized FBO staff.
D.   Rotorcraft stored in hangars or tie-downs must be towed to an approved
helipad or helicopter ramp before starting the engine.
E.   Rotorcraft shall not be operated in a manner that will produce dirt, rocks
or debris on any runway, taxiway, taxi lane, or apron.
F.   Rotorcraft are prohibited from utilizing the self-fuel facility.
15-4-9 Running of aircraft engines, exhaust, propeller blast or rotor wash
A.   Aircraft engines shall be run at idle except as may be necessary for safe
taxiing operations, taking off, landing, preflight testing, and maintenance
testing.
B.   All aircraft engine run-ups shall be conducted in areas designated by the
airport director for such run-ups. Except in an emergency, all aircraft engine
run-ups for maintenance testing purposes shall be conducted between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
C.   At no time shall an aircraft’s engine(s) be operated while the aircraft is
in a hangar or shade port.
D.   No aircraft engine shall be started or aircraft taxied where the exhaust,
propeller blast, or rotor wash may cause injury to persons or do damage to
property or spread debris.
E.   No high power maintenance run-ups are allowed between aircraft hangars,
between shade ports, near tie-downs, in taxi lanes, or on taxiways (other than
the portions of taxiways that act as run-up aprons), except at areas designated
for high power maintenance run-ups by the airport director.
15-4-10 Taxiing of aircraft
A.   No person shall taxi an aircraft except on areas designated for taxiing.
B.   No person shall taxi an aircraft without first taking all necessary
precautions to prevent a collision with other aircraft, persons, or objects.
C.   Aircraft shall not be taxied into or out of a hangar, shade port, or other
covered area.
D.   If it is impossible to taxi aircraft in compliance with this section, then
the engine must be shut off and the aircraft towed to the new location.
15-4-11 Aircraft incident/accident reports and procedures
A.   Any person involved in an aircraft operation on the airport, within the
town, or in the airspace around the airport that results in personal injury or
damage to property shall provide all pertinent information to the airport
director as soon as possible and in no event later than 24 hours after the
accident.
B.   The information shall include the names, addresses and phone numbers of
the persons involved, a description of the accident, and its cause, if known.
C.   If a federal or state law, regulation, or agency requires filing of a
written copy of an accident report, a copy of such report shall also be
submitted to the airport director.
D.   The airport director or designee shall serve as the initial incident
commander for all accidents on the airport property and shall secure the
accident area with assistance from the police and fire departments.
15-4-12 Compliance with FAA regulations
No person may conduct any aircraft operations in violation of any FAA
regulations.
15-4-13 Interfering or tampering with aircraft
No person may interfere or tamper with any aircraft, aircraft parts,
instruments, fuel, or tools without prior approval of the aircraft owner, or in
the event of an emergency, as specifically directed by the airport director.
15-4-14 Aircraft demonstrations and public events
A.   No aircraft flight or ground demonstrations may be conducted at the
airport without prior permission of the airport director.
B.   The town reserves the right to temporarily restrict or control activities
on the movement area and public areas of the airport for purposes of aerial and
ground demonstrations or for any other public purpose.
C.   To the extent practicable, such public events will be conducted in such a
manner as to minimize the impact upon normal airport operations.
15-4-15 NOTAMs and airport advisories
The airport director is responsible for the dissemination of NOTAM information
pertaining to airfield conditions and airfield lighting. The airport director
is authorized to relay airfield conditions, advisories or information
concerning outages of airfield lighting to the appropriate FAA flight service
station for dissemination as a NOTAM or advisory on the AWOS.
15-4-16 Tie-down or storage of damaged or dismantled aircraft
A damaged or dismantled aircraft shall be repaired, re-assembled, or moved to a
location acceptable to the airport director within 30 days unless the airport
director permits an alternative arrangement.
15-4-17 Airport movement areas
A.   No ground vehicles, except for emergency vehicles, may enter upon the
movement area without the express permission of the airport director.
B.   Aircraft and vehicles shall not be left unattended within the movement
area.
15-4-18 Noise abatement procedures
Aircraft pilots shall operate all aircraft in compliance with the airport’s
written noise abatement procedures to the maximum extent possible.
CHAPTER 15-5.
VEHICLES AND PEDESTRIANS
15-5-1 General requirements
A.   No person may operate a vehicle on the airport except in accordance with
this title and all federal, state and local laws.
B.   Vehicles shall access all airport facilities and businesses from the
landside public parking or appropriate gate areas for the facility or business.
C.   All vehicles shall yield the right of way to aircraft in motion and
emergency vehicles.
D.   All vehicles, except for ground service and emergency vehicles, shall
remain a safe distance from any aircraft whose engines are running.
E.   No person may operate a vehicle for hauling trash, dirt, or any other
material unless it is built to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting,
leaking, or otherwise escaping.
F.   Trailers and storage containers shall not be parked anywhere within the
AOA without the airport director’s permission.
15-5-2 Vehicle gates, access codes, and gate access cards
A.   Persons who have been provided either a code or a gate access card for the
purpose of obtaining access to the airport may use only airport-issued codes/
cards, and shall not divulge, duplicate, or otherwise distribute the same to
any person, unless otherwise approved in writing by the airport director.
Violation of this requirement may result in the loss of airport access
privileges and/or criminal penalties and fines.
B.   Vehicle access to the AOA is obtained through automated gates, subject to
the following provisions.
   1.   Upon entering the AOA through an automated gate, the driver must wait
until the gate is fully closed before departing the area in order to ensure
gate functionality and prevent unauthorized access. Notwithstanding this rule,
if another vehicle uses its access badge or access code and the gate reverses
direction, the driver may proceed to the driver’s destination.
   2.   Only one vehicle entry per gate operation is permitted. Follow through
by a second vehicle is prohibited unless being escorted by an authorized user,
in which case the authorized user must remain with the vehicle under escort at
all times.
   3.   Upon exiting the AOA, multiple vehicles may exit in one gate operation
in which case the last vehicle to exit must wait for the gate to close before
proceeding.
C.   Vehicles shall obtain access to, and depart from, aircraft parking and
storage areas via the gate located nearest to the person’s aircraft parking or
storage area. Notwithstanding this provision, if there is an inoperative gate,
vehicles may enter at an alternate gate and use airport perimeter roads and/or
taxiways to access their destination with the airport director’s approval or a
posted sign authorizing vehicles to do so.
15-5-3 Licensing, registration and insurance
A.   No person may operate a motorized vehicle of any kind on the airport
without a valid state motor vehicle operator’s license.
B.   All motorized vehicles operated on the airport shall have a current
registration as required by state law and shall be covered by the type and
amount of vehicle liability insurance coverage required by state law.
15-5-4 Control of vehicles
A.   No person may operate or park a vehicle at the airport in a manner
prohibited by this title, or by signs, pavement markings, or other signals
posted by the town or by the airport director.
B.   No person may operate or park a vehicle in the airside area unless that
person has valid access privileges.
C.   The airport director has the authority to regulate or prohibit any class
or type of vehicle or other form of transport that operates in the AOA.
15-5-5 Speed limits
A.   All vehicles shall be operated on the airport in strict compliance with
all posted speed limits.
B.   The maximum speed limit in the AOA for all vehicles, with the exception of
authorized municipal and emergency services vehicles operated by duly
authorized officials in the performance of their official duties, is 15 miles
per hour, or less, if conditions require a lower speed to ensure safe
operation.
15-5-6 Vehicles operating on runway and taxiways
A.   Only vehicles authorized by the airport director may operate in the
movement area.
B.   No vehicles may be operated on the runways and taxiways unless authorized
by the airport director.
C.   Any vehicle authorized to operate on the airport runways or taxiways shall
display an amber rotating beacon or a three-foot by three-foot white and
orange-checkered flag that complies with FAA advisory circular 150/5210-5D, as
amended, and shall be equipped with a two-way radio, or an approved escort with
a two-way radio, capable of transmitting and receiving communications on the
UNICOM frequency (123.00 MHz). Exceptions to this rule must be authorized by
the airport director.
D.   The fact that a vehicle has a two-way radio or that the driver has a
pilot’s license does not constitute an authorization or clearance for the
vehicle to operate on runways or taxiways.
E.   If a gate is inoperable, airport staff may authorize entry into the
airport movement area in order for an airport user to access his/her hangar or
other destination. The user must call the phone number listed on the gate and
advise airport staff of the inoperability.
15-5-7 Airport perimeter security
Persons owning, operating or otherwise responsible for airport buildings or
other structures that contain any portion of the airport security perimeter, as
defined by the airport director, shall operate and maintain all vehicular and
pedestrian access points and airport security perimeter on their property in a
manner that is acceptable to the airport director and limits access from their
property to the airport to only those persons authorized by the airport
director to have access.
15-5-8 Authority to remove vehicles and trailers
A.   The airport director may cause to be removed from any area of the airport
any vehicle or trailer that is disabled, abandoned, or parked in violation of
this title, or that presents an operational hazard to any area of the airport,
as determined by the airport director in his or her sole discretion.
B.   The vehicle operator shall bear any expense of removal and the risk of any
damage from such removal.
15-5-9 Bicycles and miscellaneous vehicles
A.   Bicycles may be operated on the airport, provided that such operation is
in accordance with this title, including those sections pertaining to vehicles.
B.   Any bicycles equipped with reflectors and a light may be operated on the
airport after sunset.
C.   No person may operate at the airport any go-cart, go-ped, skateboard,
rollerblade, or other vehicles not licensed, or otherwise permitted by state
law, for operation on a public street or highway, except for town vehicles or
small vehicles (golf carts, UTV’s, ATV’s, etc.) used for servicing aircraft or
on airport transportation.
15-5-10 Vehicular accidents
A.   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident on the airport that
results in injury or death to any person, or damage to any property, shall do
all of the following:
   1.   Immediately stop the vehicle at the scene of the accident.
   2.   Render reasonable assistance to each person injured in the accident,
including making arrangements for the transportation of the person to a
physician, surgeon or hospital for medical or surgical treatment, if it is
apparent that treatment is necessary or if transport is requested by the
injured person.
   3.   Give the driver’s name, address and operator’s license and registration
number to the person injured, the airport director, and to any investigating
police officer.
B.   The driver shall also make and file a report of the accident as required
by state law, and provide a copy of that report to the airport director.
15-5-11 Careless or intoxicated vehicle operation
No vehicle of any kind may be operated at the airport:
A.   In a careless, negligent or reckless manner
B.   In disregard of the rights and safety of others
C.   While the driver would be prohibited by law from operating a vehicle upon
the public streets of the town due to drug or alcohol impairment or influence
D.   At a speed or in a manner that endangers, or is likely to endanger,
persons or property
E.   If the vehicle is constructed, equipped or loaded so as to endanger, or be
likely to endanger, persons or property, or to result in the load or other
materials becoming separated from the vehicle
F.   If the vehicle is not lighted or otherwise clearly visible during hours of
darkness, or during inclement weather
15-5-12 Motor vehicle parking and storage
A.   No person may park or leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not,
except within a designated vehicle parking area, except that a vehicle may be
parked next to, or in front of, a hangar as long as the vehicle does not
obstruct aircraft movement or hangar access.
B.   Aircraft owners and operators may park their vehicles only in the aircraft
parking space designated for their aircraft.
C.   Vehicles parked in an aircraft parking area shall be parked in a manner so
as to be completely contained in an aircraft parking area and to not obstruct
adjacent aircraft parking areas or taxi lanes unless for the purposes of
immediate and temporary loading, unloading, or staging of an aircraft.
D.   A vehicle parked in an aircraft parking area shall be parked in a manner
that allows the vehicle to be immediately driven or towed away from any nearby
aircraft in case of an emergency.
E.   Vehicles are prohibited from parking in a manner that causes the vehicle
to occupy more than one marked space.
F.   Parking is limited to three days unless the vehicle is parked in an area
designated for long-term parking.
G.   Vehicles shall not park or stand within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
15-5-13 Airport access during an accident or incident
Only persons authorized by law or persons having the permission of the airport
director may enter the AOA of the airport for the purposes of attending,
observing, or assisting at the scene of an aircraft accident or incident or
vehicular accident.
15-5-14 Pedestrians in the airside area
Walking, standing, and loitering in the AOA are permitted only if determined by
the airport director not to be an operational or safety concern.
15-5-15 Vehicle repair
A.   No person may clean or make any repairs to vehicles, other than ground
support equipment, anywhere on the airport, except for minor repairs that
enable such vehicles to be removed from the airport.
B.   No person may move, or interfere or tamper with, any vehicle, or take or
use any vehicle part or tool without the written approval of the vehicle owner,
or other evidence of the right to do so satisfactorily presented to the airport
director.
15-5-16 Pedestrians soliciting rides
No person may stand or walk in, upon, or adjacent to, a roadway at the airport
for the purpose of soliciting a ride from a vehicle, nor may any person solicit
aircraft rides from within the airport operations area.
15-5-17 Motor homes, boats, jet skis, trailers, and recreational vehicles
Motor homes, boats, jet skis, trailers, and other recreational vehicles shall
not be stored anywhere on the airport except with the prior written permission
of the airport director.
TITLE 16
UTILITIES BOARD
Ordinance 2005.20 added title 16
CHAPTER 16-1.   GENERAL
CHAPTER 16-1.
GENERAL
16-1-1 Creation.
There is created the utilities board of the town for the purpose of managing
and operating the utility operations of the town including water, wastewater,
street lights, electric and other authorized utility functions in compliance
with this title and the provisions of applicable law.
16-1-2 Membership.
The membership of the utilities board shall consist of the town water director
or a water department employee designated by the water director, three council-
appointed members who are either town residents or utility customers of the
town, two town employees appointed by the town manager, and the town finance
director or a finance department employee designated by the finance director.
The council shall choose the chair of the utilities board from among its
membership.
Ordinance 2011.33 amended section
16-1-2 to revise and update the membership of the utilities board. Ordinance
2015.015 changed “utilities director” to “water director” and “utilities
department” to “water department.”
16-1-3 Powers and duties.
A.   The utilities board shall have the following powers and duties:
   1.   Keep and submit minutes to the council for information.
   2.   Subject to the provisions of paragraph C of this section, manage and
operate the water, wastewater, street lights, electric and other utility
functions of the town in accordance with the provisions of this code and
applicable law.
   3.   Adopt and amend bylaws of the board, which shall be effective upon
review and approval by the council.
B.   Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph A of this section,
responsibility for the daily operations of the utilities of the town shall be
vested in and performed by the water director under the supervision of the town
manager. The chair of the utilities board, on behalf of the board, shall
consult with the town manager with respect to the operations of the town’s
utilities.
C.   The council shall be responsible for approval of utility rates, adoption
of the budget, capital acquisitions and approval of contracts as required by
chapter 3-4 of the town code and applicable law.
Ordinance 2015.015 modified paragraph B by changing “utilities director” to
“water director”
TITLE 17
LAND DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 17-1.   TITLE, INTENT, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
CHAPTER 17-2.   ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES AND OFFICERS
CHAPTER 17-3.   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
CHAPTER 17-4.   ZONING
CHAPTER 17-5.   SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 17-6.   GENERAL AND MISCELLANEOUS DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 17-7.   RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS
CHAPTER 17-8.   MULTI-FAMILY, COMMERCIAL, AND INDUSTRIAL DESIGN STANDARDS
CHAPTER 17-9.   PARKING
CHAPTER 17-10.   SIGNS
CHAPTER 17-11.   ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE PRESERVATION, NATIVE PLANT PROTECTION,
AND LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
CHAPTER 17-12.   PROTECTION OF CULTURAL RESOURCES
CHAPTER 17-13.   STANDARDS FOR GRADING AND RELATED SITE WORK
CHAPTER 17-14.   HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 17-15.   FLOODPLAIN AND EROSION HAZARD MANAGEMENT CODE
CHAPTER 17-16.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 17-17.   DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ORDINANCE
CHAPTER 17-18.   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
CHAPTER 17-19.   SILVERBELL ROAD CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT
CHAPTER 17-1.
TITLE, INTENT, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
Chapter 17-1 was inserted into the town code by Ordinance 2015.021 and
subsequently repealed and replaced by Ordinance 2021.010.
Sections:
17-1-1   Title
17-1-2   Intent and purpose
17-1-3   Compliance
17-1-4   Transition from previous regulations
17-1-5   Interpretation
17-1-6   Definitions
17-1-1 Title
This title is known as the Marana land development code.
17-1-2 Intent and purpose
The intent and purpose of this title is to promote the health, safety, order,
and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the town, and
specifically to accomplish the following:
A.   Encourage and facilitate orderly growth and development within the town.
B.   Secure economy in municipal expenditures and facilitate adequate provision
for transportation, water, sewerage, parks, schools, and other public
requirements.
C.   Lessen congestion in the streets, prevent the overcrowding of land, and
provide adequate light and air.
D.   Secure safety from fires, floods, traffic hazards, and other dangers.
E.   Stabilize and improve property values.
F.   Promote the development of a more attractive, wholesome, and serviceable
town, including vibrant downtown, and pedestrian-oriented mixed-use standards
for new development.
G.   Create conditions favorable to economic, recreational, educational,
cultural, and civic opportunities.
17-1-3 Compliance
No one is permitted to develop or use any land, building, or structure within
the town in violation of this title.
17-1-4 Transition from previous regulations
A.   An application for a permit or development approval that has been accepted
by the town as complete prior to the effective date of this title will be
reviewed based on the standards in effect when the application was accepted as
complete.
B.   An application for a permit or development approval that has not been
accepted by the town as complete prior to the effective date of this title, or
that is submitted after that effective date, must be processed in compliance
with the requirements of this title.
C.   Any permit or development that was approved before the effective date of
this title will remain valid.
D.   Any violation of the town zoning, subdivision, or land development code in
effect prior to the effective date of this title will continue to be a
violation unless the activity does not violate this title.
17-1-5 Interpretation
These provisions are the minimum requirements to promote the public health,
safety, order, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the town. This title
is not intended to interfere with or annul any easement, covenant, or other
agreement between parties. However, where this title imposes a greater
restriction than is required by any other provision, this title governs.
17-1-6 Definitions
A.   The following definitions are used in this title, unless a different
meaning is clearly indicated by the context or by a more specific definition:
   1.   Abutting: Properties having a common property line or boundary.
   2.   Access: The place, means, or way by which pedestrians and vehicles must
have safe and usable ingress and egress to a property.
   3.   Accessory structure: A detached subordinate structure or building, the
use of which is customarily incidental to the main building or to the principal
use of land and which is located on the same parcel with the main building or
principal use.
   4.   Accessory: A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the main
building or principal use.
   5.   Acre: 43,560 square feet of land area.
   6.   Adjacent: Near or close to, but not necessarily touching or abutting or
having a common dividing line, such as two properties separated by a street,
alley, easement, or common area.
   7.   Adult day health care facility: Has the same meaning as defined in
A.R.S. § 36- 401.
   8.   Adult foster care home: Has the same meaning as defined in A.R.S. § 36-
401.
   9.   Amusement, indoor: Enclosed facilities for the purpose of sports, game
playing or similar amusements, including but not limited to skating rink,
bowling alley, billiards, ping pong, and mechanical, electronic, card, or board
games. Has the same meaning as defined in A.R.S. § 36-401.
   10.   Amusement, outdoor: An establishment that offers games, rides, or
other similar activities in a fixed location, including but not limited to
miniature golf, amusement park, water slide, amphitheater, stadium, track, and
drive-in theater.
   11.   Apiary: Where bees are kept for their honey, generally consisting of a
number of hives.
   12.   Articulated: Divided into joints or segments.
   13.   Assisted living center: Has the same meaning as defined in A.R.S. §
36-401.
   14.   Assisted living home: Has the same meaning as defined in A.R.S. § 36-
401.
   15.   Automobile fuel station: A retail establishment primarily engaged in
selling automobile fuel, but not including auto repair shops, body and fender
works, and similar repairing and painting uses.
   16.   Aviary: Large cage or building specifically designed for keeping
birds.
   17.   Awning: An architectural projection or shelter projecting from, and
supported by the exterior wall of, a building and composed of a covering of
rigid or non-rigid materials and/ or fabric on a supporting framework that may
be either permanent or retractable.
   18.   Bar: Premises used primarily for the sale or dispensing of alcoholic
beverages by the drink for on-site consumption and where food may be available
for consumption as an accessory use. Includes retail micro-brewery or micro-
distillery.
   19.   Barn: A large accessory building used exclusively for the storage of
grain, hay, and other farm products or farm equipment, or the sheltering of
livestock.
   20.   Batching plant: Manufacturing facilities for the sorting, grading, and
storage of aggregates as construction materials; includes concrete and asphalt
batching plants.
   21.   Bed and breakfast: An owner-occupied residence where four or fewer
rooms are offered for short-term rental, and provides meals only to its
transient lodgers.
   22.   Berm: An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest, screen
undesirable views, decrease noise, and/or control or manage surface drainage.
   23.   Board of adjustment: The town board of adjustment.
   24.   Buffer: Open spaces, landscaped areas, fences, walls, berms, or any
combination of them, used to physically separate or screen one use or property
from another to visually shield or block noise, lights, buildings, other
nuisances, or provide privacy.
   25.   Buildable area: The lot area where a building can be placed after yard
setbacks and easements are deducted.
   26.   Builder: The builder is the purchaser of a development area, or
portions of a development area who will build or provide for building within
their areas of ownership.
   27.   Building: Any structure having a roof and walls built and maintained
for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, or things.
   28.   Building height: The vertical distance between the finished floor
elevation and the highest point of the building, excluding chimneys, vents and
antennae.
   29.   Building mass: The three-dimensional bulk of a building measured in
height, width, and depth.
   30.   Building site: The ground area of a building or buildings together
with all adjacent open spaces.
   31.   Business or commercial: The purchase, sale or other transaction
involving the handling or disposition, other than that included in the term
"industry" as defined in this section, of any article, substance or commodity
for profit or gain.
   32.   Camp, farm labor: A building or complex of buildings located on an
operating farm that is intended to house farm workers and/or their families on
a seasonal basis.
   33.   Caretaker quarters: Accessory dwelling unit that is either built into
or onto an existing primary building or is placed on the same parcel and
adjacent to the primary building, and whose occupants are responsible for
providing security for the property or complex (commercial or industrial uses)
or for providing living or health care assistance to a resident of the primary
dwelling unit (residential uses).
   34.   Carport: An attached or detached roofed structure providing space for
the storage of one or more motor vehicles and enclosed on not more than three
sides by walls.
   35.   Character: Attributes, qualities, and features that give function,
definition, and uniqueness to a development project.
   36.   Chicken: A female chicken.
   37.   Child care facility: Has the same meaning as defined in A.R.S. § 36-
881.
   38.   Child care home: A single-family residence where child care is
regularly provided during a portion of a day for four or fewer children not
related to the proprietor.
   39.   Colony: A controlled honey bee brood including a single queen bee,
drones, and workers.
   40.   Commercial center: A development containing one or more retail stores,
restaurants, hotels, motels, and similar businesses within a single building or
multiple buildings.
   41.   Commercial vehicle: Any motor vehicle, trailer, or semi-trailer
designed or used to carry freight, passengers for a fee, or merchandise in the
furtherance of any commercial enterprise and having a gross weight of more than
10,000 pounds. Includes heavy machinery equipment, dump trucks, tractor and
trailer rigs, either as one unit or separately, vehicles having more than two
axles on the road, and similar vehicle not ordinarily used for personal
transport.
   42.   Common area: An area of common access or use designed to serve two or
more separate dwelling units which may or may not be under separate ownership.
   43.   Community garden: A private or public facility for cultivation of
fruits, flowers, vegetables, or ornamental plants by more than one person or
family.
   44.   Community recreation: Community facilities for a specific subdivision
and common to a homeowner's association, including sports courts, swimming
pools, spas, recreation buildings, patio shelters and similar uses.
   45.   Compatible: Capable of existing together in harmony and without
conflict or ill effects.
   46.   Composting facility: A facility to process raw organic by-products
into biologically stable organic material.
   47.   Condominium: A form of real estate ownership as defined in A.R.S. §
33-1202.
   48.   Condominium project: A project that includes a condominium.
   49.   Contractor's yard: A facility or area for the storage of materials,
equipment, and commercial vehicles utilized by building and construction
contractors, craftsmen, and tradesmen.
   50.   Corral: A pen or enclosure for confining animals.
   51.   County: Pima County, Arizona, or Pinal County, Arizona, as applicable
to the particular geographic area.
   52.   Cul-de-sac: A local street with only one outlet and having an
appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
   53.   Curbway: The landscaped area between the outside edge of a sidewalk
and the inside edge of a curb.
   54.   Dairy farm: Area where dairy animals are kept for milking and from
which a part or all of the milk is sold, offered for sale or supplied for human
consumption, and includes all buildings, yards and premises occupied or used in
connection with the production of milk.
   55.   Data center: A facility used primarily for the storage, management,
processing, and transmission of digital data, which houses computer or network
equipment, systems, servers, appliances and other associated components related
to digital data operations. Examples of such digital data include, but are not
limited to, computationally-intensive applications such as blockchain
technology, cryptocurrency mining, weather modeling, and genome sequencing. The
facility may also include air handlers, power generators, water cooling and
storage facilities, utility substations, and other associated utility
infrastructure to support sustained operations at the data center.
   56.   Density: The number of dwelling units that may be constructed per a
unit of measure of land area. Usually expressed using the acre as the unit of
measure.
   57.   Designated commercial area: A lot in zone A where the only building or
buildings were originally designed and constructed to accommodate business,
commercial, office, industrial, or warehousing uses and not residential uses.
   58.   Developer: Any person, group or entity proposing or constructing a
development as defined by the land development code.
   59.   Development: The act of bringing about growth; to construct or alter a
structure, to make a change in use or appearance of land, to divide land into
parcels, or to create or terminate rights of access. When appropriate to the
context, development refers to the act of development or to the result of
development within the town.
   60.   Development plan: A dimensioned presentation of the proposed
development of a parcel of land that depicts the location of buildings,
easements, parking arrangements, public access, street pattern, and other
similar features.
   61.   Distribution center: A specialized place in a building or a warehouse
used in the order fulfillment process to receive, store temporarily, and
redistribute goods to resellers or wholesalers, or directly to consumers.
   62.   Donation bin: A container used for the collection of items donated by
the general public for reuse by others.
   63.   Driveway: A private method of vehicular access contained fully within
a lot.
   64.   Drought tolerant vegetation: Low water use plants, which after
established, survive within the Sonoran desert climate with little or no
supplemental watering.
   65.   Duplex: A residential building containing two dwelling units.
   66.   Dwelling: A building or portion thereof, designed and used exclusively
for residential occupancy, including single-family, duplex, and multi-family,
but not including hotels, boarding or lodging houses.
      a.   Multi-family dwelling: A residential building containing three or
more dwelling units, each designed for occupancy by an individual or one family
as a residence.
      b.   Single-family dwelling: A building designed for occupancy by one
family as a residence.
      c.   Two-family dwelling: See duplex.
   67.   Easement: A nonpossessory interest in another's land entitling the
holder to a specific limited right, use, or enjoyment; including public
utilities, ingress and egress, access control, drainage, or other specific
purposes.
   68.   Electric utility: A business providing ancillary services, electric
distribution services, electric generation services, electric transmission
services and other services related to providing electricity to retail
customers.
   69.   Energy storage: Technologies that capture or absorb electricity, store
it as another form of energy (chemical, thermal, mechanical), and then release
it for use when it is needed.
   70.   Energy storage facility: Building, structure, or land used for energy
storage.
   71.   Facade: Any side of a building that faces a street or other open
space. The front facade is the front or principal face of a building.
   72.   Family: Any number of related persons living together within a single
dwelling unit and living as a single house-keeping unit, except that "family"
shall not include more than six persons unrelated by blood, marriage, or
adoption.
   73.   Farmers market: A structure or place where agricultural produce is
brought for the purpose of retail sale.
   74.   Farming: The growing of crops in the soil in the customary manner in
the open. Does not include the raising of livestock.
   75.   Feedlot: Any fenced area used commercially for the purpose of
fattening livestock for slaughter or sale.
   76.   Fence: An upright structure of non-cementitious material, serving to
enclose, divide, protect, or screen.
   77.   Fitness center: An establishment that provides exercise facilities
such as running, jogging, aerobics, weight lifting, court sports, and swimming,
as well as locker rooms, showers, massage rooms, saunas and related accessory
uses.
   78.   Floor area ratio: A ratio expressing the amount of square feet of
floor area permitted for every square foot of land area within a site. The
floor area ratio is usually expressed as a single number.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2238.png]
   79.   Food processing facility: Manufacturing establishment producing or
processing food and related products. Includes production or processing of any
of the following:
      a.   Bakery, sugar and confectionery products (except facilities where
the products are primarily sold on-site).
      b.   Dairy products.
      c.   Fats and oil products (excludes rendering plant).
      d.   Fruits and vegetables.
      e.   Grain mill products and by-products.
      f.   Meat, poultry, and seafood (excludes slaughterhouse).
   80.   Foster home: Has the same meaning as defined in A.R.S. § 8-501.
Includes group foster home, regular foster home, and special foster home, all
as defined in A.R.S. § 8-501.
   81.   Four-sided architecture: Multiple architectural details on all sides
of a building.
   82.   Fowl: A bird used to produce meat or eggs, including, but not limited
to, chickens, ducks, turkeys, and peacocks.
   83.   Frontage:
      a.   Building frontage: The exterior side of a building that faces and is
most nearly parallel to a public or private street; or the total length of that
exterior side. In case of ambiguity, the planning manager shall determine the
building frontage based on the visual width of the building as viewed from the
street.
      b.   Frontage buildout: The ratio of the building frontage to the street
frontage.
      c.   Street frontage: Where the property line abuts a road right-of-way
other than an alley; or the length of that portion of the property line that
abuts a road right-of-way other than an alley.
   84.   Garage: A fully enclosed accessory building or portion of the main
building, designed or used for the shelter or storage of vehicles owned or
operated by the occupants of the main building.
   85.   General plan: The town general plan.
   86.   Grade: The average of the finished ground level at the center of all
of the exterior walls of a building. In case the front wall is parallel to and
within five feet of a sidewalk, the grade must be measured at the sidewalk at
the centerline of the front of the lot.
      a.   Existing grade: The actual, current ground surface as of January
1997.
      b.   Finished grade: The final grade conforming to the approved grading
plan.
      c.   Rough grade: The stage at which grading substantially conforms to
the approved grading plan.
   87.   Grading: The initial clearing, brushing, or grubbing, and subsequent
excavating or filling, of a site.
   88.   Greenhouse: A building or structure devoted to the protection or
cultivation of plants and constructed chiefly of glass, glasslike or
translucent material, cloth, or lath.
   89.   Gross floor area: The sum of the areas of all horizontal surfaces of a
building, measured from outside surface to outside surface.
   90.   Guest quarters: Living quarters for guests, relatives, or servants in
an accessory building or within the principal residence and not used for
income-producing purposes.
   91.   Helistop: An area designed to be used for the landing or takeoff of
one helicopter, the temporary parking of one helicopter, and other facilities
as may be required by federal and state regulations, but not including
operation facilities such as maintenance, storage, fueling, or terminal
facilities.
   92.   Hive: A movable-frame receptacle used for keeping bees which may
consist of one or more frames on a single box stand.
   93.   Home occupation: Any activity conducted by a resident for gain as an
accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit.
   94.   Hospital: Any building used for overnight accommodation and medical
care of human patients, but excluding clinics, long-term care facilities, and
convalescent homes.
   95.   Hotel: A building containing six or more guest rooms, in which lodging
is provided and offered to the public for compensation and which is open to
transient guests, together with commercial accessory uses operated primarily
for the convenience of the guests thereof.
   96.   Household pet: Any animal commonly accepted as a domesticated pet and
typically housed within the primary residential structure.
   97.   Improvement: Any man-made immovable item which becomes part of, places
upon, or is affixed to real estate. Improvements are typically required to be
installed as a condition of approval or acceptance of a development. They may
include, but are not limited to, roads, water facilities, easements, traffic
control devices, utility lines, and other similar facilities.
   98.   Indoor assembly: Enclosed facilities for the purpose of (but not
limited to) banquet halls, auditoriums, clubs and lodges, conference centers,
and theaters, including kitchen for the preparation of food to be consumed at
the premises.
   99.   Industry: The manufacture, fabrication, processing, reduction or
destruction of any article, substance or commodity, or any other treatment that
changes its form, character, or appearance.
   100.   Ingress: Access or entry.
   101.   Invasive species: A non-native species whose introduction does or is
likely to cause economic or environmental harm, or harm to human, animal, or
plant health.
   102.   Junkyard: A place where scrap, waste, discarded or salvaged materials
are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled, handled, or stored in
the open, including, but not limited to, automobile wrecking yards, used lumber
yards, and places or yards for the storage of salvaged house wrecking and
structural steel materials, and equipment. Excludes farming operations, or
activities conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building and where
salvaged materials are kept incidental to manufacturing or other industrial or
agricultural operations conducted on the premises.
   103.   Kennel: Any enclosure, premises, building, structure, lot or area
where dogs, cats, or other animals are kept, raised, sold, boarded, bred,
shown, or groomed for compensation.
   104.   Laboratory: A building or group of buildings whose primary use is
medical or scientific research, investigation, testing or experimentation.
   105.   Landscaping: The use and arrangement of living vegetation, such as
trees, bushes, and groundcovers, together with inert materials such as wood,
rocks, brick, and decomposed granite.
   106.   Land split: The division of improved or unimproved land whose area is
two and one-half acres or less into two or three tracts or parcels of land for
the purpose of sale or lease.
   107.   Land use: A description of how land is occupied or utilized.
   108.   Livestock auction yard: A parcel of land and accompanying buildings
used for the sale by auction of livestock offered on consignment.
   109.   Livestock, large: Includes cattle, horses, oxen, donkeys, mules,
llamas, and other similar animals.
   110.   Livestock, small: Includes sheep, goats, miniature horses and other
similar animals.
   111.   Long-term care facility: A facility in a nonresidential setting that
provides continuous inpatient beds, medical supervision, and medical care for a
period exceeding 72 hours to eight or more residents who do not require
hospital care or direct daily care from a physician.
   112.   Lot: A tract of land bounded on all sides by property lines, of
sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements, of use, coverage, area,
setbacks, and other areas as required by these regulations with legal access to
a public street.
   113.   Lot area: The total land area, measured in a horizontal plane,
included within the lot property lines.
      a.   Lot, corner: A lot located at the intersection of two or more
streets.
      b.   Lot, interior: A lot other than a corner or key lot.
      c.   Lot, key: Any lot where the side lot line abuts the rear lot line of
other lots.
   114.   Lot coverage: The area of a site occupied by structures and other
buildings.
   115.   Lot depth: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
   116.   Lot improvement: Any building, structure, work of art, or other
object or improvement of the land on which they are situated constituting a
physical betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment.
   117.   Lot line: A line of record bounding a lot.
      a.   Common lot line: any side or rear property line that abuts another
side or rear property line, not including side or rear property lines abutting
a street or alley.
      b.   Front lot line: the lot lien separating a lot from the street and
providing sole or primary access to the property.
      c.   Rear lot line:
         i.   The lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front
lot line.
         ii.    The rear lot line of a n irregular lot is a line:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2738.png]
 
            a)    Entirely within the lot,
            b)   At least ten feet long, and
            c)    Parallel to and most distant from the front lot line.
      d.   Side lot line: Any lot line not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
         i.   A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a street side
lot line.
         ii.   A side lot line separating a lot from another lot is an interior
side lot line.
   118.   Lot width: The mean horizontal width of the lot measured at right
angles to the lot depth.
   119.   Main building: A building where the principal permitted use of a lot
or parcel is conducted.
   120.   Manufactured home:
      a.   A single-family dwelling structure transportable in one or more
sections manufactured after June 15, 1976, to standards established by the U.S.
department of housing and urban development. The structure is built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a
permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities.
      b.   A single-family dwelling structure transportable in one or more
sections manufactured before June 15, 1976, and still legally permissible for
residential occupancy.
      c.   Does not include a "recreational vehicle."
   121.   Manufactured home park: A residential use in which more than two
manufactured home spaces are located on a single site area. The spaces may be
leased, rented or sold. If the individual spaces are sold, the remainder of the
use must be in the common ownership of all unit owners.
   122.   Manufacturing:
      a.   Light manufacturing: The manufacturing, production or assembly of
products predominately from previously prepared materials, of finished products
or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging
of such products, and incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such
products, where all manufacturing activities are contained entirely within a
building and do not endanger neighboring properties. Includes large-scale
printing and publishing.
      b.   Heavy manufacturing: The manufacturing, production, assembly, or
processing of products where noise, odor, vibration, illumination, or
particulate matter may be offensive or obnoxious to adjacent land uses.
Includes any establishment or facility using unscreened outdoor structures that
cannot be integrated into the building design, such as conveyor belt systems,
cooling towers, cranes, storage silos, or similar equipment. Includes uses with
large scale outdoor storage or storage of on-site hazardous materials.
   123.   Maximum extent practicable: Under the circumstances, reasonable
efforts have been undertaken to comply with the regulation or requirement, that
the cost of additional compliance measures clearly outweigh the potential
benefits to the public, and reasonable steps have been undertaken to minimize
any potential harm or adverse impacts resulting from the noncompliance.
   124.   Medical clinic: A building containing an association or group of
physicians, dentists, clinical psychologists, or similar professional health
care practitioners, including allied professional assistants who are assembled
for the purpose of carrying on their professions. The health care facility may
include pharmacy, dental and medical laboratories, tissue labs, and/or X-ray
facilities, but shall not include inpatient care or operating rooms for major
surgery.
   125.   Medical marijuana dispensary: A nonprofit medical marijuana
dispensary duly registered and certified pursuant to A.R.S. § 36-2804.
   126.   Micro-hospital: A medical facility providing services offered by a
traditional full-service hospital but located in a smaller-scale facility of
15,000 to 50,000 square feet.
   127.   Mixed-use: Development physically and functionally integrating at
least one primary residential use with at least one primary non-residential
use.
   128.   Model home: A dwelling unit used initially for display purposes which
typified the type of units that will be constructed in the subdivision.
   129.   Modular home: A dwelling unit which is either wholly or in
substantial part manufactured at an offsite location to be assembled on site,
and which complies with the building code adopted by the town.
   130.   Motel: A facility offering transient lodging accommodations of six or
more rental units. A majority of all rental units have direct access to the
outside without the necessity of passing through the main lobby of the
building. Guests are generally traveling by automobile and parking is located
convenient to each unit.
   131.   Native vegetation: Plants indigenous to an area.
   132.   Natural features: Include but are not limited to floodplains and
surface drainage channels, washes, stream corridors and other bodies of water,
steep slopes, prominent ridges, bluffs, or valleys, and existing trees and
vegetation.
   133.   Nearby land: For purposes of significant land use change notice and
protest requirements applicable in zones A-E, land lying within (a) one-quarter
of a mile of a proposed significant land use change on a lot containing 2.5
acres or less, (b) one-half mile of a proposed significant land use change on a
lot containing more than 2.5 acres but less than 25 acres, or (c) one mile of a
proposed significant land use change on a lot containing 25 acres or more.
   134.   Nonconforming: A parcel of land, or a building or structure, or
portion thereof, or a use, which does not conform to the provisions of this
land development code, and which was legally established prior to the effective
date of the provision of this land development code to which it does not
conform.
   135.   Nuisance: Annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious and out of character with
the neighboring area.
   136.   Nursery: A place where young trees or other plants are raised for
transplanting or for sale, but does not include commercial fertilizer yard or
processing plant.
   137.   Office: A building or portion of a building where predominantly
administrative, professional, or clerical services are performed.
   138.   Off-site: Any premises not on-site.
   139.   Off-street parking: Parking of motor vehicles in a location other
than a street or public way.
   140.   On-site: Of or pertaining to a space within the boundaries of a
subdivision lot or parcel.
   141.   Open space:
      a.   General: Any area to be kept in open uses including recreational
lands such as golf courses and parks, desert, floodways, floodplains,
greenbelts, common areas, and other unbuilt, vegetated areas.
      b.   Natural undisturbed open space (NUOS): An area of land with natural
vegetation that is unimproved and not occupied by structures or man-made
impervious surfaces that is set aside, dedicated or reserved in perpetuity as a
conservation area.
   142.   Open storage: The use of premises for keeping or storing goods,
commodities, containers or equipment other than in a wholly enclosed building.
Public parking, or the parking or storing of an operable vehicle in a parking
space, is not open storage.
   143.   Orient: To bring in relation to, or adjust to, the surroundings,
situation, or environment; or to set or arrange in a determinate position.
   144.   Pad site building: A commercial building that is physically separate
from the principal or primary building.
   145.   Parcel: An area of land defined by a legal description and recorded
with the county recorder.
   146.   Parking lot: Any area of a site or structure used as a parking area
for more than four motor vehicles.
   147.   Parking space: A space for the parking of a motor vehicle, exclusive
of driveways and ramps.
   148.   Permitted use: A land use allowed as a property right within a zoning
category subject only to the requirements listed for that use.
   149.   Person: Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns.
   150.   Personal service: A business that provides personal services directly
to customers at the site of the business, or which received goods from or
returns goods to the customer which have been treated or processed at another
location. Includes but is not limited to travel agency, dry-cleaning and
laundry drop-off and pick-up station, tailor, hair stylist, cosmetician, toning
or tanning salon, branch office of financial institution, photocopying service,
postal substation, package delivery drop-off and pick-up station, shoe repair
shop, haberdashery, interior design studio, domestic pet grooming and care
service, and art, music, dance and martial arts school.
   151.   Phase: A portion of a development project scheduled for construction
and occupancy as an entity apart from other phases of the development.
   152.   Place of worship: A building or group of buildings used primarily as
a place of communion or worship. Includes convents, religious educational
buildings and parish houses, but not parochial schools.
   153.   Planning commission: The town planning commission.
   154.   Plat: A map of a subdivision.
      a.   Final plat: A map of all or part of a subdivision essentially
conforming to an approved preliminary plat, and prepared in accordance with the
provisions of the town subdivision regulations.
      b.   Preliminary plat: A preliminary map, including supporting data,
indicating a proposed subdivision design prepared in accordance with the
provisions of the town subdivision regulations.
      c.   Recorded plat: A final plat bearing all of the approvals required by
state law and local regulations and recorded in the office of the recorder of
the county where the land shown on the plat is located.
   155.   Power plant: A facility that converts one or more energy sources,
including but not limited to water power, fossil fuels, or nuclear power into
electrical energy or steam. A power generation plant may also perform either or
both of the following: (a) operation of a transmission system that conveys the
energy or steam from the generation facility to a power distribution system;
(b) operation of a distribution system that conveys energy or steam from the
generation facility or the transmission system to final consumers.
   156.   Premises: A lot and the buildings and other structures located on it.
   157.   Principal building: The building or structure on a commercial
development site with the greatest amount of gross floor area.
   158.   Primary material: Material covering 75% or more of the wall elevation
or the individual material that constitutes the majority.
   159.   Principal use: The primary or predominant use of any lot or parcel.
   160.   Private school: A privately funded primary, secondary, post-
secondary, or vocational educational facility.
   161.   Quasi-public land use: Use of the land by private, not-for-profit
institutions or organizations for purposes which may, in fact, be public uses,
or which may be restricted to a particular group, but which generally involve
the use of the land or the facility located thereon by a large number of
people; including but not limited to churches, private schools, not-for-profit
social organizations, hospitals, welfare organizations, or non-profit medical
centers.
   162.   Ratite: Members of the group ratitae; large flightless birds,
including emus and ostriches.
   163.   Recreational vehicle (RV): Any type of vehicle used primarily for
recreational pleasure. Examples include but not limited to travel trailers,
motor homes, boats, snowmobiles, etc. Recreational vehicles shall include any
mobile structure designed for temporary occupancy, but shall exclude
manufactured homes.
   164.   Redevelopment: Development on a tract of land with existing
structures where all or most of the existing structures would be razed and a
new structure or structures built.
   165.   Registered engineer: An engineer properly licensed and registered in
the state of Arizona.
   166.   Registered land surveyor: A land surveyor properly licensed and
registered in the state of Arizona.
   167.   Rendering plant: A facility where packing house waste, kitchen
grease, and dead animals are processed into industrial fats and oils (such as
tallow for soap) and various other products (such as fertilizer, food, or
biodiesel).
   168.   Residences per acre: The permitted number of residences per gross
acre (43,560 square feet of land area).
   169.   Resort. A building or group of buildings containing five or more
guest rooms, other than a hotel, and including amenities and outdoor
recreational activities intended for the primary use of its guests such as, but
not limited to, horseback riding, golf course, swimming, sports courts, and
dining facilities.
   170.   Restaurant: An establishment where food and beverages may be
purchased and consumed.
   171.   Retail establishment: A building, property, or activity whose
principal purpose is the sale of goods, products, or materials directly to the
consumer. Includes but is not limited to clothing stores, appliance stores,
bakeries, food stores, grocers, caterers, pharmacies, book stores, florists,
furniture stores, hardware stores, pet stores, toy stores, indoor tool and
equipment rental, and variety stores. Does not include restaurants, personal
service, commercial amusements, or cleaning or processing establishments.
   172.   Riding arena: An area used for riding and training horses or other
livestock.
   173.   Right-of-way:
      a.   General: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas
pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or for another special use.
      b.   Public: Same as above, but owned by a government entity.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2740.png]
 
   174.    Rodent: Any member of the order rodentia, such as, but not limited
to: mice, rabbits, and hares.
   175.    Rodeo grounds: An area used for riding, training, or showing horses
or livestock, or for competition involving those animals.
   176.   Roof: The outside top covering of a building.
   177.   RV park: A parcel of land under single or common ownership where two
or more spaces are leased, rented or sold for occupancy of a recreational
vehicle. A fee may or may not be charged for the use of the individual space.
   178.   RV space: An area within the RV park for the placement of a
recreational vehicle, in addition to any exclusive use area adjacent to the
unit set aside for the occupants of the recreational vehicle, such as patio or
parking space.
   179.   Screen: A barrier that functions to shield, protect or conceal.
   180.   Setback: The minimum distance a building must be set back from a
property line of a parcel or a specified point.
   181.   Sexually oriented business: Any business regulated by town code
chapter 9-7 (sexually oriented businesses).
   182.   Sign: See definition in
chapter 17-10.
   183.   Single-family dwelling: A dwelling unit with kitchen and sleeping
facilities, designed for occupancy by and occupied by one family. Includes
"adult developmental home," "child developmental certified home," "child
developmental home," "group home," and "intermediate care facility for
individuals with intellectual disabilities," each as defined in A.R.S. § 36-
551; includes "residential facility" as defined in A.R.S. § 36-581; includes
"adult foster care home" and "assisted living home" each as defined in A.RS. §
36-401, and includes "child care group home" as defined in A.R.S. § 36-897.
      a.   Attached single-family dwelling: A dwelling unit attached to one or
more dwelling units by structural elements common to the attached units with
each dwelling unit located on its own individual lot. The structural elements
include common wall construction, roof, or other similar improvement. Elements
like trusses, beams, and patio walls are not included.
      b.   Detached single-family dwelling: A dwelling unit which is not
attached to any other dwelling unit by any structural elements and located on
its own separate lot.
   184.   Site: The land area designated for a development project, exclusive
of any abutting public right-of-way. The land area can be a portion of a lot, a
single lot, or can consist of more than one lot.
   185.   Site plan: A drawn-to-scale plan of a site showing the location of
existing and proposed uses, structures, lot lines, streets, open spaces,
landscape features, and utilities.
   186.   Slaughterhouse: A facility for the slaughtering and processing of
animals and the refining of animal byproducts.
   187.   Solar energy system or solar power plant: A device or series of
mechanisms designed for a utility provider to provide heating, to provide
cooling, to produce electrical power, to produce mechanical power, or to
provide any combination of the foregoing by means of collecting and
transferring solar generated energy into such uses either by active or passive
means.
   188.   Special event venue: A location primarily devoted to special events
such as weddings, large parties, and banquets.
   189.   Specific plan: A precise plan for a specific piece of property, or
properties, typically under single ownership, which contains all the elements
as specified within these regulations, and which has been adopted by the
council, and which may supersede these land use regulations as they might
otherwise apply to the specified property.
   190.   Specimen plant: A plant that is grown in relatively open ground with
little competition and therefore develops an unnaturally (in most cases) broad
spread and dramatic form. Contrast with masses, drifts, thickets, or groves of
plants, in which individual specimens intermingle with each other and may even
be hard to distinguish from each other.
   191.   Sports court: Improved athletic space, typically constructed
outdoors, where such games as basketball, volleyball, paddle tennis and other
racquet sports and other games and activities can be played.
   192.   Stables: Structures where animals are kept.
      a.   Private stables: Structures where animals are kept for private use.
      b.   Public stables: Structures where animals are kept for sale or hire;
breeding, boarding, and or training.
   193.   Standards: Mandatory regulations. Standards are indicated by use of
the term "must."
   194.   Stockyard: A penned enclosure, or structure, where small or large
livestock are maintained temporarily for the purpose of slaughtering, marketing
or shipping.
   195.   Story: A space in a building between the surface of any floor and the
surface of the floor next above, or if there is no floor above, then the space
between such floor and the ceiling or roof above.
   196.   Street: Any existing or proposed street, avenue, boulevard, road,
land, parkway, place, bridge, viaduct or easement for public vehicular access
or a street shown in a plat approved
pursuant to town, county, state of Arizona or other governmental unit
regulations, or a street on a plat which has been approved by a unit of
government and duly filed and recorded in the office of the county recorder. A
street includes all land within the street right-of-way whether improved or
unimproved, and includes such improvements as pavement, shoulders, curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, parking space, bridges and viaducts.
      a.   Arterial: A street that serves or is intended to serve as a major
way by which traffic may be conveyed between the town and other communities as
well as between major population or activity concentrations within the town.
Arterials are designated in the transportation plan element of the town general
plan, and are generally one-mile apart on section lines.
      b.   Collector: A street that is supplementary to an arterial and serves,
or is intended to serve, to convey traffic between neighborhoods or similar
areas within town. Collectors are typically at half-mile points within a
section.
      c.   Half street: A right-of-way dedicated for a new street by a
developer equal to only one-half of the total right-of-way width required.
      d.   Local street: A street used primarily to gain access to the property
bordering it. Does not include arterials or collectors.
      e.   Major street: A street shown on the future circulation map.
The future circulation map is figure 2-4 of the Marana General Plan
      f.   Minor street: A street not shown on the future circulation map.
      g.   Primary arterial: A road intended to move traffic to and from such
major attractions as villages, regional shop-ping centers, colleges and/or
universities, major industrial areas and similar traffic generators within the
town and/or as a route for traffic between communities or large areas.
      h.   Walkable mixed-use street: A local multi-modal thoroughfare with a
range of speeds and capacities.
   197.   Street center line: The centerline or monument line of a street or
road right-of-way as established by an official survey.
   198.   Street right-of-way width: The distance between property lines
measured at right angles to the center line of the street.
   199.   Streetscreen: An evergreen hedge, opaque fence, wall, or similar
feature built along a street frontage that screens a parking lot from the
street, provides privacy to a side yard, or delineates the public right-of-way.
   200.   Structure: Anything constructed or erected which requires location on
or in the ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground.
Structures do not include ditches and their appurtenances, poles, lines,
cables, or transmission or distribution facilities of public utilities,
freestanding mailboxes, on grade slabs, walks, driveways, landscaping materials
and fences.
   201.   Subdivider: Has the same meaning as in the definition of "subdivider"
under Arizona law.
   202.   Subdivision: A division of land that meets the definition of
"subdivision" under Arizona law.
   203.   Subdivision design: Street alignment, grades and widths, alignment
and widths of easements and rights-of-way for drainage and sanitary sewers and
the arrangement and orientation of lots as set forth in the town subdivision
regulations or design manuals, or both.
   204.   Subdivision improvements: Infrastructure and improvements required to
be constructed or installed as a condition of subdivision approval pursuant to
town subdivision regulations or state law, including but not limited to
grading, sewer and water utilities, streets, easements, and traffic control
devices.
   205.   Swine: Any hoofed animal of the porcine species, such as a pig.
   206.   Temporary retail: A temporary retail activity, including but not
limited to:
      a.   Automobile, boat, or RV sales;
      b.   Seasonal sale of products, such as Christmas trees, pumpkins, and
fireworks;
      c.   Street vendors. Does not include "mobile food vendors" as defined in
section
9-13-2(C).
   207.   Temporary use: Any use allowed for a specified period of time. A use
not of a permanent nature.
   208.   Television, radio, or film studio: A facility for the production of
films and/or the production and broadcast of television and radio programs
including but not necessarily limited to offices, dressing rooms, studios,
sound stages, file rooms, and set stage, but not including transmitting
facilities, unless a conditional use permit is obtained under
chapter 17-18.
   209.   Townhouse: A single-family dwelling in a row of at least three,
attached, in which each unit has its own separate front entrance, and no unit
is located over another unit.
   210.   Transitional housing: A dwelling shared as a primary residence by
adult persons with disabilities, as that term is defined under federal law for
purposes of the Fair Housing Act, who live together in an environment that may
provide self-support or resident staff persons providing care, education, or
activities for the residents. Transitional housing's primary purpose is to
provide shelter in a residential family-like environment. Examples of
transitional housing include but are not limited to sober living homes as
defined in A.R.S. § 36-2061, and adult behavioral health therapeutic homes as
defined in A.R.S. § 36-401.
   211.   Transportation corridor: Land occupied by transportation facilities,
including airports, railroads, roads, irrigation canals, or public utility
line, or which is immediately adjacent to such facilities, and which has been
designated for the purpose of accommodating such modes of transportation and
related uses.
   212.   Truck stop: A vehicle fueling station along or near an interstate
highway; may include a restaurant, sleeping and showering rooms, a store
selling basic items, and similar uses.
   213.   Use: The purpose for which land or a building is arranged designed or
intended, for which either land or building is or may be occupied or
maintained.
   214.   Utilities: Services such as natural gas, electricity, water,
telephone, and cable television.
   215.   Utility facility: Building, structure, or land used by a utility,
railroad, or governmental agency for uses such as, but not necessarily limited
to, water or sewage treatment plants or pumping stations, substations,
telephone exchanges, and resource recovery facilities, but not including a
power plant, a solar energy system or solar power plant, an energy storage
facility, and land, buildings, or structures used solely for storage and
maintenance of equipment and materials.
   216.   Vacation rental: Has the same meaning as in the definition of
“vacation rental” under Arizona law.
   217.   Variance: An exception to the provisions of these regulations.
   218.   Veterinary clinic: Any establishment maintained and operated by a
licensed veterinarian for the diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries
of animals and for short-term boarding incidental to treatment.
   219.   Wall: An upright opaque structure of stone, brick, block, or similar
cementitious material, serving to enclose, divide, support, protect, or screen.
   220.   Warehouse: A building where goods are received and stored indoors for
distribution or wholesale sale.
   221.   Water harvesting: The capture and storage of water, especially
rainwater, for later agricultural, industrial, or domestic use.
   222.   Wireless communication facility: A facility used for the transmission
and reception of radio or microwave signals or for commercial wireless
communications.
   223.   Yard: Any open space other than a court on the same lot with a
building or dwelling group which open space is unoccupied and unobstructed from
the ground upward to the sky except for the projecting and/or accessory
buildings permitted by these regulations.
B.   The definitions set forth in this section supplement the definitions set
forth in
chapter 1-3 of this code.
C.   Additional definitions that apply to specific chapters of this title may
be found in the applicable chapter.
Ordinance 2022.026 added definition 67., 68., and 69. and renumbered subsequent
definitions; amended definition 154.; added definition 186; amended definition
214
Ordinance 2023.032 amended definitions 182. and 209.
Ordinance 2024.029 added definition 55. and renumbered subsequent definitions.
A.R.S. § 36-401 includes the following definitions:
4.   "Adult day health care facility" means a facility that provides adult day
health services during a portion of a continuous twenty-four-hour period for
compensation on a regular basis for five or more adults who are not related to
the proprietor.
5.   "Adult day health services" means a program that provides planned care
supervision and activities, personal care, personal living skills training,
meals and health monitoring in a group setting during a portion of a continuous
twenty-four-hour period. Adult day health services may also include preventive,
therapeutic and restorative health-related services that do not include
behavioral health services.
6.   "Adult foster care home" means a residential setting that provides room
and board and adult foster care services for at least one and no more than four
adults who are participants in the Arizona long-term care system pursuant to
[A.R.S. § 36-2931 et seq.] or contracts for services with the United States
department of veterans affairs and in which the sponsor or the manager resides
with the residents and integrates the residents who are receiving adult foster
care into that person's family.
7.   "Adult foster care services" means supervision, assistance with eating,
bathing, toileting, dressing, self -medication and other routines of daily
living or services authorized by rules adopted pursuant to § 36-405 and § 36-
2939, subsection C.
8.   "Assisted living center" means an assisted living facility that provides
resident rooms or residential units to eleven or more residents.
9.   "Assisted living facility" means a residential care institution, including
an adult foster care home, that provides or contracts to provide supervisory
care services, personal care services or directed care services on a continuous
basis.
10.   "Assisted living home" means an assisted living facility that provides
resident rooms to ten or fewer residents.
 
A.R.S. § 36-881 includes the following definitions:
1.   "Child" means any person through the age of fourteen years. Child also
means a person who is under eighteen years of age if the child has a
developmental disability as defined in § 36-551 or has at least one of the
disabilities listed in § 15-761, paragraph 2 and requires special education as
defined in § 15-761.
2.   "Child care" means the care, supervision and guidance of a child or
children, unaccompanied by a parent, guardian or custodian, on a regular basis,
for periods of less than twenty-four hours per day, in a place other than the
child's or the children's own home or homes.
3.   "Child care facility" means any facility in which child care is regularly
provided for compensation for five or more children not related to the
proprietor.
 
A.R.S. § 8-501 includes the following definitions:
6. "Foster home" means a home that is maintained by any individual or
individuals having the care or control of minor children, other than those
related to each other by blood or marriage, or related to such individuals, or
who are legal wards of such individuals.
8. "Group foster home" means a licensed regular or special foster home that is
suitable for placement of more than five minor children but not more than ten
minor children.
13. "Regular foster home" means a licensed foster home that is suitable for
placement of not more than five minor children.
16. "Special foster home" means a licensed foster home that is capable of
handling not more than five minor children who require special care for
physical, mental or emotional reasons or who have been adjudicated delinquent.
Special foster home includes any home handling foster children aged twelve
through seventeen.
 
A.R.S. § 36-551 includes the following definitions:
2. "Adult developmental home" means a residential setting in a family home in
which the care, physical custody and supervision of the adult client are the
responsibility, under a twenty-four-hour care model, of the licensee who, in
that capacity, is not an employee of the division or of a service provider and
the home provides the following services for a group of siblings or up to three
adults with developmental disabilities:
(a)   Room and board.
(b)   Habilitation.
(c)   Appropriate personal care.
(d)   Appropriate supervision.
 
11.   "Child developmental certified home" means a regular foster home as
defined in § 8-501 that is licensed pursuant to § 8-509 and that is certified
by the department pursuant to § 36-593.01.
12.   "Child developmental home" means a residential setting in a family home
in which the care and supervision of the child are the responsibility, under a
twenty-four-hour care model, of the licensee who serves as the developmental
home provider of the child in the home setting and who, in that capacity, is
not an employee of the division or of a service provider and the home provides
the following services for a group of siblings or up to three children with
developmental disabilities:
 
(a)   Room and board.
(b)   Habilitation.
(c)   Appropriate personal care.
(d)   Appropriate supervision.
23. "Group home" means a community residential setting for not more than six
persons with developmental disabilities that is operated by a service provider
under contract with the department and that provides room and board and daily
habilitation and other assessed medically necessary services and supports to
meet the needs of each person. Group home does not include an adult
developmental home, a child developmental home or an intermediate care facility
for individuals with intellectual disabilities.
28. "Intermediate care facility for individuals with intellectual disabilities"
means a facility that primarily provides health and rehabilitative services to
persons with developmental disabilities that are above the service level of
room and board or supervisory care services or personal care services as
defined in § 36-401.
 
A.R.S. § 36-581 includes the following definitions:
1.   "Developmental disability" means autism, cerebral palsy, epilepsy or
cognitive disability.
2.   "Residential facility" means a home in which persons with developmental
disabilities live and that is licensed, operated, supported or supervised by
the department.
 
A.R.S. § 36-897 includes the following definition:
1. "Child care group home" means a residential facility in which child care is
regularly provided for compensation for periods of less than twenty-four hours
per day for not less than five children but no more than ten children through
the age of twelve years.
"Subdivider" is defined at A.R.S. § 33-1202 paragraph 55
The municipal definition of "subdivision" may be found at A.R.S. § 9-463.02
 
A.R.S. § 36-2061 includes the following definition:
"Sober living home" means any premises, place or building that provides
alcohol-free or drug-free housing and that:
(a)   Promotes independent living and life skills development.
(b)   May provide activities that are directed primarily toward recovery from
substance use disorders.
(c)   Provides a supervised setting to a group of unrelated individuals who are
recovering from substance use disorders.
(d)   Does not provide any medical or clinical services or medication
administration on-site, except for verification of abstinence.
 
A.R.S. § 36-401 includes the following definition:
3. "Adult behavioral health therapeutic home" means a residence for individuals
who are at least eighteen years of age, have behavioral health issues and need
behavioral health services that does all of the following for those
individuals:
(a)   Provides room and board.
(b)   Assists in acquiring daily living skills.
(c)   Coordinates transportation to scheduled appointments.
(d)   Monitors behaviors.
(e)   Assists in the self-administration of medication.
(f)   Provides feedback to case managers related to behavior.
"Vacation rental" is defined at A.R.S. § 9-500.39
CHAPTER 17-2.
ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES AND OFFICERS
Chapter 17-2 was inserted into the town code by Ordinance 2015.021
Sections:
17-2-1   Planning commission
17-2-2   Board of adjustment
17-2-3   Planning department and planning manager
17-2-1 Planning commission
A.   Establishment and composition. The planning commission consists of seven
members appointed by the council from among the residents of the town.
B.   Organization. The planning commission shall consist of a chairperson, a
vice-chairperson, and five other members. The planning commission shall adopt
rules for its own organization and for the transaction of its business. The
rules shall not conflict with other sections of this code or other ordinances
of the town or with the laws of the state of Arizona.
C.   Duties and powers.
   1.   Obligations imposed by law. The planning commission shall undertake all
tasks necessary to comply with state laws.
   2.   Reports and recommendations. The planning commission may make reports
and recommendations relating to the planning and development of the town to the
council and to other organizations and residents of the town. The planning
commission may recommend programs for the construction or financing of public
improvements to executive or legislative officials of the town.
   3.   Other tasks assigned by the council. The planning commission shall
undertake all other tasks assigned by the council.
A.R.S. § 9-461.02 authorizes the creation of a planning commission, and
provides for local ordinance to address the organization, number of members,
terms of office, method of appointment and removal of members.
A.R.S. § 9-461.06 (E) and (F) describe the planning commission’s role in the
adoption and amendment of the general plan. A.R.S. § 9-461.09 requires the
planning commission to hold at least one hearing on a specific plan
application. A.R.S. § 9-461.12 authorizes the planning commission to hold joint
meetings with other planning commissions upon approval of the council. A.R.S. §
9-462.04 (A) requires the planning commission to hold a public hearing on any
zoning ordinance.
17-2-2 Board of adjustment
A.   Establishment. There is hereby established a board of adjustment for the
town. The board of adjustment shall consist of the members of the planning
commission.
B.   Officers; public meeting and minutes; bylaws; quorum; procedure.
   1.   The chair of the planning commission shall serve as the chair of the
board with the power to administer oaths and take evidence.
   2.   The meetings of the board of adjustment shall be subject to the
requirements of the Arizona open meeting laws. The minutes of the board’s
proceedings shall show the vote of each member. Records of the board’s
examinations and other official actions shall be filed with the secretary to
the board of adjustment as a public record.
   3.   The board of adjustment shall follow and adhere to any rules of
procedure established for the board by the council.
   4.   The board of adjustment shall adopt all rules and procedures necessary
or convenient for the conduct of its business, consistent with applicable law
and any rules of procedure established for the board by the council.
C.   Powers and duties.
   1.   Variances. The board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals for
variances, as provided by state law.
   2.   Interpretations. The board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals
from zoning decisions of the planning manager, as provided by state law.
   3.   Other matters. The board shall consider any other matter referred by
the council.
D.   Compensation. The members of the board of adjustment shall serve without
compensation; however, members may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred
in conjunction with their duties and authorized and approved by the council.
Ordinance 2021.004 replaced “planning director” with “planning manager” in
paragraph D.2
Ordinance 2022.003 amended paragraphs A and C; deleted paragraph B; and
restructured paragraphs C through E as B through D
A.R.S. § 9-462.06 requires the town to establish a board of adjustment and
prescribes its duties.
The Arizona open meeting laws are found at A.R.S. §§ 38-431 through -431.09,
and provide for the posting of agendas, keeping of minutes, and other
requirements designed to assure that meetings are conducted openly
A.R.S. § 9-462.06 (G) and (H) establish and restrict the powers and duties of
the board of adjustment.
17-2-3 Planning department and planning manager
A.   Pursuant to A.R.S. §9-461.03, the planning department of the town of
Marana is hereby established, and here and after referred to as the development
services department. The development services department shall perform the
planning functions for the town and shall provide technical support and
guidance for action on all plan and ordinance amendments and on applications
for development approval and shall perform such other functions as may be
requested by the town council or the planning commission as authorized by this
code.
B.   Pursuant to A.R.S. §9-462.05(C), the position of planning manager is
hereby established. The planning manager is the person designated by the town
manager as being primarily responsible for the administration of this title,
regardless of that person’s job title. The planning manager is the “zoning
administrator” for purposes of title 9, article 6.1, A.R.S. (A.R.S. § 9-462 et
seq.)
Ordinance 2021.004 replaced section 17-2-3 (planning director) with section 17-
2-3 (planning department and planning manager)
A.R.S. § 9-462.05 (C) requires the council to establish the office of zoning
administrator, who is responsible for enforcement of the zoning ordinance.
A.R.S. § 9-462 (A)(4), defines the “zoning administrator” as the official
responsible for enforcement of the zoning ordinance. In Marana, the planning
manager is the zoning administrator.
Ordinance 2021.004 deleted section 17-2-4 (cultural resources preservation
board)
CHAPTER 17-3.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 17-3 was inserted into the town code by Ordinance 2015.021
Sections:
17-3-1   Amendment and rezoning
17-3-2   Conditional use permits
17-3-3   Temporary use permit
17-3-4   Development plans
17-3-5   Site plans and design review plans
17-3-6   Compliance with code
17-3-7   Classification; enforcement; continuing violations
17-3-8   Responsibility for violation
17-3-9   Responsibility for enforcement
17-3-1 Amendment and rezoning
A.   Application.
   1.   Any person may request an amendment of the text of this land
development code by filing a written application with the development services
department.
   2.   An owner of real property within the town, or that owner's authorized
representative, may apply for a rezoning of that property by filing a written
application with the development services department.
B.   Rezoning. The town has three broad rezoning categories:
   1.   Translational or non-site analysis rezoning: A simplified rezoning with
flexible application requirements for any rezoning that does not require a site
analysis as described in subparagraph 2 below.
   2.   Site analysis rezoning: A rezoning used in all of the following
circumstances:
      a.   When property is to be developed for more than one non-residential
use or on multiple lots.
      b.   When property is to be developed with more than three lots for
single- family residential use.
      c.   When property is to be developed for multi-family residential use.
   3.   Specific plan: A specific plan, as defined in section
17-1-6(A), contains unique development and design standards specific to a
rezoning site on a parcel of five acres or more, with either single-or multi-
phased development. See section
17-4-15 for further requirements regarding specific plans.
C.   Citizen review process. After submission of an application for a rezoning
to the town and before the planning commission holds a public hearing on the
matter, the applicant and the town shall comply with the citizen review process
set forth in this paragraph.
   1.   The applicant shall mail written notice of the application to all
owners of property located within 300 feet of the subject property and to any
other persons reasonably determined by the planning manager to be potentially
affected citizens. All distances shall be measured from the property lines of
the subject property.
      a.   The written notice shall provide a general explanation of the
substance of the proposed rezoning, and shall provide notice of the date, time,
and location of a neighborhood meeting to discuss the application.
      b.   The applicant shall mail the written notice by first class mail at
least 15 days prior to the neighborhood meeting.
   2.   The applicant shall hold the neighborhood meeting, noticed as provided
in subparagraph 1, a minimum of 15 days prior to the planning commission public
hearing.
   3.   Following the neighborhood meeting, the applicant shall submit to the
planning manager a meeting summary that includes:
      a.   Copies of the written notice required by subparagraph 1 and of the
mailing list for the notice.
      b.   A list of the people in attendance at the meeting.
      c.   A description of the issues that were raised and a summary of the
discussion.
   4.   The town shall post a sign on the subject property at least 15 days
prior to the planning commission public hearing. The town will ensure that the
sign complies with design standards specified by the town and is placed in a
conspicuous location. The town will incorporate the costs associated with the
sign posting into the town’s fees for rezoning applications, as set forth in
the comprehensive fee schedule approved by the council and amended from time to
time.
   5.   The planning manager may authorize an alternative citizen review
process for translational, non-site analysis rezoning applications, and other
similar rezoning applications deemed appropriate for the alternative process by
the planning manager, as long as the alternative process meets the requirements
of A.R.S. § 9-462.03.
D.   Procedures.
   1.   Before any application for a text amendment or rezoning is accepted by
the development services department, the applicant shall submit an application
for a pre-application meeting. The purpose of the pre-application meeting is to
discuss, in general, the procedures and requirements for an amendment request
pursuant to this section.
   2.   All applications shall follow the requirements defined in the town's
applications, checklists, and process guides on file with the development
services department. The planning manager may waive the requirement to provide
any information required by an application, checklist, or process guide by
making a written finding specifying the reasons the information is not needed
for a thorough review of the proposed amendment or rezoning. The waiver shall
be included in the materials submitted to the planning commission and the
council.
   3.   The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the application
and shall recommend to the town council approval, approval with conditions, or
denial of the rezoning or text change. Prior to the public hearing, public
notice shall be given in the manner provided in A.R.S. § 9-462.04 (A).
   4.   After the public hearing before the planning commission, the planning
manager shall schedule the application for hearing before the town council.
   5.   The town council shall hold a public hearing on the application and
shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the rezoning or text change.
Prior to the public hearing, public notice shall be given in the manner
provided in A.R.S. § 9-462.04(A).
   6.   When a rezoning application is accompanied by an application for a
conditional use permit applications may be processed and reviewed concurrently.
   7.   If the proposed rezoning is inconsistent with the land use designation
in the general plan, an application for an amendment to the general plan shall
be submitted by the applicant in accordance with the requirements of the
general plan. Amendments to both the official zoning map and the general plan
may be considered concurrently.
E.   Approval criteria. The planning commission and town council shall consider
the following, at a minimum, in reviewing an application for a rezoning:
   1.   Any change of character in the area due to installation of public
facilities, other zone changes, new growth trends, deterioration, and
development;
   2.   The degree to which the proposed zoning will benefit the community;
whether there will be benefits derived by the community, or area, by granting
the proposed rezoning;
   3.   Whether the proposed rezoning is compatible with the surrounding area
or whether there will be adverse impacts on the capacity or safety of the
portion of street network influenced by the rezoning, parking problems, or
environmental impacts that the new use will generate such an excessive storm
runoff, water, air, or noise pollution, excessive nighttime lighting, or other
nuisances;
   4.   Whether the proposal conforms with and is in furtherance of the
implementation of the goals and policies of the general plan, other adopted
plans, and the goals, objectives and policies of this land development code,
and other town regulations and guidelines, including goals and policies
relating to economic development;
   5.   The zoning districts and existing land uses of the surrounding
properties;
   6.   Whether the existing and proposed transportation infrastructure is
suitable and adequate to serve the traffic anticipated to be generated by the
proposed development.
   7.   Whether the existing and proposed utility infrastructure, public
facilities, and public services are suitable and adequate to serve the proposed
rezoning area;
   8.   Whether the subject property is suitable for the uses to which it has
been restricted under the existing zoning classification;
   9.   Whether the rezoning is compatible with the adjacent neighborhood,
especially residential neighborhood stability and character;
   10.   If applicable, the length of time the subject property has remained
vacant as zoned; and,
   11.   Whether there is an adequate supply of land available in the subject
area and the surrounding community to accommodate the zoning and community
needs.
F.   Review time frames. The town shall review all zoning applications pursuant
to the following time frames.
   1.   The town shall determine whether a zoning application is
administratively complete within 30 days after receiving the application.
   2.   If the town determines that a zoning application is not
administratively complete, the town will provide the applicant with a written
notice that includes a comprehensive list of the specific deficiencies. Upon
issuance of the written notice, the administrative completeness review time
frame and overall time frame contained in this section are suspended until the
town receives the resubmitted application.
   3.   The town shall determine whether a resubmitted application is
administratively complete within 15 days after receiving the resubmitted
application. If the town determines that a resubmitted application is not
administratively complete, the process set forth in subparagraph F.2 above
shall repeat until the application is administratively complete.
   4.   After determining that a zoning application is administratively
complete, the town council shall approve or deny the application within 180
days. The town may extend the time frame to approve or deny a zoning
application beyond 180 days for either of the following reasons:
      a.   Town staff may grant a one-time extension of not more than 30 days
for extenuating circumstances; or
      b.   Town staff may grant extensions in 30-day increments at the request
of the applicant.
   5.   This section does not apply to zoning applications for any of the
following:
      a.   Land that is designated as a district of historical significance
pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-462.01(a).
      b.   An area that is designated as historic on the national register of
historic places.
      c.   Land that is already zoned as a specific plan.
Ordinance 2021.010 replaced Section 17-3-1 in its entirety; Ordinance 2022.006
amended Section 17-3-1B. and D.
Ordinance 2023.005 adds provisions relating to a citizen review process for
rezoning applications.
Ordinance 2024.027 added paragraph F. to Section 17-3-1.
17-3-2 Conditional use permits
A.   Purpose. The town recognizes certain uses which may be appropriate in a
specific zoning district, but which may have characteristics that, depending
upon the location, design, and standards of operation, may have a greater
impact than permitted uses on nearby properties, businesses, or residences.
Such uses require more comprehensive review, including the ability of the town
to establish specific conditions for the project to mitigate any potential
impacts. The planning commission can evaluate only conditional uses listed, and
is empowered to grant, grant with conditions, or deny any application for a use
permit. The planning commission’s review is subject to findings and the
application meeting requirements of this section. The burden of proof shall be
the responsibility of the applicant.
B.   Application. Applications shall be filed with the planning manager on an
application form with the required documentation specified on guidelines
provided by the planning manager with appropriate fees. The application, at a
minimum, shall include the following:
   1.   Name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is not the owner of
the property, the name and address of the owner shall be supplied along with
authorization that the applicant is the agent of the owner and may apply for
the use permit. Proof of ownership must be submitted with the application.
   2.   A statement describing the proposed use, and any pertinent data
required to evaluate the use, including but not limited to: hours of operation,
numbers of employees and shifts, processes and materials involved in the use,
and types and volume of traffic generated by the use.
   3.   A site plan including dimensions showing the type and location of
buildings, structures, floor plans, parking, landscaping, circulation and other
relevant site information.
   4.   Any additional information required by the planning manager.
C.   Public hearing. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the
application. Prior to the public hearing, notice shall be sent to all owners of
property located within 300 feet of the property subject to the request and
shall be given in the manner provided in A.R.S. § 9-462.04 (A).
D.   Findings. A conditional use permit may be granted only after a
determination by the planning commission that the proposed use:
   1.   Will not adversely affect the orderly development and improvement of
surrounding property for uses permitted within the zoning district;
   2.   Will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of the property in the
immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted, nor substantially
diminish or impair the property values within the neighborhood;
   3.   Will not adversely affect the tax base and other substantial revenue
sources within the town;
   4.   Conforms to the character of the neighborhood, within the same zoning
district, in which it is located, giving consideration to the location, type,
and height of the buildings or structures and the type and extent of
landscaping and screening on the site;
   5.   Is on a proposed site adequate in size and shape to accommodate the
intended use and all requirements for the zone district will be met, including
but not limited to, the setbacks, walls, landscaping and bufferyards;
   6.   Will have ingress and egress designed to minimize traffic hazards and
to minimize traffic congestion on the public roads;
   7.   Is consistent with the general plan and other adopted town plans;
   8.   Shall not be noxious or offensive by reason of vibration, noise, odor,
dust, smoke, or gas;
   9.   Will have adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, fire protection,
and other necessary facilities; and
   10.   Benefits the public interest and welfare to an extent sufficient to
outweigh the individual interests adversely affected by the establishment of
the proposed use.
E.   Action by the planning commission. The planning commission may grant,
grant with conditions, or deny the application. If the application is denied,
the planning commission shall make factual findings on the public record with
the reasons for the denial. The planning commission may place any conditions
which are deemed necessary to mitigate potential impacts and insure
compatibility of the use with surrounding development and the town as a whole.
These conditions may include, but are not limited to:
   1.   Requirements for setbacks, open spaces, buffers, fences or walls to
mitigate conflicts from visual, noise, lighting and similar impacts associated
with the use;
   2.   Dedication and/or paving of street or other public rights-of-ways, and
control in location of access points and on-site circulation to mitigate
traffic impacts from increased volumes or nature of traffic activity associated
with the use;
   3.   Regulations pertaining to hours of operation, methods of operation, and
phasing of the development of the site to mitigate impacts to surrounding
properties and the neighborhood;
   4.   Time limits on the duration of the permit to determine if the use,
after a temporary period of operation, is materially detrimental or to evaluate
whether changed conditions in the neighborhood effect the capability of the use
to continue to adequately mitigate impacts to the surrounding area or the town
as a whole.
F.   Effective date of the conditional use permit. The decision of the planning
commission shall be final and effective 15 days from the date of decision
unless an appeal is filed as provided below.
G.   Appeal procedure.
   1.   The action of the planning commission may be appealed to the council by
the applicant, any member of the council, the town manager or any property
owner within 300 feet of the property subject to the request. Such requests for
appeal must be filed on an application form provided by the planning manager,
with the appropriate fee, within the 15 days following the date of the planning
commission action.
   2.   Consideration of the appeal shall be made at a public hearing.
   3.   Notice of the hearing shall be placed in the newspaper of general
circulation in the area designated by the council for legal public notice at
least 15 days prior to the hearing.
   4.   The council shall act to affirm, or reverse, in whole or in part, or
modify the planning commission’s decision including adding to or deleting the
conditions attached to the approval by the planning commission. Any action to
grant a conditional use permit, either by affirmation, modification, or
reversal of the planning commission’s decision, must include the required
findings for use permits as provided in this section.
H.   Modification of conditional use permits. A request to modify, expand, or
otherwise change an approved conditional use permit, not in substantial
conformance with the approved permit, shall be processed according to the
provisions of this section as a new application.
I.   Exercise and use. A permit automatically expires if the use is not
established within six months of its grant or within the time otherwise
specified in the permit, whichever is greater. For a use requiring a building
permit, the use is established when a building permit is issued or a
development plan is approved for the use. If the use does not require a
building permit, the use is established when the planning manager finds clear
and visible evidence of the use’s establishment.
J.   Extension of initial period for use. Upon a showing of good cause, the
planning manager may extend the period for initially exercising the permit for
a maximum of one additional year.
K.   Expiration upon discontinuance. If a use established under a conditional
use permit is discontinued for any reason for a period of six months, the
permit becomes void and the use may not be resumed. Upon applications during
the six month period by the owner and upon showing of good cause, the planning
manager may grant another extension not to exceed a total of six additional
months.
L.   Revocation. Failure to comply with the conditions, stipulations or terms
of the approval of a conditional use permit is a violation of this code.
Repeated offenses shall be cause for revocation of the permit.
M.   Grounds for revocation. The planning commission may revoke a permit on any
of the following grounds:
   1.   Violation of a zoning regulation of the town.
   2.   Violation of a term, limitation or condition of the conditional use
permit.
   3.   Causing or allowing a nuisance in connection with the premises.
   4.   Conviction of a violation of federal or state law or town ordinance in
connection with the operation of the permitted use.
N.   Termination upon change of use. A conditional permit for an established
use terminates upon the establishment of a new use.
O.   Status of the conditional use permit. A use permit granted pursuant to the
provisions of this section shall run with the land and continue to be valid
regardless of ownership of the property or structure so long as it operates
within the conditions, stipulations, and terms of the permit.
P.   Conditional uses upon annexation
   1.   Purpose. The uses and densities permitted under county zoning and in
county zoning districts do not directly correlate to the uses and densities
permitted in the most closely comparable town of Marana zoning classifications.
Upon annexation, this paragraph P is intended to authorize the council to
conditionally permit uses and densities permitted by the county immediately
before annexation upon translation of county zoning to the most closely
comparable town of Marana zoning classification.
   2.   Applicability. The special procedures and authority set forth in this
paragraph P apply only to the translation of county zoning to town of Marana
zoning upon annexation of property.
   3.   Procedure. Except as specifically set forth below, paragraphs A
(purpose) through G (appeal procedure) and I (exercise and use) through K
(expiration upon discontinuance) of this section 17-3-2 shall not apply to
conditional uses authorized upon annexation pursuant to this paragraph P.
Conditional uses granted upon annexation shall be included in the ordinance
adopted by council translating county zoning upon annexation.
   4.   Findings. In determining whether to grant conditional uses upon
annexation pursuant to this paragraph P, the council shall consider the factors
set forth in paragraph D (findings) of this section.
   5.   Conditions. Conditional uses permitted by the council upon annexation
may include conditions the council deems necessary to mitigate potential
impacts and insure compatibility of the use with surrounding development and
the town as a whole, including without limitation those conditions set forth in
paragraph E of this section.
   6.   Effect. Paragraphs H (modification of conditional use permits), L
(revocation), M (grounds for revocation), and O (status of the conditional use
permit) shall apply to conditional uses permitted by the council upon
annexation pursuant to this paragraph P.
Ordinance 2021.003 amended paragraphs A, C, E, J, L, O, P.3, P.4, and P.6;
replaced paragraphs B.3, B.4, and D.1 through D.10; and restructured paragraphs
G.2 and G.3 as G.2 through G.4
Ordinance 2021.004 replaced “planning director” with “planning manager” in
paragraphs B, B.4, G.1, I, J, and K
17-3-3 Temporary use permit
A.   Purpose. The temporary use permit is for the following uses and is allowed
only in the zoning districts indicated:
   1.   A real estate sales office in any zoning district, except where it is a
permitted use as set forth in section
17-4-19 table 1.
   2.   A single-family dwelling in a temporary structure in any zoning
district.
   3.   A donation bin located in a neighborhood commercial, village
commercial, light industrial, or heavy industry zoning district.
   4.   Temporary retail located in an agricultural, multi-family residential,
resort and recreation, neighborhood commercial, village commercial, light
industrial, or heavy industry zoning district.
B.   Application procedures.
   1.   A temporary use permit application shall include a description of the
use and a site plan.
   2.   The planning manager shall determine whether the application is
complete.
   3.   If the application is incomplete, the application shall be returned to
the applicant with an explanation of the reasons it is incomplete.
   4.   If the application is complete, the planning manager shall approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the temporary use permit.
C.   Approval criteria.
   1.   Findings. The planning manager shall not approve or modify an
application for a temporary use permit unless the use meets the findings set
forth in paragraph 17-3-2 D above.
   2.   Owner permission. The applicant must provide written authorization from
the owner of the land where the use is to be located.
      a.   When the use is to be located on public right-of-way, the applicant
must provide written authorization from the town.
      b.   When the use is in a commercial center, the applicant must provide
written authorization of one of the following:
         i.   The anchor tenant of the commercial center.
         ii.   The association of commercial owners.
         iii.   The management company responsible for managing the commercial
center.
   3.   Traffic and adverse effects. The use shall be located and operated to
minimize adverse effects on surrounding properties, particularly traffic
generated by the use and traffic circulation in the area.
   4.   Parking and access.
      a.   Adequate off-street parking, in accordance with this code, shall be
provided to serve the use.
      b.   The use shall not displace the required off-street parking spaces or
loading areas of the principal permitted uses on the site.
      c.   The entrance and exit drives shall be designed to prevent traffic
hazards and nuisances.
   5.   Property line setbacks. Structures and merchandise displays shall
comply with the yard and property line setback requirements of the zoning
district where the use is located.
   6.   Sight visibility triangle. Structures and merchandise displays shall
not interfere with the sight visibility triangle of the intersection.
   7.   General site maintenance.
      a.   During the temporary use, the site shall be maintained in a clean
and orderly condition, free of refuse and other debris.
      b.   After the temporary use, the site shall be cleaned and restored to a
condition acceptable to the property owner.
D.   Additional approval criteria for specific uses. The planning manager shall
not approve or modify an application for a temporary use permit for the
following unless the use meets the following additional criteria:
   1.   Temporary retail.
      a.   Automobile, boat, or RV sales.
         i.   Shall not exceed 14 days.
         ii.   Shall be located on a paved, gravel, or other dust-stabilized
surface.
      b.   Seasonal sale of products.
         i.   Shall not exceed four consecutive months per calendar year.
         ii.   The building or display booth must be portable and completely
removed at the end of the permit period.
      c.   Temporary outdoor merchant(s). Does not include “mobile food
vendors” as defined in section
9-13-2(C). Mobile food vendors are regulated by
chapter 9-13.
         i.   Limited to the sale of food, beverages, or merchandise from a
stand, motor vehicle, or person.
         ii.   Shall not exceed four consecutive months.
   2.   Real estate development and construction-related temporary uses.
      a.   General criteria.
         i.   Zoning clearance and building permit authorization for
construction shall be obtained prior to issuance of the temporary use permit,
unless otherwise specified below.
         ii.   The temporary building, travel trailer, or manufactured home
shall be located on the lot or parcel on which construction is occurring and
shall be occupied and used only by the property owner or authorized
representative.
         iii.   Shall be removed from the property within 14 days after
completion of the construction work, or within 14 days after the expiration of
the authorized building permit for the construction work, whichever comes
first.
         iv.   If an accessory building has been used for temporary residential
use during construction, the building shall be returned to its accessory use
state and any kitchen facilities placed in the building shall be removed within
ten days after the expiration of the authorized building permit for the
construction work, whichever comes first.
      b.   Real estate sales office. One temporary structure such as a trailer
or manufactured home may be used as a real estate sales office in any new
construction project for the sale of units within that project only, subject to
the following:
         i.   The permit shall be valid until all units for the project are
sold.
         ii.   An all-weather emergency access road approved by the fire
department and the town engineer shall be provided to the site.
         iii.   An off-street parking area shall be provided.
      c.   Single family dwelling in temporary structure. During the active
construction period (after a building or grading permit has been issued) of a
construction project involving a non-residential use or a residential
development, one manufactured home, trailer, or recreational vehicle may be
allowed on the same property to be used as a temporary residence or for a night
watchman for a period not to exceed 12 months or the active construction
period, whichever is less. The temporary home shall be removed from the site
within 14 days of the approved final building permit inspection or the final
certificate of occupancy.
   3.   Donation bins.
      a.   Permitted only as an accessory use, on the same lot or in the same
commercial center as an existing permitted use.
      b.   The permit shall be valid for a period of one year.
      c.   Must be constructed of painted metal, rubber, wood, or plastic.
      d.   Shall be maintained in a safe condition and free of graffiti.
      e.   The area immediately surrounding the donation bin must be maintained
so as to be free of trash or debris. Items may not be placed or left outside of
the donation bin.
      f.   Each donation bin shall be no more than six cubic yards in capacity
and must have a locking lid or a latch.
      g.   No more than two donation bins shall be permitted on any one
property, except that only two donation bins shall be permitted in a commercial
center, even if it consists of multiple properties.
      h.   One 12-cubic-yard donation bin may be used in lieu of two six-cubic-
yard donation bins.
      i.   The planning manager may approve more than two donation bins on
properties that are greater than ten acres in size if the additional donation
bins are located on a different street frontage and spaced a minimum of 500
feet from any other donation bin.
      j.   Each donation bin shall be clearly marked as follows:
         i.   To identify the specific items and materials requested to be left
for donations.
         ii.   To identify the name, telephone number and email address of the
owner or operator of the donation bin that may be used for contact at any time.
         iii.   The temporary use permit number associated with the donation
bin shall be clearly located on the donation bin.
         iv.   A notice shall also be on the donation bin that items shall not
be left outside of the donation bin and that no hazardous materials may be
placed inside the donation bin.
         v.   To identify the name of the non-profit entity that shares the
donated item profits.
      k.   The property owner or authorized agent may rescind authorization for
the donation bin at any time and the permit shall be revoked.
E.   Appeal. Upon receiving notification of the approval or denial of a
temporary use permit, the applicant or any party aggrieved by the decision may
file an appeal to the board of adjustment.
Ordinance 2021.003 replaced section 17-3-3 under the same name
Ordinance 2021.004 replaced “planning director” with “planning manager” in
paragraphs B.2, B.4, C.1, D, D.3.i
17-3-4 Development plans
A.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to accomplish the following:
   1.   Provide an expedited administrative review process for non-residential
and multi-family developments.
   2.   Promote the development of non-residential and multi-family sites that
are functional, safe, attractive, and compatible with surrounding uses.
   3.   Encourage high-quality development that reflects the goals and policies
of the general plan.
   4.   Ensure compliance with local, state, and federal regulations, as well
as development agreements, specific plans, and other relevant documents.
   5.   Incorporate necessary infrastructure improvements into plans for
development.
B.   Applicability. This section applies to all non-residential, mixed-use, and
multi-family developments with a total of five or more dwelling units.
Development plan approval must precede the issuance of any building permit
related to these types of development.
C.   Pre-application meeting. To aid in the preparation of a complete
development plan application, a pre-application meeting shall be held not more
than two years prior to the date of submitting the full development plan
application. The applicant shall submit the following with the request for a
pre-application meeting:
   1.   Submittal fee, per the town’s fee schedule.
   2.   Conceptual development plan that includes the size, height, and
location of all proposed structures, existing and proposed points of access,
location of drive aisles, and location and number of parking spaces.
   3.   Location map.
   4.   Project narrative that includes project name, location, site area,
zoning, and background.
D.   Application submittal.
   1.   All applications shall follow the requirements defined in the
development plan checklist on file with the development services department.
The development plan checklist is an administrative document that is amended
from time to time by the planning manager.
   2.   At a minimum, the following items shall be submitted with the
application, unless waived in writing by the planning manager.
      a.   Completed project application, with submittal fee per the town’s
fees schedule.
      b.   Owner authorization letter, if applicable.
      c.   One complete plan set that includes a site plan, landscape plan,
building elevations, and a plan for all proposed improvements.
      d.   Supporting reports for drainage, soils, traffic, and title, as
applicable.
      e.   Any other submittal requirements identified at the pre-application
meeting.
      f.   Any additional information requested based on the complexity and
impact of the proposed project.
E.   Approval.
   1.   After a complete application has been submitted, the documents shall be
routed to the appropriate town departments and outside agencies for review and
comment. The applicant is responsible for addressing all comments.
   2.   The plan shall be reviewed for compliance with local, state, and
federal regulations, as well as for compliance with specific plans, development
agreements, and other relevant documents.
   3.   Once all comments have been resolved, the development plan shall be
considered administratively approved. An electronic copy of the plan set with
an approval stamp shall be forwarded to the applicant.
F.   Appeal. An applicant may appeal a final action by the planning manager to
the board of adjustment pursuant to subsection
17-2-2(C)(2).
G.   Expiration. If a building permit has not been issued within two years from
the date of approval of the development plan, the plan shall be considered
expired and null and void. An administration extension of up to one year may be
granted by the planning manager upon request and with good cause shown.
Section 17-3-4 was created by Ordinance 2025.024 and subsequent sections were
renumbered
17-3-5 Site plans and design review plans
A.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide an expedited
administrative review process for developments that require a site plan or a
design review plan.
B.   Administrative review and approval. Except as otherwise expressly provided
in this code, the planning manager shall have the authority to approve,
conditionally approve, or deny an application seeking the approval of a site
plan, a design review plan, or an amendment to a site plan or design review
plan.
C.   Applicability. A site plan or design review plan application must be
submitted whenever required by title 17.
D.   Application. All applications shall follow the requirements defined in the
applicable checklist on file with the development services department, if any.
The checklist is an administrative document that is amended from time to time
by the planning manager.
E.   Approval.
   1.   After a complete application has been submitted, the documents shall be
routed to the appropriate town departments and outside agencies for review and
comment. The applicant is responsible for addressing all comments.
   2.   The plan shall be reviewed for compliance with local, state, and
federal regulations, as well as for compliance with specific plans, development
agreements, and other relevant documents.
   3.   Once all comments have been resolved, the site plan, design review
plan, or amendment shall be considered administratively approved. An electronic
copy of the plan set with an approval stamp shall be forwarded by the
applicant.
F.   Appeal. An applicant may appeal a final action by the planning manager to
the board of adjustment pursuant to subsection
17-2-2(C)(2).
G.   Expiration. If a building permit has not been issued within two years from
the date of approval of a site plan or design review plan, the plan shall be
considered expired and null and void. An administrative extension of up to one
year may be granted by the planning manager upon request and with good cause
shown.
Section 17-3-5 was created by Ordinance 2025.024 and caused subsequent sections
to be renumbered
17-3-6 Compliance with code
Permits shall not be granted for the construction or substantial modification
of any building or structure or for the moving of a building or structure onto
a lot or for the change in use of any land, building, or structure if such
construction, moving, modification, or change in use would be a violation of
any of the provisions of this code, nor shall any sewer or water service line
or electric or gas utilities be installed to service the premises if such use
would be a violation of this code. Any license or permit issued by any official
or employee of the town which would not be in conformance with the provisions
of this code shall be null and void. Any use, arrangement, or construction that
is not in conformance with plans, specifications, or other documents approved
under the terms of this code shall be deemed a violation of this code.
Section renumbered by Ordinance 2025.024
17-3-7 Classification; enforcement; continuing violations
A.   Except as otherwise provided in this title, any violation of this title is
a civil infraction, and may be enforced in any manner provided by town
ordinances and state laws.
B.   Each day any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Ordinance 2021.003 added section 17-3-5 and renumbered subsequent sections
accordingly
Section renumbered by Ordinance 2025.024
17-3-8 Responsibility for violation
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the land and any and all
builders, contractors, sub-contractors, real estate agents, and any other
person having appropriate decision-making authority in the establishment of any
use of land or the erection, modification, or relocation of any building or
structure or other use of the land to make sure that a proper permit has been
obtained before work is begun. Any person doing any work on a project for which
a proper permit has not been obtained shall be deemed in violation of this
title.
Ordinance 2021.003 renumbered and amended the section
Section renumbered by Ordinance 2025.024
17-3-9 Responsibility for enforcement
A.   The planning manager or designee shall be responsible for the enforcement
of zoning ordinances codified in this land development code, with the
assistance of the town attorney or designee.
B.   The town engineer or designee shall be responsible for the enforcement of
subdivision and floodplain regulations codified in this land development code,
with the assistance of the town attorney or designee.
C.   The planning manager, town engineer, town attorney and respective
designees may designate and authorize code compliance officers to assist in
enforcement of this title, consistent with the provisions of
chapter 1-9.
Ordinance 2021.003 renumbered the section, amended paragraphs A and B, and
added paragraph C
Ordinance 2021.004 replaced “planning director” with “planning manager” in
paragraphs A and C
Section renumbered by Ordinance 2025.024
CHAPTER 17-4.
ZONING
Chapter 17-4 was inserted into the town code by Ordinance 2018.010 and was
subsequently repealed and replaced in its entirety by Ordinance 2021.010.
Sections:
17-4-1   Zone districts and zoning groups established
17-4-2   Use matrix
17-4-3   Use conditions matrix
17-4-4   Agricultural (AG)
17-4-5   Residential zoning districts R-180, R-144, R-80, R-36, R-16, R-10, R-
8, R-7, R-6, R-5, R-4, and R-3
17-4-6   Multi-family residential (MR) zoning group
17-4-7   Commercial zoning districts
17-4-8   Industrial zoning districts
17-4-9   Mixed-use zoning districts
17-4-10   Mixed-use streets
17-4-11   Blended-use (BU)
17-4-12   Downtown Marana overlay (DO)
17-4-13   Downtown neighborhood (DN)
17-4-14   Downtown (DT)
17-4-15   Specific plan (SP)
17-4-16   Legacy zones
17-4-17   Zone A - small lot zone
17-4-18   Zone B - medium lot zone
17-4-19   Zone C - large lot zone
17-4-20   Zone D - designated flood plain zone
17-4-21   Zone E - transportation corridor zone
17-4-22   Recreation vehicle (RV)
17-4-23   Manufactured housing (MH)
17-4-24   Commercial office (CO)
17-4-25   Mixed-use (MU-1)
17-4-26   R-3.5 Residential
17-4-1 Zone districts and zoning groups established
A.   The zones and zoning groups listed in
table 1 (zone districts and zoning groups summary) are established by this
section.
B.   
Table 1 also shows the consolidation of certain residential zoning districts
into zoning groups as of the effective date of this chapter. These zoning
groups combine zones that allow the same uses in the use matrix table (
table 2) and the conditions per use table (
table 3). In some cases, a zoning group label is used for ease of reference in
table headings and cross-references (for example, "ER" in place of "R-36").
C.   Official zone map. The location and boundaries of each of the zones are
shown on the official zone map of the town, and the map is a part of this code.
Whenever amendments or changes are made in zone boundaries, the amendments or
changes must be made by ordinance and recorded on the official zone map. The
official zone map data layer maintained by and located in the office of the
technology services department is the final authority in determining current
zoning status.
D.   Zone districts and zoning groups summary table. The following table shows
the town's zone districts and zoning groups.
Table 1. Zone districts and zoning groups summary
Table 1. Zone districts and zoning groups summary
Agricultural zone
AG    Agricultural
Ranchette residential zoning group (RA)
R-180 R-180 residential
R-144 R-144 residential
R-80  R-80 residential
Estate residential zoning group (ER)
R-36  R-36 residential
Neighborhood residential zoning group (NR)
R-16  R-16 residential
R-10  R-10 residential
R-8   R-8 residential
R-7   R-7 residential
R-6   R-6 residential
Garden residential zoning group (GR)
R-5   R-5 residential
R-4   R-4 residential
R-3   R-3 residential
Multi-family residential zoning group (MR)
MR-1  Multi-family residential (high density)
MR-2  Multi-family residential (medium density)
Commercial zones
RR    Resort and recreation
NC    Neighborhood commercial
VC    Village commercial
Industrial zones
LI    Light industrial
HI    Heavy industrial
Mixed-use zones
DMO   Downtown Marana overlay
DT    Downtown
DN    Downtown neighborhood
BU    Blended-use
Specific plan zone
SP    Specific plan
 
17-4-2 Use matrix
A.   
Table 2 (use matrix) identifies the permissiveness of uses in all residential
zoning groups and zoning districts other than the mixed-use districts and the
SP zone. (Uses for the mixed-use districts are set forth in the mixed-use
zoning district use matrix found at
table 8.)
B.   The notations in
table 2 have the following meanings:
   1.   "P" means the use is permitted subject to design standards.
   2.   "A" means the use is permitted as an accessory use located on the same
lot with a permitted use.
   3.   "C" means the use is allowed upon approval of a conditional use permit
(see section
17-3-2).
   4.   "U" means the use is allowed upon meeting the conditions set forth in
table 3 below.
   5.   "T" means the use is allowed upon approval of a temporary use permit
(see section
17-3-3).
   6.   "X" means the use is prohibited.
C.   Uses not mentioned.
   1.   General presumption. Uses not listed shall be presumed to be
prohibited, unless the planning manager determines that the use is materially
similar to a listed use.
   2.   Planning manager determination. If a use is not listed in
table 2 and is not otherwise prohibited by law, the planning manager shall
determine whether the use is materially similar to a use listed in
table 2, using as a guide the type of business, industry, or governmental
activity as classified and defined by the two-digit sector number of the most
recently published north American industry classification system (NAICS) as
established by the United States census bureau.
   3.   Materially similar uses. If the planning manager finds that the use is
materially similar, the regulations governing that use shall apply to the use
not listed and the planning manager's decision shall be filed in the office of
the town clerk.
   4.   Not materially similar uses. If the planning manager determines that a
materially similar use does not exist, the planning manager may consider
submitting an amendment to this section to establish a specific listing for the
use in question by legislative action of the town council upon recommendation
by the planning commission.
Table 2. Use matrix
Uses AG RA ER NR GR MR RR NC VC LI HI
Table 2. Use matrix
Uses                                           AG RA ER NR GR MR RR NC VC LI HI
Residential
Single-family detached                         P  P  P  P  P  C  C  U  U  X  X
Single-family attached                         X  X  X  P  P  C  C  U  U  X  X
Duplex                                         U  U  U  U  P  P  U  U  U  X  X
Townhouse                                      U  U  U  U  P  P  P  U  U  X  X
Triplex                                        U  U  U  U  U  U  U  U  U  X  X
Fourplex                                       U  U  U  U  U  U  U  U  U  X  X
Multi-family                                   X  X  X  X  X  P  P  U  P  P  P
Manufactured home                              P  U  U  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X
Modular home                                   P  P  U  U  U  X  X  X  X  X  X
Accessory dwelling unit*                       U  U  U  U  U  U  U  U  U  X  X
Accessory structure                            A  A  U  U  A  A  A  A  A  A  A
Caretaker quarters                             A  A  A  X  X  A  A  A  A  A  A
Carport                                        A  A  A  X  X  A  A  A  A  A  A
Child care home                                U  U  U  U  U  U  U  X  X  X  X
Community recreation                           P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  X  X
Fences or walls                                A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A
Foster home                                    P  P  P  P  P  C  C  C  C  X  X
Garage                                         A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A
Guest quarters                                 A  A  A  U  U  U  X  X  X  X  X
Home occupation                                U  U  U  U  U  U  U  U  U  X  X
Model home                                     A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  X  X
Real estate sales trailer                      T  T  T  T  T  T  T  T  T  T  T
Single-family dwelling in temporary structure  T  T  T  T  T  T  T  T  T  T  T
Sports court                                   A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A
Swimming pool or spa                           A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A
Transitional housing                           U  U  U  U  U  C  C  U  U  X  X
Agricultural
Apiary                                         U  U  U  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X
Aviary                                         U  U  U  X  X  X  X  X  X  U  U
Chickens                                       U  U  U  U  U  U  U  U  U  X  X
Community garden                               P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Composting facility                            A  X  X  X  X  X  A  X  X  X  C
Corral or barn                                 P  A  A  X  X  X  A  X  C  X  X
Dairy farm                                     C  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X
Farming                                        P  A  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X
Feedlot                                        C  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X
Roosters and other fowl, ratites, or rodents   U  U  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X
Greenhouse                                     P  A  A  A  A  A  A  P  P  P  P
Household pets                                 P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Livestock auction yard                         C  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X
Livestock                                      U  U  X  X  X  X  U  X  X  X  X
Medical marijuana dispensary offsite           X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X
cultivation
Nursery                                        P  C  X  X  X  X  X  P  P  P  P
Riding arena                                   P  U  U  X  X  X  A  X  X  X  X
Rodeo grounds                                  C  C  C  X  X  X  A  X  X  X  X
Stable, private                                U  U  U  X  X  X  U  X  X  X  X
Stable, public                                 P  C  X  X  X  X  C  C  C  C  C
Swine                                          U  C  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X
Lodging
Bed and breakfast                              P  P  P  C  C  X  P  P  P  X  X
Campground                                     C  X  X  X  X  X  P  X  X  X  X
Hotel                                          X  X  X  X  X  X  P  C  P  P  P
Motel                                          X  X  X  X  X  X  P  C  P  P  P
Resort                                         C  C  X  X  X  X  P  C  P  C  X
RV park                                        C  X  X  X  X  X  P  C  P  X  X
Vacation rental                                P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  X  X
Entertainment
Amusement, indoor                              X  X  X  X  X  X  A  U  P  P  P
Amusement, outdoor                             C  X  X  X  X  X  A  C  P  P  P
Golf course                                    P  P  P  P  P  P  A  X  X  X  X
Sexually oriented business                     X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  U  U  U
Shooting range, indoor                         C  X  X  X  X  X  C  C  C  C  C
Shooting range, outdoor                        C  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X
Special event venue                            C  X  X  X  X  X  A  X  C  P  P
Zoo; petting zoo                               C  X  X  X  X  X  C  X  X  X  X
Service
Adult day health care facility                 X  X  X  X  X  X  A  P  P  X  X
Assisted living center                         X  X  X  X  X  X  P  P  P  X  X
Automobile paint or body shop                  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  P  P
Automobile service facility                    C  X  X  X  X  X  X  C  P  P  P
Automobile fuel station                        X  X  X  X  X  X  A  P  P  P  P
Bar                                            X  X  X  X  X  A  A  P  P  P  P
Car wash                                       X  X  X  X  X  X  X  C  P  P  P
Child care facility                            C  C  C  C  X  X  A  P  P  C  C
Commercial vehicle service facility            A  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  P  P
Donation bin                                   X  X  X  X  X  X  X  T  T  T  T
Financial institution                          X  X  X  X  X  X  X  P  P  P  P
Fitness center                                 X  X  X  X  X  X  A  U  P  P  P
Helistop                                       X  X  X  X  X  X  C  X  A  P  P
Laundry or dry cleaner                         X  X  X  X  X  X  X  U  U  P  P
Kennel                                         C  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  U  U  U
Medical clinics                                X  X  X  X  X  X  A  P  P  P  P
Parking lot                                    A  A  A  A  A  A  A  P  P  P  P
Personal service                               X  X  X  X  X  X  A  P  P  P  P
Public horse track                             C  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X
Restaurant                                     C  X  X  X  X  A  A  P  P  P  P
Mobile food vendor                             X  U  U  U  U  U  U  U  U  U  U
Truck stop                                     U  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  U  U  U
Veterinary clinic                              C  X  X  X  X  X  X  P  P  P  P
Office
Office                                         A  X  X  X  X  A  A  P  P  P  P
Television, radio, or film studio              X  X  X  X  X  X  C  U  U  P  P
Retail
Agricultural, industrial, or commercial        C  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  P  P
vehicle sales or lease
Auto/vehicle sales                             X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  P  P  P
Farmers market                                 P  X  X  X  X  X  P  P  P  P  P
Medical marijuana dispensary/                  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  C  C  C
marijuana establishment (dual licensee)
Package liquor store                           X  X  X  X  X  X  X  P  P  P  P
Retail establishment, under 30,000 sq. ft., no
open storage (except stock-in-trade per        X  X  X  X  X  A  A  P  P  P  P
17-8-6)
Retail establishment, 30,000 sq. ft. and
larger, no open storage (except stock-in-trade X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  P  P  P
per
17-8-6)
Retail establishment with open storage         X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  C  P  P
Temporary retail                               T  X  X  X  X  T  T  T  T  T  T
Open space
Public park or playground                      P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Institutional
Cemetery or mausoleum without crematory        P  C  X  X  X  X  X  C  P  P  P
Cemetery or mausoleum with crematory           C  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  C  C  P
Hospital                                       X  X  X  X  X  X  X  C  C  C  C
Indoor assembly                                C  X  X  X  X  X  A  U  P  P  P
Long-term care facility                        X  X  X  X  X  X  C  P  P  P  P
Place of worship                               P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Private school                                 C  C  C  C  C  C  A  P  P  P  P
Utilities
Accessory energy storage facility              U  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  U  U
Energy storage facility                        C  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  C  C
Power plant                                    C  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  C  C
Solar energy system/solar power plant          C  C  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  C  C
Utility facility                               C  C  C  C  C  C  C  P  P  P  P
Wireless communication facility                U  U  U  U  U  U  U  U  U  U  U
Industrial
Batching plant                                 C  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  C
Construction equipment sales, service, storage X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  C  P
or distribution
Contractor’s yard                            X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  P  P
Data center                                    X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  A  A
Distribution center                            X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  C  P  P
Dog and cat food processing                    X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X
Explosive materials manufacturing or storage   X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  C
Fertilizer plant                               X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X
Food processing facility                       C  X  X  X  X  X  X  C  C  C  P
Foundry                                        X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  C
Heavy manufacturing                            X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  C  C
Junkyard                                       X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  C
Laboratory                                     X  X  X  X  X  X  X  A  C  P  P
Light manufacturing                            X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  P  P
Mineral extraction or borrow pit               C  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  C
Rendering plant                                X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X
Rubber reclaiming or processing                X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X
Self storage, indoor                           X  X  X  X  X  X  X  C  P  P  P
Self storage outdoor                           X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  P  P
Slaughterhouse                                 X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X
Tar or asphalt processing (excluding batching  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X
plant)
Warehouse                                      X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  P  P
* Accessory dwelling units are allowed upon meeting the conditions set forth in
Table 3 below only upon the effective date of Section
17-6-14  as set forth in Section
17-6-14 (G).
 
Ordinance 2022.006, 2022.022, 2022.026, 2023.032, 2024.014, 2024.028, 2024.029,
2025.002 and 2025.023 amended
Table 2 of Section
17-4-2
17-4-3 Use conditions matrix
The following table lists the conditions that apply to uses marked with a "U"
in
T
able 2  (Use matrix). Where a zoning group is listed in the "zone(s)" column,
the conditions apply to all zoning districts in that zoning group.
Table 3. Conditions per use
USE ZONE(S) CONDITION(S)
Table 3. Conditions per use
USE           ZONE CONDITION(S)
              (S)
Residential
                   Must comply with the development standards for R-3 zone as set forth in
Single-family NC,  section
detached      VC   17-4-5(B)(7)
                   Table 4
                   (Development standards per residential zone)
                   Must comply with the development standards for R-3 zone as set forth in
Single-family NC,  section
attached      VC   17-4-5(B)(7)
                   Table 4  
                   (Development standards per residential zone)
                   Must comply with the development standards for R-3 zone as set forth in
              NC,  section
              VC   17-4-5(B)(7)
                   Table 4  
                   (Development standards per residential zone)
Duplex        AG,
              RA,
              ER,
              NR,  Allowed only if requirements set forth in section 17-6-15 are met
              GR,
              MR,
              RR
                   Must comply with the development standards for R-3 zone as set forth in
              NC,  section
              VC   17-4-5(B)(7)
                   Table 4
                   (Development standards per residential zone)
Townhouse     AG,
              RA,
              ER,  Allowed only if requirements set forth in section
              NR,  17-6-5 are met
              GR,
              MR,
              RR
              AG,
              RA,
              ER,
              NR,  Allowed only if requirements set forth in section
Triplex       GR,  17-6-5 are met
              MR,
              RR,
              NC,
              VC
              AG,
              RA,
              ER,
              NR,  Allowed only if requirements set forth in section
Fourplex      GR,  17-6-5 are met
              MR,
              RR,
              NC,
              VC
                   Must comply with the development standards for MR-2 zone as set forth in
Multi-family  NC   section
                   17-4-6(D)
                   Table 5 (Development standards per MR zone)
Manufactured  RA   Shall be fully skirted unless placed at ground level
home          ER
              ER   Architectural similarity and compatibility for the purpose of blending into
Modular home  NR   the existing neighborhood
              GR
              AG
              RA
              ER
Accessory     NR   Must comply with all development standards for accessory dwelling units, as
dwelling unit GR   set forth in Section
              MR   17-6-14
              RR
              NC
              VC
Accessory     ER   Shall consist of a maximum of 2,500 total square feet per parcel
structure     NR   Shall consist of a maximum of 1,500 total square feet per parcel
              AG
              RA   Must be conducted in a single-family dwelling by a full time occupant of the
              ER   dwelling
              NR   During operating hours, the entire property may be devoted to the use
              GR   An opaque five-foot fence or wall shall screen outdoor activity and
              MR   equipment areas from any adjacent residential use
Child care    RR
home               Shall not employ more than one nonresident of the premises
              AG   All parking shall be on site and shall not include commercial parking
              RA   features such as wheel stops, parking lanes or striping
              ER   Shall maintain the required residential off-street parking Any new structure
              NR   or proposed changes to an existing single- family dwelling used as a child
              GR   care home must be consistent with the residential character of the single-
                   family dwelling as it appeared before operation of the child care home
Guest         GR   Must be located within the principal residence
quarters      MR
             NR   Must be located within the principal residence on lots smaller than 16,000
                   square feet
                   Must be conducted by a full time occupant of the dwelling
                   Shall not exceed 25% of the gross floor area of a dwelling
                   Shall not employ more than one nonresident of the premises
                   Exterior public display of stock-in-trade, external evidence of the home
                   occupation, and outdoor storage of equipment or material associated with the
                   home occupation are prohibited
                   All parking shall be on site and shall not include commercial parking
                   features such as wheel stops, parking lanes or striping
                   Shall maintain the required residential off-street parking
                   Shall not create more parking demand or vehicular or pedestrian traffic than
              AG   a typical residential use
              RA   No more than one vehicle shall be used in conjunction with the home
              ER   occupation
              NR   Shall not cause any sustained, unpleasant, or unusual noises or vibrations;
Home          GR   noxious fumes or odors; or other nuisances in the immediate neighborhood
occupation    MR   Shall serve no more than five clients per day
              RR   Shall serve no more than two clients at a time
              NC   Any new structure or proposed changes to an existing structure used in
              VC   conjunction with the home occupation must be consistent with the residential
                   character of the dwelling
                   Prohibited home occupations include auto repair and service; veterinarian
                   service, kennels, and pet grooming; commercial food preparation; mortuary or
                   embalming service; tattoo parlor; welding service; and any commercial use
                   not customarily incidental to a residential use
                   Additional conditions may apply for specific uses regulated by other
                   provisions of this title
                   May include customary use of amenities customarily incidental to a
                   residential use, such as a swimming pool, playground equipment, and other
                   similar amenities, in the backyard only, and only during the hours of 8:00
                   a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
              AG,
              RA,  Must comply with all development standards for transitional housing, as set
              ER,  forth in Section
              NR,  17-6-12
Transitional  GR,
housing            Must comply with all development standards for transitional housing, as set
                   forth in Section
              NC,  17-6-12
              VC   Must comply with the development standards for R-3 zone as set forth in
                   Section
                   17-4-5(B)(7) Table 4 (Development standards per residential zone)
Agricultural
                   Lot area and fenced area for one type of animal shall not also be counted
General       All  for any other type of animal
                   Minimum fenced area is included in minimum lot area
                   Colonies shall be maintained in movable-frame hives Hives shall be erected
                   using a hive stand which separates the hive's bottom boards from directly
              AG   contacting the ground
Apiary        RA   Colonies shall be maintained to reasonably prevent undue swarming or
              ER   aggressive behavior
                   Four colonies shall be permitted for every 10,000 square feet of parcel area
                   Shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from any adjacent residential
                   property line and a minimum of 60 feet from all other property lines
                   No more than 40 birds permitted on any property within a residential
              AG   district or adjacent to a residential district
              RA   Must be set back a minimum of 60 feet from any property line and 20 feet
Aviary        ER   from any residential structure or aviary
              LI   Length or width shall not exceed 50 linear feet except in the AG zone
              HI   Shall not exceed the maximum building height of the applicable zoning
                   district
                   Shall not exceed 2,000 square feet
                   No more than 40 animals per acre
                   Structures shall be set back a minimum of 60 feet from any property whose
Chickens;     AG   zoning does not allow roosters or other fowl, and a minimum of 30 feet from
roosters;     RA   any property line
other fowl         Must comply with all applicable animal-keeping standards, as set forth in
                   section
                   17-6-7
                   One chicken permitted for every 1,000 square feet of lot area
                   Chickens and associated structures prohibited in the area extending the full
                   width of the lot between the main building and the front street lot line
                   Structures six feet or less in height and 16 square feet or less in area are
                   not required to be set back from the side or rear property line, but must be
                   behind the main building
                   Structures more than six feet in height or larger than 16 square feet in
              ER   area are subject to accessory building setback requirements
Chickens      NR   All structures must be at least 20 feet from any offsite dwelling unit
                   A setback is not required from property lines abutting alleys, rights-of-
                   way, access easements, or nonresidential uses, or with the consent of the
                   adjacent property owner
                   Structures must be shorter than the fence line of the lot; in no event shall
                   the height of a structure exceed 12 feet
                   Must comply with all applicable animal-keeping standards, as set forth in
                   section
                   17-6-7
                   Up to six chickens permitted per lot
                   Chickens must be kept in an enclosure located in the rear or side yard
                   Enclosures shall be set back at least 20 feet from any neighboring property
                   line
             GR   Enclosures shall be a maximum of 200 square feet in size
                   Enclosures must be shorter than the fence line of the lot; in no event shall
                   the height of an enclosure exceed eight feet
                   Must comply with all applicable animal-keeping standards, as set forth in
                   section
                   17-6-7
              MR   When developed as single-family detached residential pursuant to a CUP, up
             RR   to six chickens permitted per lot, with same conditions as listed for the GR
                   zone
             NC   When developed as single-family detached residential, up to six chickens
              VC   permitted per lot, with same conditions as listed for the GR zone
                   Animals shall be confined within a stock-tight fence or corral
                   Animal structures shall be set back a minimum of 60 feet from all property
Livestock,    AG   lines
large or      RA   Corrals shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from the front property line
small         RR   No barn, shed, corral, fence, or other structure for the housing or
                   confinement of one or more large livestock or more than three small
                   livestock, shall be erected, constructed, or moved to within 100 feet of a
                   human residence, except the on-site residence of the owner of the animals
Livestock,    AG   One animal shall be permitted for every 10,000 square feet of lot area
large         RA   A minimum of 400 square feet of fenced area shall be provided for each
              RR   animal
Livestock,    AG   One animal shall be permitted for every 5,000 square feet of lot area
small         RA   A minimum of 200 square feet of fenced area shall be provided for each
              RR   animal
                   One permitted for every 10,000 square feet of lot area Animals shall be
Ratites       AG   confined within minimum six-foot-high stock- tight fenced corrals
              RA   Structures shall be set back a minimum of 60 feet from any property line
                   Corrals shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from any property line
                   Allowed only with a conditional use permit, except that a private and
              RA   unlighted riding arena is allowed as an accessory use if it is set back a
                   minimum of 100 feet from any adjacent residential property line and a
                   minimum of 60 feet from all other property lines
Riding arena       A private and unlighted riding arena is allowed as an accessory use if it is
                   set back a minimum of 100 feet from any adjacent residential property line
              ER   and a minimum of 60 feet from all other property lines
                   A private and lighted riding arena is allowed only with a conditional use
                   permit
Rodents       AG   A maximum of 40 animals permitted per acre
              RA   Structures shall be set back a minimum of 60 feet from any property line
              AG   Unlighted only
Stable,       RA   Allowed only as an accessory use
private       ER   Unlighted only
              RR
                   Minimum lot size shall be one acre
                   One swine per acre shall be permitted for a parcel smaller than five acres
                   The minimum setback for a swine related structure and or pen on a lot less
                   than five acres shall be 100 feet from any property line
                   On a parcel five acres or greater, all swine related structures and or pens
                   shall be located on the half of the property opposite of the highest
Swine         AG   classified street adjacent to the subject property
                   The minimum required setback for any pen or structure on a lot containing
                   five or more swine shall be 300 feet from any property line
                   No barn, shed, corral, fence, or other structure for the housing or
                   confinement of one or more swine shall be erected, constructed, or moved to
                   within 100 feet of a human residence, except the on-site residence of the
                   owner of the animals
Entertainment
Amusement,    NC   Shall not exceed 30,000 sq. ft.
indoor
Sexually      VC   Shall meet all of the setbacks and other requirements set forth in A.R.S. §
oriented      LI   13-1422 as it may be amended from time to time
business      HI
Service
Fitness       NC   Shall not exceed 10,000 sq. ft.
center
Laundry or    NC   Shall not exceed 10,000 sq. ft.
dry cleaner
Laundry or    VC   Shall not exceed 30,000 sq. ft.
dry cleaner
Kennel        VC   Boarding allowed only in fully enclosed building
              LI   Not permitted within 1,000 feet of any existing residence
Kennel        HI   Not permitted within 1,000 feet of any existing residence
              RR
              NC
              VC   Shall comply with the requirements of chapter 9-13
              LI
Mobile food   HI
vendor        RA   Shall comply with the requirements of chapter 9-13
              NR   A mobile food vendor selling only ice cream may operate on public rights-of-
              ER   way in residential zoning districts
              GR   May operate on private property in a residential zoning district with a
              MR   separate agreement with the property owner; maximum of six hours within a 24
                   hour period
              AG
Truck stop    VC   Only permitted with a conditional use permit (see section
              LI   17-3-2) near an interstate highway interchange
              HI
Office
Television,   NC   Shall not exceed 10,000 sq. ft. except upon issuance of a conditional use
radio, or     VC   permit (see section
film studio        17-3-2)
Institutional
Indoor        NC   Shall not exceed 30,000 sq. ft.
assembly
Utilities
Accessory          Must comply with all development standards for energy storage facilities, as
energy        AG,  set forth in section
storage       LI,  17-6-11
facility      HI   Must be accessory to an electric utility facility
                   Shall consist of a maximum of 10% of total land use per parcel
Wireless           See
communication All  Chapter 17-18
facility
 
Ordinance 2022.026, 2023.031, 2023.032, 2024.014, 2024.028, 2025.002, and
2025.023 amended
Table 3 of Section
17-4-3
17-4-4 Agricultural (AG)
A.   Properties in the agricultural (AG) zoning district are regulated based on
their primary use as set forth in the use matrix set forth in section
17-4-2.
B.   The purpose of the AG zone is to accommodate agricultural, rural, and open
space uses and related activities. This zone will minimize adverse impacts on
rural and agricultural lands from development of incompatible land uses and
urban encroachment.
C.   Development standards:
Lot area (minimum)        5 acres
Setbacks (minimum)        Front - 40 ft.
                         Side - 40 ft.
                         Rear - 60 ft.
Building height (maximum) 30 ft.
                         Accessory building, not for agricultural use - 30 ft.
                         Accessory buildings, for agricultural use - 50 ft.
Lot coverage (maximum)    40% of the total lot area
 
17-4-5 Residential zoning districts R-180, R-144, R-80, R-36, R-16, R-10, R-8,
R-7, R-6, R-5, R-4, and R-3
A.   The R-180, R-144, R-80, R-36, R-16, R-10, R-8, R-7, R-6, R-5, R-4, and R-
3 residential zones consist primarily of single-family homes, with one dwelling
and accessory buildings on an individual lot.
B.   The following development standards apply in the R-180, R-144, R-80, R-36,
R-16, R-10, R-8, R-7, R-6, R-5, R-4, and R-3 zones:
   1.   Minimum lot sizes for each zone are determined by the number following
the dash multiplied by one thousand square feet. For example, the minimum lot
size of the R-180 zoning district is 180,000 square feet.
   2.   Properties are regulated based on their primary use as set forth in the
use matrix set forth in section
17-4-2.
   3.   Only one primary use is permitted.
   4.   No accessory buildings may be located within the minimum front setback.
   5.   Lot widths and depths.
      a.   Each lot must have a width-to-depth ratio of between 3.0 and 0.33.
Therefore, the average depth of the lot must be at least one-third its average
width, and the average width of the lot must be at least one-third its average
depth.
      b.   When the ratio set forth in the preceding paragraph provides a lot
width or depth less than the minimum lot widths and depths set forth in
table 4 (development standards per residential zone), the minimum lot widths
and depths set forth in
table 4 apply.
   6.   Utilities. All utilities must be undergrounded.
   7.   
Table 4 (development standards per residential zone) establishes the site
development standards of the residential zones (with the column headings
deleting the "R-" portions of the zone designations, and where "B" signifies
that the item is governed by minimum building code requirements only):
Table 4. Development standards per residential zone
 Zone R-
Table 4. Development standards per residential zone
                                                                Zone R-
Development standard                                            180 144 80  36  16  10 8  7  6  5  4  3
Minimum lot width (feet) [https://export.amlegal.com/media/     175 175 120 100 80  70 65 55 50 45 40 35
8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/IMAGES/0-0-0-2302.jpg]
Minimum lot depth (feet)                                        275 200 200 100 100 95 90 85 80 77 74 70
Minimum lot boundary setbacks (feet)—                                                     
Main building ‡ —                                                                       
Front                                                           40  40  30  30  20  16 16 16 16 10 10 10
Front-loading garage                                            40  40  30  30  25  20 20 20 20 20 20 20
Side abutting a street                                          30  30  30  20  15  10 10 10 10 10 10 10
Side                                                            30  30  30  15  10  5  5Δ5Δ5ΔB  B  B
Rear                                                            50  50  40  30  20  15 15 15 15 10 10 10
Rear and side— covered patio structure open on at least three 20  20  20  10  5   5  5Δ5Δ5Δ5Δ5Δ5Δ
sides
Accessory building                                              30  30  30  20  10  5  5Δ5Δ5ΔB  B  B
Minimum building separation (in feet) between—                                            
Principal buildings                                             20  20  20  20  15  10 10 10 10 B  B  B
Principal and accessory building                                10  10  10  10  10  5  5  5  5  B  B  B
Accessory buildings                                             10  10  10  10  10  5  5  5  5  B  B  B
Maximum building height (feet) —                                                          
Main building                                                   35  35  35  30  30  30 30 30 30 30 30 30
Accessory building†                                           30* 30* 30* 25  25  25 25 25 25 25 25 25
Maximum lot coverage (percent of total lot area)[https://
export.amlegal.com/media/                                       40  40  40  40  50  50 50 50 50 75 75 75
8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/IMAGES/0-0-0-2300.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2302.jpg] Corner lots shall be at least five feet wider than the
minimum lot width of the zone to permit conformance with the required street
side yard requirements and sight visibility triangles.
‡ In subdivisions containing one or more lots 16,000 square feet or smaller,
the residential design guidelines allow smaller setbacks in certain situations.
Δ Side setbacks of individual lots in these zones may be reduced so long as the
total separation between buildings on adjacent lots is not less than ten feet.
† Accessory building height shall be the lesser of the actual height of the
main building or the accessory building height shown here. This does not apply
to accessory buildings used for agricultural purposes in the R-180, R-144, and
R-80 zones.
* Accessory buildings used for agricultural purposes shall be limited to 50
feet in height.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2300.jpg]In subdivisions containing one or more lots 16,000 square
feet or smaller, the residential design guidelines allow greater lot coverage
in certain situations.
Ordinance 2023.012 amended Table 4 of Section 17-4-5
17-4-6 Multi-family residential (MR) zoning group
A.   Description. The MR zoning group consists of the MR-1 and MR-2 zones.
B.   Density. Undevelopable areas such as washes and slopes over 15% shall be
excluded when calculating density in the MR zoning group net developable area.
C.   Design standards. All pertinent requirements of
chapter 17-8 (multi-family, commercial, and industrial design standards) apply
in the MR zoning group.
D.   The following development standards apply in the MR zones.
Table 5. Development standards per MR zone
Development standard MR-1 MR-2
Table 5. Development standards per MR zone
Development standard       MR-1                      MR-2
Density                    20 units per acre minimum 20 units per acre maximum
Site setbacks (minimum)    Front – 20 ft.          Front – 20 ft.
                          Side – 20 ft.           Side – 20 ft.
                          Rear – 20 ft.           Rear – 20 ft.
Building height (maximum)  50 ft.                    35 ft.
Lot coverage (maximum)     75% of the total lot area 70% of the total lot area
                           Apartment or condominium: Apartment or condominium:
                           100 square feet per unit  100 square feet per unit
Recreational or active     Town home or patio home:  Town home or patio home:
common area (minimum)      140 square feet per unit  140 square feet per unit
                           (See section              (See section
                           17-5-3(B)(12))            17-5-3(B)(12))
Private patio, balcony, or N/A                       75 sq. ft. per unit
combination (minimum)
 
17-4-7 Commercial zoning districts
A.   General. The commercial zoning districts are the RR, NC, and VC zones.
   1.   Properties are regulated based on their primary use as set forth in the
use matrix set forth in section
17-4-2.
   2.   A single parcel may have multiple permitted uses.
B.   Purpose.
   1.   Resort and recreation zone (RR). The resort and recreation zone
provides for the development and operation of temporary lodging, recreation
opportunities and associated specialized guest facilities while protecting
adjacent land uses from inappropriate and adverse impacts.
   2.   Neighborhood commercial (NC) zone. The neighborhood commercial (NC)
zone accommodates businesses serving neighborhood residential needs including
retail sales and professional services and ensures compatibility with adjacent
residential uses.
   3.   Village commercial (VC) zone. The village commercial (VC) zone is a
community level commercial zone intended to provide for business serving the
town and surrounding communities providing the sale of goods and services and a
variety of commercial and professional activities as well as higher-density
residential opportunities.
C.   Landscaping. See section
17-11-7 (landscape requirements) and the landscaping provisions of
Chapter 17-8 (multi-family, commercial, and industrial design standards).
D.   Design standards. See
Chapter 17-8 (multi-family, commercial, and industrial design standards).
E.   The following development standards apply in the commercial zones:
Table 6. Development standards per commercial zone
Development standard RR NC‡VC‡
Table 6. Development standards per commercial zone
Development standard                                               RR                                   NC‡*                                         VC‡
Site area                                                          10 acres min.                        1 acre min., 20-acre max. (no minimum lot      10 acres min. √  (no minimum lot size)
                                                                                                        size)
Floor area ratio (maximum)                                         0.25                                 0.5                                            0.5
Density (maximum)                                                  4.36 units per acre                  10 dwelling units per acre                     20 dwelling units per acre
                                                                                                                                                       Front
                                                                                                        Front – 20 ft.                               30 ft. (commercial)
                                                                   Arterial or collector – 40 ft.     Street side—20 ft. Side – 20 ft.           20 ft. (residential)
Site setbacks (minimum) [https://export.amlegal.com/media/         Other roads – 25 ft. Side – 25 ftRear – 20 ft.                                Street side
8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/IMAGES/0-0-0-2302.jpg]   Rear – 25 ft.                      Abutting residential zone property line – 25 30 ft. (commercial)
                                                                                                        ft.                                            20 ft. (residential)
                                                                                                                                                       Side – 20 ft.
                                                                                                                                                       Rear – 20 ft.
                                                                   50 ft.
                                                                   Accessory buildings – 40 ft.
                                                                   50% height increase may be approved
                                                                   with a conditional use permit (see   30 ft.                                         50 ft. (commercial) 40 ft. (residential) Accessory buildings –30
Building height (maximum)                                          section                              Accessory buildings - 25 ft.                   ft.
                                                                   17-3-2, conditional use permits)
                                                                   Height must match adjacent parcel
                                                                   permitted height within 75 ft. of
                                                                   site property line
Lot coverage (maximum)                                             40% of the total lot area            40% of the total area (commercial)             55% of the total area
                                                                                                        50% of the total area (residential)
                                                                   25 ft. front, street side, and
                                                                   abutting residential zones Street
                                                                   frontages require trees planted at
                                                                   no more than 40 ft. on center with
                                                                   25% in a 24-inch box or greater
Landscape area requirements (minimum; site)                        Landscaping must cover at least 15%  N/A                                            N/A
                                                                   of the site
                                                                   Landscaping and trees must cover at
                                                                   least 15% of, and be evenly
                                                                   distributed throughout, parking
                                                                   areas
 
‡Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Table 6, single-family
detached, single-family attached, duplex, and townhouse residential uses in the
NC and VC zones must comply with the development standards for R-3 zone as set
forth in section
17-4-5(B)(7) Table 4 (Development standards per residential zone)
*Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Table 6, multi-family
residential uses in the NC zone must comply with the development standards for
MR-2 zone as set forth in section
17-4-6(D) Table 5 (Development standards per MR zone)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2302.jpg] When commercial or industrial development is adjacent to
AG, RA, ER, NR, and GR zones or groups, side and rear setbacks must equal or
exceed the height of the primary building on the site. See
17-8-2(B)(6).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2300.jpg] Site area in the VC zone district may be less than 10
acres when property is rezoned from a legacy zone district to VC or when
property is rezoned to VC in an area that is substantially comprised of
commercial sites of less than 10 acres.
Ordinance 2022.022 amended Table 6 of Section 17-4-7
Ordinance 2023.012 amended Table 6 of Section 17-4-7
Ordinance 2024.014 amended Table 6 of Section 17-4-7
17-4-8 Industrial zoning districts
A.   The industrial zoning districts are the LI and HI zones. Properties in
industrial zoning districts are regulated based on their primary use as set
forth in the use matrix set forth in section
17-4-2.
B.   Purpose.
   1.   Light industrial (LI). The light industrial (LI) zone provides for
manufacturing, processing, research, science, engineering, wholesale trade,
services, general commercial, institutional and retail sales.
   2.   Heavy industrial (HI). The heavy industrial (HI) zone provides for
manufacturing, processing, research, science, engineering, and wholesale trade.
C.   Design standards. See
Chapter 17-8 (multi-family, commercial, and industrial design standards).
D.   Storage. Outdoor storage must be screened on all sides by opaque fencing
and solid gates. In the LI zone, outdoor storage areas are only permitted as an
accessory use and the total area may not exceed 20% of the floor area of the
parcel's buildings.
E.    Data centers. As provided in section
17-6-13, data centers are not permitted to operate in the town as a principal
use unless approved in a specific plan or specific plan amendment explicitly
created or amended for the purpose of data center development and adopted
through the rezoning process set forth in section
17-3-1 and as described in section
17-4-15 (Specific plan (SP)). Data centers are permitted as an accessory use in
the LI and HI zoning districts when all of the following are true:
   1.   The data center occupies no more than 15% of the site.
   2.   The data center is used to serve the enterprise functions of the on-
site property owner and is not used to lease data storage and processing
services to third parties. For purposes of this subparagraph "on-site property
owner" includes an owner that owns the property and is the parent company of
the company or companies on-site.
   3.   The data center complies with any applicable development standards for
accessory use data centers, as set forth in section
17-6-13.
F.   The following development standards apply in the industrial zones.
Table 7. Development standards per industrial zone
Development standard LI HI
Table 7. Development standards per industrial zone
Development standard                                               LI                                                                        HI
Site area (minimum)                                                One acre (no minimum lot size)                                            One acre (no minimum lot size)
Floor area ratio (maximum)                                         0.75                                                                      1.00
                                                                   Residential street – 50 ft.                                             Residential street – 50 ft.
Site setbacks                                                      Non-residential street – 20 ft.                                         Non-residential street – 20 ft.
(minimum) [https://export.amlegal.com/media/                       Where abutting a residentially-zoned parcel—30 ft. or the height of the Abutting a residentially-zoned parcel—30 ft. or the height of the building,
8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/IMAGES/0-0-0-2302.jpg]   building, whichever is greater, and the entire setback shall be           whichever is greater
                                                                   landscaped
                                                                   All other situations – 15 ft.                                           All other situations—15 ft.
Building height (maximum)                                          50 ft.                                                                    55 ft.
Lot coverage                                                       No maximum                                                                No maximum
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2302.jpg] When commercial or industrial development is adjacent to
AG, RA, ER, NR, and GR zones or groups, side and rear setbacks must equal or
exceed the height of the primary building on the site. See
17-8-2(B)(6).
Ordinance 2024.029 added paragraph E. to Section 17-4-8 and renumbered existing
paragraph E. as F.
17-4-9 Mixed-use zoning districts
A.   General. The mixed-use zoning districts are the BU, DO, DT, and DN zones.
Properties in mixed-use zoning districts are regulated primarily on the
physical form, intensity, character, and size of buildings and uses. Use
restrictions in the mixed-use zoning districts are found in the use matrix set
forth in
table 8 below.
B.   Purpose. The mixed-use zoning districts promote walkable, compact,
downtown and neighborhood development. The zones will vary the intensity of
land use, variety of land uses, scale and size of buildings, and other factors
according to the context.
   1.   The BU zone is implemented through a blended-use plan, approved with
the rezoning to BU, comprised of a combination of the three intensities
described below and regulated by section
17-4-11.
      a.   Low intensity. Consists of single-family residential areas, with
some mix of uses, home occupations, and accessory buildings.
      b.   Medium intensity. Consists of a mix of uses but is primarily blended
density residential. It contains a wide range of building types-houses,
courtyard housing, townhouses, duplexes, triplexes, small apartment buildings,
and live-work units.
      c.   High intensity. Consists of higher density mixed-use buildings that
accommodate retail, offices, institutions, and apartments or condominiums.
   2.   The DT and DN zones are implemented through a downtown implementation
plan, submitted by one or more owners of land located in the DO district. Until
submission and approval of a downtown implementation plan, the underlying
zoning entitlements remain in place. Upon town approval of a downtown
implementation plan, the underlying zoning entitlements are replaced with the
zoning entitlements set forth in the DT and DN zones.
C.   Use. Mixed-use districts are subject to the requirements of
table 8 below, where the notations have the following meanings:
   1.   "P" means the use is permitted subject to design standards.
   2.   "A" means the use is permitted as an accessory use located on the same
lot with a permitted use.
   3.   "C" means the use is allowed upon approval of a conditional use permit
(see section
17-3-2).
   4.   "U" means the use is allowed upon meeting the conditions set forth in
table 9 below.
   5.   "T" means the use is allowed upon approval of a temporary use permit
(see section
17-3-3).
   6.   "X" means the use is prohibited.
D.   Uses not mentioned.
   1.   General presumption. Uses not listed in
Table 8 and not otherwise prohibited by law shall be presumed to be permitted
subject to the conditions and restrictions that apply to the most similar use,
as determined by the planning manager. A use shall be prohibited only if the
planning manager determines that the use is not similar to any listed use.
   2.   Planning manager determination. In making the determination required by
paragraph
17-4-9 D. 1 above, the planning manager shall use as a guide the most recently
published north American industry classification system as established by the
United States census bureau.
   3.   Notice of determination. The planning manager's determination under
paragraph
17-4-9 D. 1 above shall be filed in the office of the town clerk, with copies
provided to the council and manager.
   4.   Ratification or modification. The planning manager's determination may
be ratified or modified by legislative action of the town council upon
recommendation by the planning commission.
   5.   No similar uses. If the planning manager determines that a similar use
does not exist, the planning manager may submit an amendment to this section to
establish a specific listing for the use in question by legislative action of
the town council upon recommendation by the planning commission.
Table 8. Mixed-use zoning district use matrix
Use Blended use zone (BU) intensity Downtown overlay (DO)
    Low Medium High                 DN DT
Table 8. Mixed-use zoning district use matrix
Use                       Blended use zone (BU) intensity Downtown overlay (DO)
                          Low Medium High                 DN DT
Residential
Single-family detached    P   P      X                    P  X
Duplex                    P   P      U                    P  U
Triplex                   U   P      P                    P  P
Townhouse                 U   P      P                    P  P
Fourplex                  U   U      U                    U  U
Multi-family              X   U      P                    U  P
Live-work                 X   P      P                    P  P
Accessory dwelling        P   P      P                    P  P
Detached accessory        A   A      A                    A  A
structure
Group home                C   C      C                    C  C
Home occupation           A   A      A                    A  A
Model home                A   A      A                    A  A
Modular home              C   X      X                    X  X
Sales office              T   T      P                    T  P
Sports court, unlighted   A   A      A                    A  X
Civic space
Park                      P   P      U                    P  U
Green                     P   P      U                    P  U
Square                    P   P      P                    P  P
Plaza                     X   P      P                    P  P
Multipurpose field        P   P      X                    P  X
Playground                P   P      P                    P  P
Community garden          P   P      P                    P  P
Agricultural
Corral, barn, or other    A   X      X                    X  X
animal-keeping structure
Greenhouse                P   U      U                    U  U
Kennel                    A   X      X                    X  X
Stables                   A   X      X                    X  X
Lodging
Bed and breakfast         U   U      X                    U  P
Hotel                     X   X      P                    U  P
Resort                    X   X      P                    U  X
Entertainment
Adult entertainment       X   X      X                    X  X
Bowling center            X   X      P                    X  P
Theater, excluding drive- X   X      P                    X  P
in
Automotive
Automobile service        X   X      C                    X  X
facility
Automobile fuel station   X   X      C                    X  X
Auto sales                X   X      X                    X  X
Car wash                  X   X      C                    X  X
Drive-thru facility       X   X      C                    X  X
Office
Live-work                 U   U      P                    U  P
Office                    U   U      P                    U  P
Service
Business service          X   U      U                    U  U
Commercial laundry        X   X      U                    U  X
Child care home provider  P   P      P                    P  X
Day care center           C   C      C                    C  C
Donation bin              X   X      X                    X  X
Financial institution     X   X      U                    U  U
Hospital                  X   X      P                    X  X
Medical clinic            X   U      U                    U  C
Medical marijuana         X   X      C                    X  C
dispensary
Mini-storage              X   X      X                    X  X
Personal service          X   P      P                    P  P
Veterinary clinic         X   X      U                    C  C
Retail
Bar, pub, tavern,         X   U      U                    U  U
microbrewery
Live-work                 X   P      P                    P  P
Package liquor store      X   X      U                    X  U
Restaurant                X   U      U                    U  U
Retail facility           X   U      U                    U  U
Institutional
Cemetery or mausoleum     U   U      X                    U  X
Club or meeting hall      X   U      U                    X  X
Funeral home              X   U      U                    U  U
Museum                    X   U      U                    U  U
Place of worship          U   U      U                    U  U
Education
Elementary or middle      U   U      U                    U  X
school
High school               X   U      U                    U  X
Utilities
Communications facility   C   C      C                    C  C
Utility facility          C   C      C                    C  C
 
6.   Multiple uses. Multiple uses within a single site or building are
permitted in all mixed-use districts and areas.
7.   Conditional uses. Conditional uses listed in
table 8 above are limited for size or intensity per
table 9 below.
Table 9. Conditions per area
 BU low intensity BU medium intensity; DN BU high intensity; DT
Table 9. Conditions per area
                 BU low intensity     BU medium intensity; BU high intensity;
                                      DN                   DT
                                                           Parks and greens
Civic space      None                 None                 permitted along the
                                                           perimeter
Agricultural     Not applicable       On-site parking may  On-site parking may
                                      not exceed 20 spaces not exceed 30 spaces
                 Triplexs, Townhouses Six dwelling units   No maximum
                 and Fourplexes       maximum              Duplexes and
Residential      allowed only if      Fourplexes allowed   fourplexes allowed
                 requirements set     only if requirements only if requirements
                 forth in section     set forth in section set forth in section
                 17-6-5 are met       17-6-15 are met      17-6-15 are met
Lodging          Six rooms maximum    12 rooms maximum     No maximum
Office           600 sq. ft. maximum  6,000 sq. ft. per    No maximum
                                      floor maximum
                                      10,000 sq. ft.       30,000 sq. ft.
Service & retail Not applicable       maximum; no open     maximum; no open
                                      storage              storage
Institutional    On-site parking may  On-site parking may  On-site parking may
                 not exceed 20 spaces not exceed 30 spaces not exceed 50 spaces
                                      Childcare facilities may have no more
Education        Not applicable       than four parking spaces; elementary
                                      schools may not exceed five acres unless
                                      playground has 24-hour access
 
E.   Civic space. The purpose of civic space is to ensure civic amenities are
appropriate in type and location. Civic space is required per the standards
below.
   1.   At least 5% of the net developable area of all blended-use plans and of
downtown implementation plans five acres or larger must be dedicated to civic
space.
   2.   Civic spaces are identified and located in the blended-use plan or
downtown implementation plan, and are permitted by location per
table 8 above.
   3.   Each blended-use plan or downtown implementation plan 40 acres or more
in area must have at least one green, square, or plaza (see 2, 3, or 4 of
table 10). The main civic space must be located within 800 feet of the
geographic center of the plan and may be adjusted up to 25% in length from the
center by the planning manager for topographical conditions, or existing street
alignment.
   4.   A square or plaza (3 and 4 of
table 10) must have a minimum of 50% of its perimeter bounded by streets.
   5.   Civic spaces are designed per
table 10.
 Table 10. Civic space types
 Table 10. Civic space types
1. Park
Area                                  Three acres, minimum
Standard: A space independent of
surrounding buildings. Landscape must [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
consist of paths and trails, fields,  8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
and open shelters, all                IMAGES/0-0-0-46.png]
naturalistically disposed.
2. Green
Area                                  One to five acres
Standard: An open space spatially
bounded by landscaping rather than    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
buildings. Character consists of      8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
landscaping and trees,                IMAGES/0-0-0-48.png]
naturalistically disposed.
3. Square
Area                                  One-half to five acres
Standard: An open space spatially
bounded by buildings. Landscape       [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
consists of paths, landscaping and    8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
trees, formally disposed. Squares are IMAGES/0-0-0-50.png]
located at the intersection of major
streets.
4. Plaza
Area                                  One-quarter to four acres
Standard: A plaza is formed by
building fronts. Landscape consists   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
primarily of pavement. Shade is       8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
required for 30% of the space. Plazas IMAGES/0-0-0-52.png]
must be located at the intersection
of major streets.
5. Neighborhood multipurpose field
Area                                  One and a half to three acres
Standard: There must be a 20-ft.
clear zone at the perimeter
landscaped with canopy trees. If      [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
adjacent to a street, the street      8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
trees may provide the required shade. IMAGES/0-0-0-54.png]
The multipurpose field may also serve
as a stormwater basin.
6. Playground
Area                                  Varies
Standard: A playground must be fenced
and may include an open shelter or    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
shade structure. Playgrounds are      8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
located within residential areas and  IMAGES/0-0-0-56.png]
may be placed within a block or as
part of another civic space.
7. Community garden                    
Area                                  Varies
Standard: Community gardens consist   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
of land used for the cultivation of   8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
fruits, vegetables, plants, flowers,  IMAGES/0-0-0-58.png]
or herbs by multiple users.
 
F.   Development standards.
   1.   Site standards.
      a.   Setbacks. Buildings must be set back from parcel boundaries
according to
table 16,
table 17,
table 18,
table 19, and
table 20 below.
      b.   Lot coverage. Lot coverage by buildings is limited to the maximum
percentage specified in
table 16,
table 17,
table 18,
table 19, and
table 20 below.
      c.   Yards. Yard types must be assigned according to
table 11 below.
      d.   Landscaping. Landscaping is subject to the requirements of
table 11,
table 16,
table 17,
table 18,
table 19, and
table 20 below. Where the minimum number of required trees cannot be reasonably
planted in a yard, they may be accommodated with additional streetscape
improvements.
      e.   Buffers are not required within blended-use plans or downtown
implementation plans, except as specifically required by
table 16,
table 17,
table 18,
table 19, and
table 20 below. Street frontage buffers are not required in blended-use plans
or downtown implementation plans.
Table 11. Yard types
Table 11. Yard types
1. Common
                                   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Illustration (BU low intensity)    8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
                                   IMAGES/0-0-0-60.png]
Illustration (BU medium intensity; [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
DN)                                8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
                                   IMAGES/0-0-0-62.png]
                                   See
                                   table 16,
Planting                           table 17,
                                   table 18,
                                   table 19, and
                                   table 20; trees should shade the sidewalk
Surface                            70% minimum must be landscaped; paving is
                                   limited to sidewalks and driveways
Walkways                           One per street frontage; must access
                                   building entries
Fencing                            Not permitted
2. Fenced
                                   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Illustration (BU low intensity)    8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
                                   IMAGES/0-0-0-64.png]
Illustration (BU medium intensity; [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
DN)                                8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
                                   IMAGES/0-0-0-66.png]
                                   See
                                   table 16,
Planting                           table 17,
                                   table 18,
                                   table 19, and
                                   table 20; trees should shade the sidewalk
Surface                            50% minimum must be landscaped; paving is
                                   limited to sidewalks and driveways
Walkways                           One per street frontage; must access
                                   building entries
                                   Required at or along all property lines;
Fencing                            three feet minimum and four feet maximum
                                   in height
3. Shallow
                                   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Illustration                       8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
                                   IMAGES/0-0-0-68.png]
                                   See
                                   table 16,
Planting                           table 17,
                                   table 18,
                                   table 19, and
                                   table 20
                                   Landscaped in BU medium and DN; paved in
Surface                            BU high and DT (vegetation is permitted
                                   in raised containers)
Walkways                           One per building entry
                                   Permitted at building setback line or at
Fencing                            outdoor seating areas; three feet maximum
                                   in height
4. Urban
                                   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Illustration                       8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
                                   IMAGES/0-0-0-70.png]
Planting                           Not applicable
Surface                            Must be paved; vegetation is permitted in
                                   raised containers
Walkways                           Not applicable
Fencing                            Permitted outdoor seating areas only;
                                   three feet maximum in height
5. Pedestrian forecourt
                                   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Illustration                       8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
                                   IMAGES/0-0-0-72.png]
Planting                           Not applicable
Surface                            Must be paved; vegetation is permitted in
                                   courtyard or containers
Fencing                            Permitted outdoor seating areas only;
                                   three feet maximum in height
Area                               1,800 sq. ft. maximum
                                   Must be bordered by habitable spaces on
Activation                         three sides, or on two sides at corner
                                   sites
6. Vehicular forecourt              
                                   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Illustration                       8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
                                   IMAGES/0-0-0-74.png]
Planting                           Not applicable
Surface                            Driveway must be paved; the remainder of
                                   the yard may be paved or landscaped
Fencing                            Permitted outdoor seating areas only;
                                   three feet maximum in height
Area                               3,000 sq. ft. maximum
                                   Must be bordered by habitable spaces on
Activation                         three sides, or on two sides at corner
                                   sites
 
      f.   Parking location. Parking on the site must comply with the
following:
         i.   Parking is required to be behind the building.
         ii.   Parking must be accessed from an alley or rear lane in the BU
medium and high intensity areas and in the DN and DT zones.
         iii.   Open parking areas must be screened from the street by a
building or streetscreen.
         iv.   A streetscreen must have openings no wider than the driveway or
sidewalk, plus a setback of 18 inches at driveway intersections.
         v.   A streetscreen shall be no less than 42 inches and no more than
six feet in height.
      g.   Parking requirements. No minimum parking requirements apply in the
mixed-use zones. Maximum parking requirements apply to certain uses (see
table 9).
   2.   Building standards.
      a.   Minimum frontage buildout. Building facades must be built along the
prescribed length of each street frontage as regulated by
table 16,
table 17,
table 18,
table 19, and
table 20 and as illustrated in
figure 17-a.
Figure 17-A. Frontage buildout
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2332.png]
 
      b.    Height. Building heights are measured in stories with the following
restrictions:
         i.   Stories are measured from finished floor to finished ceiling.
         ii.   Stories may not exceed 14 feet in height, except that a
commercial use on the first floor has a minimum height of 12 feet and a maximum
height of 25 feet.
         iii.   Height limits do not apply to attics or raised basements,
masts, belfries, clock towers, chimney flues, water tanks, or elevator
bulkheads.
         iv.   Edge conditions. Height is limited to adjacent parcel zoning
height within 50 feet of the lot line in all mixed-use zones.
      c.   Equipment screening. All outdoor electrical, plumbing, and
mechanical equipment must be located behind the front facade, or concealed from
street view with a screen or wall.
      d.   Accessory dwelling. The habitable area of an accessory dwelling may
not exceed 800 sq. ft. or 30% of a principal dwelling, whichever is greater.
Garages are not considered habitable area.
      e.   Facades.
         i.   The facade must conform to
table 12 and is permitted as specified by
table 16,
table 17,
table 18,
table 19, and
table 20.
         ii.   Building entries must be provided as follows:
            a)   The main entrance to the principal building must be located on
the primary facade.
            b)   One entry must be provided for every 80 feet of facade leading
to habitable space.
               1)   Buildings on corner lots are exempt from entry frequency
requirements if the facade is under 50 feet in length.
         iii.   Glazing.
            a)    At least 15% of each story of each facade must be glazed with
clear glass.
            b)    At least 50% of the first story of buildings facing Marana
Main Street must be glazed with clear glass.
            c)    Additional glazing requirement apply to shopfr onts per
table 12.
         iv.    Buildings may include multiple facade types along their length,
each type no less than 30 feet in width.
         v.    A shopfront is required for all ground floor comm ercial uses in
the BU high intensity area and in the DT zone except for lodging and office.
Table 12. Facade types
Table 12. Facade types
1. Porch
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/ IMAGES/0-0-0-80.png]
IMAGES/0-0-0-78.png]
Requirement                               Minimum depth of six feet
2. Stoop
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/ IMAGES/0-0-0-84.png]
IMAGES/0-0-0-82.png]
Requirement                               Minimum of one foot above highest adjacent sidewalk grade
3. Common entry                            
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/ IMAGES/0-0-0-88.png]
IMAGES/0-0-0-86.png]
Awnings and canopies should encroach into the right-of-way
4. Terrace
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/ IMAGES/0-0-0-92.png]
IMAGES/0-0-0-90.png]
Requirement                               Minimum eight inches above highest adjacent sidewalk grade
5. Shopfront
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/ IMAGES/0-0-0-96.png]
IMAGES/0-0-0-94.png]
Requirement                               At least 50% of each ground floor facade must be glazed with clear glass
6. Gallery
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/ IMAGES/0-0-0-100.png]
IMAGES/0-0-0-98.png]
                                          •At least 50% of each ground floor facade must be glazed with clear glass
Requirements                              •Must be at least eight feet deep with at least ten feet of vertical
                                          clearance
 
Tables 8 and 9 of section 17-4-9 were amended by Ordinance 2025.023
17-4-10 Mixed-use streets
The requirements of this section, rather than the town's subdivision street
standards manual, apply within the BU, DN, and DT zones.
A.   Centerlines of offset thoroughfares entering onto a collector or arterial
must be at least 300 feet apart.
B.   Streets must connect to other streets, forming a network. The planning
manager is authorized to permit a deviation to this requirement, thereby
allowing a dead-end street terminating in a cul-de-sac, consistent with the
following requirements:
   1.   The planning manager, in consultation with the town engineer, makes one
or more of the following determinations:
      a.   The physical terrain will make connection to other streets cost-
prohibitive or unsafe.
      b.   Existing development physically blocks connection to other streets.
      c.   Access restrictions or standard traffic engineering considerations
make connection impossible or unsafe.
   2.   Connectivity for bicycles and pedestrians should be created and
maintained whenever possible, even when there is no vehicular connectivity.
   3.   No cul-de-sac may exceed the greater of 300 feet to the center of the
bulb or one-half block in length.
C.   Block standards.
   1.   Blocks consist of lots surrounded by streets.
      a.   Lengths of block faces may not exceed the maximum length of a block
face, measured along lot lines, per
table 13, except the planning manager may increase the maximum length by up to
10% to accommodate specific site conditions.
 
Table 13. Maximum block face length
Zone or Intensity   Length in feet
BU low intensity    500
BU medium intensity 400
BU high intensity   300
DT                  300
DN                  400
 
      b.   Where two or more zones or intensities occur on the same block face,
the block face length may not exceed the shortest required length.
   2.   The planning manager may exempt blocks adjacent to undeveloped land,
areas unsuitable for development, or pre-existing incomplete blocks from a
limitation on block length.
   3.   Block faces exceeding 500 feet must be subdivided with a sidewalk
extending through the block that is 12 feet wide, minimum.
   4.   Rear alleys are required for medium and high intensity areas in the BU
zone and in DT and DN zones. Rear alleys are not mandatory where the rear lot
lines are at the edge of the site to be subdivided or where the block has been
previously subdivided.
D.   Intersection sight visibility distances are determined based on the
subdivision street standards, except that sight visibility zones are not
required for mixed-use zone intersections controlled by a traffic signal or
stop sign.
E.   Streets in mixed-use zones must be designed as follows:
   1.   Streets classified as arterials shall use the avenue street cross
section (
table 14, cross section 1)
   2.   Streets classified as collectors shall use the avenue or street cross
section (
table 14, cross section 1, 2, 3, or 4).
   3.   Streets classified as local roadways shall use the street cross section
(
table 14, cross section 2, 3, or 4).
   4.   As an alternative to the above, streets in the BU high intensity area
and in the DT zone may use the commercial street-mixed parking or parking plaza
street cross sections (
table 14, cross section 7 or 8).
   5.   The alley cross section (
table 14, cross section 5) may be used for secondary, service, or parking
access.
Table 14. Mixed-use street cross connections
Table 14. Mixed-use street cross connections
1. Avenue
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-102.png]
Street type            Avenue
Right-of-way width     100 feet
Pavement width         62 feet total (31 feet each)
Movement               Free movement, inner lanes
Travel lanes           Four
Parking lanes          Parallel both sides, eight feet
Curb radius, effective Ten feet
Walkway type           Sidewalk, ten feet
Planter type           Four-foot by seven-foot tree well
Curb type              Vertical, with gutter
Street trees           Maximum 30 feet on center
2. Commercial street with diagonal parking
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-104.png]
Street type            Commercial street with diagonal parking
Right-of-way width     80 feet
Pavement width         57 feet
Movement               Free movement
Travel lanes           Two
Parking lanes          Diagonal both sides, 17.5 feet
Curb radius, effective Ten feet
Walkway type           Sidewalk, 11.5 feet
Planter type           Four-foot by seven-foot tree well
Curb type              Curb with gutter and/or ribbon gutter
Street trees           Maximum 30 feet on center
3. Commercial local street with parallel parking
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-106.png]
Street type            Commercial local street with parallel parking
Right-of-way width     36 feet; utility and access easement in the sidewalks
Pavement width         36 feet
Movement               Free
Travel lanes           Two
Parking lanes          Parallel both sides, eight feet
Curb radius, effective Ten feet
Walkway type           Sidewalk, 12 feet
Planter type           Four-foot by seven-foot tree well
Curb type              Vertical, with gutter
Street trees           Maximum 30 feet on center
4. Street
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-108.png]
Street type            Street
Right-of-way width     32 feet; utility and access easement in curb ways
Pavement width         32 feet
Movement               Slow
Travel lanes           Two
Parking lanes          Parallel both sides, six feet. Omit mid-block for 40
                       foot long staging area
Curb radius, effective Ten feet
Walkway type           Sidewalk, five feet
Planter type           Curbway, eight feet landscaped
Curb type              Mountable, with gutter
Street trees           Maximum 40 feet on center
5. Commercial alley
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-110.png]
Street type            Commercial alley
Right-of-way width     22 feet
Pavement width         11 feet
Movement               Slow
Travel lanes           Two
Parking lanes          None
Curb radius            Four feet chamfer
Walkway type           Not applicable
Planter type           Not applicable
Curb type              Not applicable
Landscape              Not applicable
6. Residential alley
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-112.png]
Street type            Residential alley
Right-of-way width     22 feet
Pavement width         12 feet
Movement               Yield
Travel lanes           One
Parking lanes          None
Curb radius            Four feet
Walkway type           Not applicable
Planter type           Not applicable
Curb type              Not applicable
Landscape              Not applicable
7. Commercial street - mixed parking
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-114.png]
Street type            Commercial street - mixed parking
Right-of-way width     90 feet
Pavement width         48 feet
Movement               Free
Travel lanes           Two
Parking lanes          Diagonal, 18 feet; parallel, 8 feet
Curb radius, effective Ten feet; 25 feet at existing intersections
Walkway type           Sidewalk, 21 feet
Planter type           Tree well, varies
Curb type              Vertical, with gutter
Street trees           Maximum 40 feet on center
8. Parking plaza street
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-116.png]
Street type            Parking plaza street
Right-of-way width     107 feet
Pavement width         74 feet pervious pavers
Movement               Free
Travel lanes           Two
Parking lanes          Diagonal, 18 feet center; parallel, eight feet sides
Curb radius, effective Ten feet; 25 feet at existing intersections
Walkway type           Sidewalk, 15 feet
Planter type           4 ft. x 4 ft. tree well, 6 ft. x 9 ft. center wells
Curb type              Vertical
Street trees           Maximum 40 feet on center
 
17-4-11 Blended-use (BU)
The blended-use zoning district may be applied by process of rezoning to any
parcel 40 acres or greater. The approval of rezoning to BU adopts the blended-
use plan submitted by the applicant in conformance with this section and
section
17-4-9 (Mixed-use zoning districts).
A.   Blended-use neighborhood types.
   1.   Aldea. This blended-use neighborhood type consists of no less than 40
acres and no more than 80 acres.
   2.   Pueblo. This blended-use neighborhood type has no less than 80 acres,
and no more than 200 acres.
B.   Multiple neighborhoods must be developed under a single application on
properties larger than 200 acres.
C.   Intensities. Aldeas and pueblos are comprised of land assigned to
intensities rather than uses. The minimum and maximum percentage of the
blended-use plan's total land area to be assigned to each intensity is given in
table 15 below.
 
Table 15. Neighborhood areas
      Low intensity Medium intensity High intensity
Aldea  0 - 45%       25 - 75%         0 - 35%
Pueblo 0 -30%        40 - 70%         0 - 30%
 
D.   Development standards per intensity area.
Table 16. Low intensity
Lot width 60 feet minimum, 120 feet maximum
Table 16. Low intensity
Lot width         60 feet minimum, 120 feet maximum
Frontage buildout Not applicable
Lot coverage      50% maximum
                  Front, primary - 20 feet minimum
                  Front, secondary - 15 feet minimum
Setbacks          Side - ten feet minimum
                  Rear - 12 feet minimum, five feet minimum for accessory
                  buildings
                  Parking or enclosed storage - 20 feet behind front facade
Building height   Two stories maximum
Yard              Common
                  Fenced
Facades           Porch
                  Stoop
                  Porch or patio - 40% of setback maximum, but no more than
Encroachments     eight feet
                  Balcony or bay window - 20% of setback maximum, but no more
                  than four feet
Landscaping       Two trees required for every 60 feet of lot width
 
Table 17. Medium intensity
Lot width 24 feet minimum, 96 feet maximum
Table 17. Medium intensity
                                                                   24 feet
Lot width                                                          minimum, 96
                                                                   feet maximum
Frontage buildout                                                  60% minimum
                                                                   at setback
Lot coverage                                                       70% maximum
                                                                   Front,
                                                                   primary -
                                                                   six feet
                                                                   minimum, 18
                                                                   feet maximum
                                                                   Front,
                                                                   secondary -
                                                                   six feet
                                                                   minimum, 18
                                                                   feet maximum
                                                                   Side - none
                                                                   Rear - three
Setbacks [https://export.amlegal.com/media/                        feet minimum
8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/IMAGES/0-0-0-2302.jpg]   Parking or
                                                                   enclosed
                                                                   storage - 20
                                                                   feet behind
                                                                   front
                                                                   facade, with
                                                                   access from
                                                                   alley or
                                                                   rear lane
                                                                   (see
                                                                   paragraph
                                                                   17-49 F. 1.
                                                                   f above)
                                                                   Three
Buildings height                                                   stories
                                                                   maximum
Yard                                                               Fenced
                                                                   Shallow
                                                                   Porch
Facades                                                            Stoop
                                                                   Terrace
                                                                   Common entry
                                                                   Porch, patio
                                                                   or stoop -
                                                                   60% of
                                                                   actual
                                                                   setback, but
                                                                   no more than
Encroachments                                                      eight feet
                                                                   Balcony or
                                                                   bay window -
                                                                   20% of
                                                                   actual
                                                                   setback, but
                                                                   no more than
                                                                   four feet
                                                                   Minimum ten-
                                                                   foot
                                                                   landscaped
                                                                   buffer
                                                                   abutting
                                                                   non-mixed-
                                                                   use
                                                                   residential
Landscaping                                                        zones
                                                                   Minimum of
                                                                   one tree for
                                                                   every 40
                                                                   feet of lot
                                                                   width (in
                                                                   addition to
                                                                   street
                                                                   trees)
                                                                   Must have a
                                                                   minimum of
                                                                   15%
                                                                   landscaped
                                                                   area, evenly
                                                                   distributed
                                                                   throughout
                                                                   the parking
Parking lots                                                       lot and
                                                                   adjacent to
                                                                   buildings
                                                                   Landscaped
                                                                   islands must
                                                                   provide one
                                                                   tree for
                                                                   every six
                                                                   parking
                                                                   stalls
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2302.jpg] When commercial or industrial development is adjacent to
AG, RA, ER, NR, and GR zones or groups, side and rear setbacks must equal or
exceed the height of the primary building on the site. See
17-8-2(B)(6).
Table 18. High intensity
Table 18. High intensity
Lot width                                 18 feet minimum, 180 feet maximum
Frontage buildout                         80% minimum at setback
Lot coverage                              80% maximum
                                          Front, primary - no minimum, 12 feet
                                          maximum
                                          Front, secondary - no minimum, 12
Setbacks [https://export.amlegal.com/     feet maximum
media/                                    Side - no minimum, 24 feet maximum
8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/ Rear - three feet minimum
IMAGES/0-0-0-2302.jpg]                    Parking or enclosed storage - 20 feet
                                          behind front facade, with access from
                                          alley or rear lane (see paragraph 17-
                                          49 F. 1. f above)
Buildings height                          Four stories maximum
                                          Shallow
Yard                                      Urban
                                          Pedestrian forecourt
                                          Vehicular forecourt
                                          Stoop
                                          Common entry
Facades                                   Terrace
                                          Shopfront
                                          Gallery
                                          Awnings and galleries may encroach
                                          the sidewalk to within two feet of
Encroachments                             the curb
                                          Balcony or bay window - 100% of
                                          setback maximum
                                          Minimum 20-foot landscaped buffer
Landscaping                               abutting non-mixed-use residential
                                          zones
                                          Must have a minimum of 10% landscaped
                                          area, evenly distributed throughout
Parking lots                              the parking lot and adjacent to
                                          buildings
                                          Landscaped islands must provide one
                                          tree for every ten parking stalls
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2302.jpg] When commercial or industrial development is adjacent to
AG, RA, ER, NR, and GR zones or groups, side and rear setbacks must equal or
exceed the height of the primary building on the site. See
17-8-2(B)(6).
17-4-11 was amended for clarity in the introductory paragraph by Ordinance 17-
4-11
17-4-12 Downtown Marana overlay (DO)
A.   Purpose. The DO is an overlay designation identifying geographic areas
where owners of land may opt to replace their underlying zoning entitlements
with the DN and DT zone designations.
B.   Application. To obtain DN and DT zoning in the DO district, one or more
property owners must submit a downtown implementation plan, showing (at a
minimum) the requested locations of DN and DT zone designations on their
property.
C.   Administrative approval. The planning manager is authorized and directed
to approve a downtown implementation plan that conforms to the requirements of
sections
17-4-9 (Mixed-use zoning districts),
17-4-12 (Downtown Marana overlay (DO)),
17-4-13 (Downtown neighborhood (DN)), and
17-4-14 (Downtown (DT)), and meets the following minimum requirements:
   1.   The DT designation includes all land within 100 feet of the Marana Main
Street right-of-way line.
   2.   The DN designation includes all land within 100 feet of the property
line of all properties containing existing single-family residences, excluding
any such property for which the property owner consents in writing.
   3.   The DN designation must be used for land that meets both of the
previous two paragraphs.
D.   Council approval. Any downtown implementation plan not approved pursuant
to paragraph C of this section may be submitted as an application for rezoning,
which shall be reviewed through the normal rezoning process.
Ordinance 2024.010 amended paragraph C, removed paragraphs D and E, and
renumbered paragraph F
17-4-13 Downtown neighborhood (DN)
A.   Purpose. The DN zone implements the Marana general plan by providing a
transition from the DT to surrounding areas. This zone consists of a mix of
uses but is primarily medium density residential. It may contain a wide range
of building types: houses, courtyard housing, townhouses, duplexes, triplexes,
apartment buildings, and live-work units.
B.   Development standards.
Table 19. Downtown neighborhood (DN)
Table 19. Downtown neighborhood (DN)
Lot width         24 feet minimum, 96 feet maximum
Frontage buildout 60% minimum at setback
Lot coverage      70% maximum
                  Front-six feet minimum, 18 feet maximum
Setbacks          Side - no minimum
                  Rear - three feet minimum
                  Parking or enclosed storage - 20 feet behind front facade
Buildings height  Three stories maximum
Yard              Fenced
                  Shallow
                  Porch
                  Stoop
Facades           Terrace
                  Common entry
                  Shopfront
                  Porch, patio or stoop - 60% of actual setback, but no more
Encroachments     than eight feet
                  Balcony or bay window - 20% of actual, but no more than four
                  feet
                  Minimum ten-foot landscaped buffer abutting non- mixed-use
Landscaping       residential zones
                  One tree required for every 40 feet of lot width ( in
                  addition to street trees)
                  Must have a minimum of 15% landscaped area, evenly
                  distributed throughout the parking lot and adjacent to
Parking lots      buildings
                  Landscaped islands must provide one tree for every six
                  parking stalls
 
17-4-14 Downtown (DT)
A.   Purpose. The DT zone implements the Marana general plan by providing a
mixed-use center for town. This zone consists of higher density mixed-use
buildings that accommodate retail, offices, institutions, and apartments. It
has a network of walkable streets that create blocks along Marana Main Street
with wide sidewalks, street trees, awnings or galleries for shade, and
buildings set close to the sidewalks.
B.   Development standards.
Table 20. Downtown (DT)
Table 20. Downtown (DT)
Lot width         18 feet minimum, 180 feet maximum
Frontage buildout 80% minimum at setback
Lot coverage      80% maximum
Setbacks          Front-no minimum, 12 feet maximum
                 Side - no minimum, 24 feet maximum
                 Rear - three feet minimum
Buildings height  Four stories maximum
                  Shallow
Yard              Urban
                  Pedestrian forecourt
                  Vehicular forecourt
                  Common entry
Facades           Terrace
                  Shopfront
                  Gallery
                  Awnings and galleries may encroach the sidewalk to within two
Encroachments     feet of the curb
                  Balcony or bay window - 100% of setback maximum
Landscaping       Minimum 20-foot landscaped buffer abutting non-mixed-use
                  residential zones
                  Must have a minimum of 10% landscaped area, evenly
                  distributed throughout the parking lot and adjacent to
Parking lots      buildings
                  Landscaped islands must provide one tree for every ten
                  parking stalls
 
17-4-15 Specific plan (SP)
A.   General. Properties in each specific plan (SP) zoning district are
regulated based on site-specific regulations prepared by or on behalf of the
master property owner of the particular specific plan area. Each specific plan
is adopted through the rezoning process set forth in section
17-3-1.
B.   Applicability. The owner or owners of one or more contiguous parcels of
land totaling five acres or larger in size may apply for a specific plan.
C.   Contents of specific plan. All specific plans shall include the
requirements defined in the town's applications, checklists, and process guides
on file with the development services department. At a minimum, a specific plan
shall include the following elements:
   1.   Narrative or overview of the project which identifies the primary
objectives.
   2.   Development capability inventory analysis.
   3.   Proposed land use plan.
   4.   Implementation and administrative regulations.
   5.   Development and design regulations.
   6.   The compatibility of the specific plan with adjoining land uses.
   7.   Detailed regulations and programs for the systematic implementation of
the specific plan.
   8.   Specific development standards for the map elements.
   9.   Hydrology analysis.
   10.   Standards for the phasing, construction and maintenance of major and
collector streets proposed for the plan area or needed for servicing the
project.
   11.   Standards for the phasing, construction and maintenance of sewage
disposal, effluent use, storm water drainage, solid waste disposal and public
utilities.
   12.   Standards for the conservation, development or utilization of natural
resources, including surface water, soils, vegetation and wildlife.
   13.   General landscape program.
   14.   For single-phase plans, a draft schedule for the preservation of site
features established by the plan and the construction, dedication and provision
of public services.
   15.   For multi-phased plans, a draft phasing schedule for the preservation
of site features established by the plan, the development of the various master
blocks of the specific plan, and the construction, dedication and provision of
public services.
   16.   How and to what extent the specific plan is to supplement or supersede
the adopted land development code.
D.   Specific plan amendments. Amendments to specific plans are categorized as
either administrative amendments or substantial amendments. Administrative
amendments are approved by the planning manager after written application is
made. Substantial amendments are approved through the rezoning process set
forth in section
17-3-1.
   1.   The planning manager shall determine whether a proposed specific plan
amendment is administrative or substantial.
   2.   Categories of administrative amendments include, but are not limited
to:
      a.   The addition of new information to the specific plan maps or text
that does not change the effect of any regulations or guidelines.
      b.   Changes to infrastructure, such as drainage and utilities, which do
not change the overall intent of the specific plan or increase the development
capacity in the specific plan area.
      c.   Changes in the land use designation boundary, division of plan areas
or combinations of areas.
      d.   Minor modifications or adjustments to intrusions, encroachments,
easements, rights-of-way, or open spaces, so long as the modifications do not
conflict with the overall intent of the specific plan.
      e.   The addition of a use that is materially similar to a listed use, as
determined by the planning manager pursuant to the process set forth in section
17-4-2(C).
   3.   A substantial amendment is an amendment that would result in a
substantial change to the specific plan's regulations or the overall intent of
the specific plan, and that is not an amendment listed in subparagraph 2 above
or a materially similar amendment.
17-4-16 Legacy zones
A.   The zoning districts set forth in sections
17-4-17 through
17-4-26 below are legacy zones. The legacy zones consist of zoning districts
that currently exist within the town limits, but that are intended to be phased
out over time. Each of these zoning designations is intended to be deleted when
no land in the town has that zoning designation. The town will not rezone land
to any of these legacy zone districts.
B.   Notwithstanding any language in sections
17-4-17 through
17-4-26 permitting commercial and industrial uses in the legacy zones, as
provided in section
17-6-13, data centers are not permitted to operate in the town as a principal
use unless approved in a specific plan or specific plan amendment explicitly
created or amended for the purpose of data center development and adopted
through the rezoning process set forth in section
17-3-1 and as described in section
17-4-15 (Specific plan (SP)).
C.   Data centers are permitted as an accessory use in the legacy zoning
districts when all of the following are true:
   1.   The data center occupies no more than 15% of the site.
   2.   The data center is used to serve the enterprise functions of the on-
site property owner and is not used to lease data storage and processing
services to third parties. For purposes of this subparagraph "on-site property
owner" includes an owner that owns the property and is the parent company of
the company or companies on-site.
   3.   The data center complies with any applicable development standards for
accessory use data centers, as set forth in section
17-6-13.
Ordinance 2024.029 added paragraphs B. and C. to section 17-4-16.
17-4-17 Zone A - small lot zone
A.   Permitted uses. Within zone A, residential, commercial, industrial, and
quasi-public land uses shall be permitted so long as each such land use is
conducted on a lot no larger than 2.5 acres. Agricultural uses, as listed in
section
17-4-2, table 2 (Use matrix), shall be permitted in zone A in the same
circumstances as they are permitted in the AG zone per section
17-4-2, table 2, and subject to the same conditions per use as in the AG zone
per section
17-4-3, table 3 (Conditions per use). Rezoning is not required to establish a
use permitted in the neighborhood commercial (NC) zone, within an existing
building or suite in a designated commercial area if the use can be
accommodated within the existing building or suite without requiring a new
retail commercial building permit. This is not, however, to be construed to
permit any land use that may be specifically prohibited within the town by this
or any other ordinance of the town or by state or federal law.
B.   Density requirements. There shall be no maximum density of land use per
se, except that density of land use on any parcel of land within zone A shall
be determined in part by prior density of land use and by setback requirements
defined in this and other titles of this code or as may be determined by other
applicable federal, state and local regulations.
C.   Setbacks.
   1.   The required front yard (setback) shall be a minimum of 20 feet.
   2.   The required side yard (setback) shall be a minimum of five feet, with
a street side yard (setback) having a minimum of ten feet.
   3.   The required rear yard (setback) shall be a minimum of 20 feet.
D.   Building heights. Buildings and structures erected in this zone shall have
a height not greater than 30 feet.
E.   Manufactured home. A manufactured home may be placed on any lot within
zone A provided the following conditions are met:
   1.   There is an existing manufactured home on the lots adjacent to the lots
in which the new manufactured home is to be placed. Adjacent, for the purposes
of this section, means on either side, and means directly across the street, if
one exists, and to the rear across an alley, if one exists.
   2.   Where the provisions of subparagraph 1 above do not exist, then a
manufactured home may be placed on a lot with the issuance of a conditional use
permit pursuant to the procedure set forth in section
17-3-2 (conditional use permits).
Ordinance 2022.006 amended Section 17-4-17 A.
17-4-18 Zone B - medium lot zone
A.   Permitted uses. Within zone B, any residential, commercial, industrial, or
quasi-public land use is permitted so long as each separate land use is
conducted on a lot larger than 2.5 acres but no larger than 25 acres.
Agricultural uses, as listed in section
17-4-2, table 2 (Use matrix), shall be permitted in zone B in the same
circumstances as they are permitted in the AG zone per section
17-4-2, table 2, and subject to the same conditions per use as in the AG zone
per section
17-4-3, table 3 (Conditions per use). This is not to be construed, however, to
permit any land use that may be expressly prohibited within the town by other
ordinances of the town, by other provisions of this code, or by state or
federal law.
B.   Density requirements. There shall be no maximum density of land use per se
in this zone, except as may be dictated by prior density of land use and by
setback requirements defined elsewhere in this code.
C.   Setbacks. The setback requirements for zone B shall be the same as for
zone A.
D.   Manufactured home. A manufactured home may be placed on any lot within
zone B provided the following conditions are met:
   1.   There is an existing manufactured home on the lots adjacent to the lots
in which the new manufactured home is to be placed. Adjacent, for the purposes
of this section, means on either side, and means directly across the street, if
one exists, and to the rear across an alley, if one exists.
   2.   Where the provisions of subparagraph 1 above do not exist, then a
manufactured home may be placed on a lot with the issuance of a conditional use
permit pursuant to the procedure set forth in section
17-3-2 (conditional use permits).
Ordinance 2022.006 amended Section 17-4-18 A.
17-4-19 Zone C - large lot zone
A.   Permitted uses. Within zone C, any residential, commercial, industrial, or
quasi-public land use shall be permitted, so long as each separate activity is
conducted on a lot no smaller than 25 acres. Agricultural uses, as listed in
section
17-4-2, table 2 (Use matrix), shall be permitted in zone C in the same
circumstances as they are permitted in the AG zone per section
17-4-2, table 2, and subject to the same conditions per use as in the AG zone
per section
17-4-3. table 3 (Conditions per use). This is not to be construed, however, to
permit any land use that may be expressly prohibited within the town by other
sections of this code, other ordinances of the town, or state or federal law.
B.   Density requirements. The maximum density allowed shall be one dwelling
unit or one commercial, industrial, or quasi-public establishment per 25 acres.
C.   Setbacks. No building or structure, except a fence or wall that is not
part of a building and not over six feet in height shall be constructed closer
than ten feet to any side property line or closer than 40 feet plus one foot
for each foot of building height in excess of ten feet above ground level to
any front or rear property line. Where a lot is situated on the corner of two
dedicated streets, each of the property lines along the right-of-way line of a
dedicated street shall be considered to be a front property line, and each
other property line shall be considered to be a side property line in
determining allowable setbacks.
D.   Manufactured home. A manufactured home may be placed on any lot within
zone C provided the following conditions are met:
   1.   There is an existing manufactured home on the lots adjacent to the lots
in which the new manufactured home is to be placed. Adjacent, for the purposes
of this section, means on either side, and means directly across the street, if
one exists, and to the rear across an alley, if one exists.
   2.   Where the provisions of subparagraph 1 above do not exist, then a
manufactured home may be placed on a lot with the issuance of a conditional use
permit pursuant to the procedure set forth in section
17-3-2 (conditional use permits).
E.   Energy storage facilities. Energy storage facilities may be permitted in
zone C subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to the
procedure set forth in section
17-3-2 (conditional use permits), and in compliance with all development
standards for energy storage facilities set forth in section
17-6-11.
Ordinance 2022.006 amended Section 17-4-19 A. Ordinance 2022.026 added Section
17-4-19 E.
17-4-20 Zone D - designated flood plain zone
The permitted uses, density requirements, and setbacks are the same as zone B,
but the property owner's attention is drawn to the fact that this is an area at
high risk of flooding and flood hazards. All uses require a floodplain use
permit.
17-4-21 Zone E - transportation corridor zone
A.   Permitted uses. Within zone E, no residential land use shall be permitted
except one single-family residence. Any commercial, industrial, or quasi-public
land use shall be permitted which is consistent in its location with the land
use element of the town's general plan. This is not to be construed, however,
to permit any land use that may be expressly prohibited within the town by
other sections of this code, by other ordinances of the town, or by state or
federal law.
B.   Density requirements. There shall be no maximum or minimum density
requirements in zone E, except as may be required by the setback requirements
of this code or by other applicable federal, state and local regulations.
C.   Setbacks. The setback requirements for zone E shall be the same as for
zone A.
17-4-22 Recreation vehicle (RV)
A.   Purpose. The purpose of the recreational vehicle (RV) zone is to provide
for the development of parks which rent spaces or which provide subdivided lots
for sale, catering to the special needs of recreational vehicle environments
and lifestyles within the town.
B.   Location. All recreational vehicle developments shall comply with the
town's general plan. In addition, recreational vehicle developments shall abut
a major arterial paved all-weather street meeting town standards.
C.   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within the recreational
vehicle (RV) zone:
   1.   Recreational vehicle parks with one recreational vehicle per rental
space.
   2.   Recreational vehicle subdivisions with one recreational vehicle per
lot.
D.   Accessory uses.
   1.   Accessory uses appurtenant to recreational vehicle parks include
community recreation buildings, facilities, and areas, laundry facilities,
manager's office and apartment, child care facilities, and similar accessory
uses for the exclusive benefit of the park or subdivision residents.
   2.   Accessory uses appurtenant to individual recreational vehicles include
carports, ramada, cabana, covered patio, storage room and similar uses.
Accessory buildings shall not be used for regular occupancy or for sleeping.
   3.   Other customary accessory uses and buildings as may be determined by
the planning manager which are incidental to the principal use and do not
include any activity commonly conducted as a business. However, the occasional
sale of a recreational vehicle, motor vehicle, or trailer on a lot on which the
seller resides shall not be considered a business.
E.   Conditional Uses. The following may be permitted subject to the issuance
of a conditional use permit pursuant to the procedure set forth in section
17-3-2 (conditional use permits):
   1.   A boat, auto, or trailer storage area, provided they are in a
completely enclosed area surrounded by not less than a six-foot fence or wall,
completely screened from view from all sides.
   2.   Recreational uses intended primarily for the occupants of the park or
subdivision, including golf courses and related facilities.
   3.   Model sales area, provided not more than five spaces are devoted to
this use, and not to exceed 12 months, unless an extension is granted by the
planning commission. The planning commission may allow an additional sales area
where the park or subdivision occupies more than 100 acres.
   4.   Convenience market.
   5.   Restaurant, provided the recreational vehicle park or subdivision
contain not less than 500 recreational vehicle spaces or lots.
   6.   Vehicle wash.
   7.   Mini-storage area, not to exceed one storage unit per 20 recreational
vehicle spaces or lots.
   8.   One recreational vehicle may be installed per lot on a commercial or
industrial parcel or lot, provided a minimum set back of at least 20 feet from
all other structures is provided. This provision is principally intended to
allow for a caretaker on a commercial or industrial complex. When provided, the
unit shall be entirely screened, and meet all development standards, as
applicable, listed below. The planning commission shall approve the final site
plan.
   9.   Any use not appearing in this section which may be permitted by the
planning manager, and which shall be primarily for the residents of the park or
subdivision.
   10.   Upon annexation and translation of county zoning, any use or uses and
densities that were permitted on the annexed property under the county zoning
at the time of annexation (see section
17-3-2 (conditional use permits), paragraph P).
F.   Temporary uses. Temporary construction buildings and yards during the
actual construction and development of the recreational vehicle park or
subdivision, and sales offices, not to exceed 18 months, unless active
construction is ongoing, in which case the planning manager may grant
additional six month increments upon finding that active construction is still
on-going and necessary.
G.   Prohibited uses (reserved).
H.   Site development standards.
   1.   Minimum project size: five acres.
   2.   Minimum project setback: 20 feet from all street frontages measured
from the right-of-way line. This setback shall be fully landscaped and
screened, and may include a perimeter masonry decorative wall and which shall
contain a minimum of 15 gallon trees per 40 lineal feet of street frontage,
with 65% vegetative cover in shrubs and groundcover on the exterior of the
wall. The landscape and screening plan shall be approved by the planning
manager. Refer to section
17-11-7 for further requirements.
   3.   Parks or subdivisions.
      a.   Minimum lot size per rental unit: 1,750 sq. ft., with a minimum
average lot size of 2,000 sq. ft.
      b.   Maximum density: 15 units per net acre, excluding streets and
drives.
      c.   Minimum common recreation area per unit: 150 sq. ft.
      d.   Minimum width per space: 35 feet.
      e.   Minimum depth per space: 50 feet.
      f.   Minimum distance between units (exterior of all structures, drives
and accessory structures): seven feet.
      g.   Minimum front yard: seven feet.
      h.   Minimum rear yard: five feet.
      i.   Setbacks declared a minimum. No encroachment or variance shall be
allowed within five feet of the front, side or rear lot or space line required
setbacks unless the building, structure, or other appurtenance meets the
currently-applicable international building code requirements for a minimum
two-hour fire wall rating. Setbacks established above are determined the
minimum necessary for the public health, safety and general welfare.
      j.   Detached storage buildings not exceeding 120 square feet in area are
permitted on each recreational vehicle space. All storage buildings shall be
located in the rear of the recreational vehicle space. Detached storage
buildings shall not encroach into the required setbacks without a variance, and
subject to the fire wall requirements set forth above.
      k.   Certain accessory structures, which are complimentary to individual
recreational vehicles and park models (i.e. covered carports, patio awnings,
ramadas, storage buildings, and room additions) which are made an integral part
of and are architecturally compatible with the recreational vehicle or park
model itself may be permitted by the planning manager, after review of plans
assuring the required compatibility, and provided, further, that the owner/
developer of the park or subdivision has provided sufficient setbacks to meet
the requirements of paragraph "i" above.
   4.   Common recreation area shall be provided both in recreational vehicle
parks and subdivisions. Common recreation areas shall be owned and maintained
by a property owner's association where a recreational vehicle subdivision is
developed. Plans for the common recreation areas shall be approved by the town,
and shall include facilities and equipment for both adults and children. Public
or private streets, vehicle storage areas, exterior boundary landscaped areas
and other areas shall not be included when calculating required recreational
areas.
   5.   Access to all lots or spaces shall be from the interior of the park or
subdivision.
   6.   Private streets shall be a minimum paved width of 28 feet including
required curbs when flush with the surface of the paving. Concrete sidewalks at
least two feet in width shall be provided on each side of interior private
streets. The planning manager may permit a four foot sidewalk on one side of an
interior street where deemed desirable.
   7.   The maximum height of any habitable structure shall not exceed 20 feet.
All other structures shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
   8.   All structures that are located on non-manufactured home spaces or lots
shall not exceed 35 feet in height from grade to the highest point on the roof.
   9.   All utility lines shall be placed underground within the park or
subdivision. Each lot shall be provided with water, sanitary sewer, electric
lines, telephone lines and gas lines, as needed, in compliance with applicable
town codes. Fire hydrants shall be installed as required by the building
official.
   10.   All parks or subdivisions shall have street lighting provided along
private or public streets for the safety of pedestrians, and as required by the
town engineer.
   11.   All parks or subdivisions shall have refuse collection areas approved
by the planning manager. All such refuse collection areas shall be screened
from public view.
   12.   All parks or subdivisions shall have a minimum of two vehicular
entrances. One entrance may be kept closed to the general public, but is
required to meet public safety standards.
   13.   All parks and subdivisions shall improve, to town standards, and
dedicate any abutting public street and shall dedicate all interior easements
and drives for utilities and public service vehicles where required by the town
engineer.
17-4-23 Manufactured housing (MH)
A.   Purpose. The purpose of the manufactured housing (MH) zone is to provide
for the development of parks and subdivided lots for sale that cater to the
special needs of the manufactured home environment and lifestyle within the
Town of Marana.
B.   Location. All manufactured housing developments shall comply with the
town's general plan. In addition, manufactured housing developments shall not
be placed within the airport environs of any airport within the town. All
manufactured home developments shall be served by paved all-weather roads
meeting town standards.
C.   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within the MH zone:
   1.   Manufactured housing parks with one manufactured home per rental space.
   2.   Manufactured housing subdivisions with one manufactured home per lot.
D.   Accessory uses.
   1.   Accessory uses appurtenant to manufactured housing parks include
community recreation buildings and areas, accessory parking areas, laundry
facilities, manager's office and apartment, child care facilities and other
similar accessory uses for the exclusive benefit of the park or subdivision
residents.
   2.   Accessory uses appurtenant to the individual manufactured home, include
carports, ramada, cabana, covered patio, storage room and similar uses.
Accessory buildings shall not be used for regular occupancy or sleeping.
   3.   Other customary uses and buildings as may be determined by the planning
manager, which are incidental to the principal use and do not include any
activity commonly conducted as a business. However, the occasional sale of a
manufactured home, motor vehicle or trailer on a lot on which the seller
resides shall not be considered a business.
E.   Conditional uses. The following may be permitted with the issuance of a
conditional use permit pursuant to the procedure set forth in section
17-3-2 (conditional use permits):
   1.   A boat or trailer storage area, provided they are in a completely
enclosed area surrounded by not less than a six-foot fence or wall, and
completely screened from view from all sides, and only for the residents of the
park or subdivision. Chain link fences with slat inserts are not acceptable in
fulfilling this fencing requirement.
   2.   Recreational uses intended primarily for the occupants of the park or
subdivision, including golf courses and related facilities.
   3.   Model home area of up to five manufactured homes, but only as part of a
manufactured home subdivision, and provided at least 100 lots are subdivided or
rental spaces provided.
   4.   Any use not appearing in this section which may be permitted by the
planning manager, and which shall be primarily for the residents of the park or
the subdivision.
   5.   One manufactured home may be installed per lot on a commercial or
industrial parcel or lot, provided a minimum setback of at least 20 feet from
all other structures is provided. This provision is principally intended to
allow for a caretaker on a commercial or industrial complex. When provided, the
unit shall be entirely screened, and meet all development standards, as
applicable, listed below. The planning commission shall approve the final site
plan.
   6.   Upon annexation and translation of county zoning, any use or uses and
densities that were permitted on the annexed property under the county zoning
at the time of annexation (see section
17-3-2 (conditional use permits), paragraph P).
F.   Temporary uses. Temporary construction buildings and yards during the
actual construction and development of the park or subdivision, and sales
office, not to exceed 18 months unless active construction is ongoing at the
end of the 18 month period, in which case the planning manager may grant
additional six-month increments upon finding that active construction is still
on-going and is necessary for the continued development of the park or
subdivision.
G.   Prohibited uses (reserved).
H.   Site development standards.
   1.   Minimum project size: ten acres.
   2.   Minimum project setbacks: 20 feet from all street frontages measured
from the right-of-way line.
      a.   This setback shall be fully landscaped and screened, and may include
a perimeter decorative masonry wall.
      b.   The setback area shall also contain a minimum of one tree, not less
than 15 gallons, per 40 lineal feet of street frontage, with 65% vegetative
cover in shrubs and groundcover on the exterior side of the wall.
      c.   The landscape and screening plan shall be approved by the planning
manager. Refer to section
17-11-7 for further requirements.
      d.   No off-street parking facilities or recreational facilities for
common use shall be located in any such required exterior yard.
   3.   Parks and subdivisions:
      a.   Minimum lot size per rental unit or lot: 5000 sq. ft.
      b.   Maximum density: eight units per net acre.
      c.   Minimum common recreation area per park or subdivision space: 250
sq. ft. A homeowners association shall be established in manufactured home
subdivisions to own and maintain the park/open space as may be approved by the
town.
      d.   Minimum width per space: 55 feet.
      e.   Minimum depth per space: 90 feet.
      f.   Minimum setback between units (exterior of all structures, drives,
and accessory structures): ten feet.
      g.   Minimum front-yard setback: 20 feet.
      h.   Minimum rear-yard setback: 25 feet.
      i.   Minimum common recreation area per rental or subdivision space: 250
sq. ft.
      j.   Setbacks declared a minimum. No encroachment or variance shall be
allowed within five feet of the front, side, or rear yard lot or space line,
unless the building, structure, or other appurtenance meets the applicable
international building code requirements for a minimum two-hour fire wall
rating. Setbacks established above are determined the minimum necessary for the
public health, safety, and general welfare.
      k.   Detached storage buildings not exceeding 120 square feet in area are
permitted on each manufactured home space or lot. All storage buildings shall
be located in the rear of the manufactured home space or lot. Detached storage
buildings shall not encroach into the required setbacks without a variance, and
shall be subject to the applicable international building code fire wall
requirements set forth above.
      l.   Certain accessory structures, which are complimentary to individual
manufactured homes (i.e. covered carports, patio awnings, ramadas, storage
buildings, and room additions) which are made an integral part of and are
architecturally compatible with the manufactured home may be permitted by the
planning manager, after review of plans assuring the required compatibility,
and provided further, that the owner/developer of the park or subdivision has
provided sufficient setbacks to meet the requirements of paragraph j above.
      m.   The maximum height of any habitable structure shall not exceed 20
feet. All other structures shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
      n.   All structures that are located on non-manufactured home spaces or
lots shall not exceed two stories nor shall they exceed 35 feet in height from
grade to the highest point on the roof.
   4.   Common recreation area shall be provided both in manufactured home
parks and subdivisions. Common recreation areas shall be owned and maintained
by a property owner's association where a manufactured subdivision is
developed. Plans for the common recreation areas shall be approved by the town,
and shall include facilities and equipment for both adults and children. Public
or private streets, vehicle storage areas, exterior boundary landscaped areas
and other areas shall not be included when calculating required recreational
areas.
   5.   Access to all lots or spaces shall be from the interior of the park or
subdivision.
   6.   Private streets shall be a minimum paved width of 28 feet including
required curbs when flush with the surface of the paving. Concrete sidewalks at
least four feet in width shall be provided on each side of interior private
streets. The planning manager may permit a four foot sidewalk on one side of an
interior street where deemed desirable.
   7.   All utility lines shall be placed underground within the park or
subdivision. Each lot shall be provided with water, sanitary sewer, electric
lines, telephone lines and gas lines, as needed, in compliance with applicable
town codes. Fire hydrants shall be installed as required by the building
official.
   8.   All parks or subdivisions shall have street lighting provided along
private or public streets for the safety of pedestrians, as required by the
town engineer.
   9.   All parks or subdivisions shall have refuse collection areas approved
by the planning manager. Such refuse collection areas shall be screened from
public view.
   10.   All parks or subdivisions shall have a minimum of two vehicular
entrances. One entrance may be kept closed to the general public, but is
required to meet public safety standards.
   11.   All parks and subdivisions shall improve to town standards and
dedicate any abutting public street and shall dedicate all interior easements
and drives for utilities and public service vehicles where required by the town
engineer.
17-4-24 Commercial office (CO)
A.   Purpose. The CO zone is intended to provide for the use of designated
properties for professional offices and limited commercial facilities to serve
the residents of the town. It includes those uses related to medical,
professional, financial, administrative, and interrelated uses. This zone is
intended to prohibit most retail commercial uses which, more properly, belong
in other commercial zones. It is also intended to provide multi-family
residential opportunities and options to commercial and other higher-intensity
districts.
B.   Location. The following shall be considered in establishing and
maintaining the CO zone:
   1.   Convenient and efficient vehicular access to an arterial or collector
street.
   2.   Availability of land suitable for grouping of professional activities.
   3.   Availability of parcels whose general commercial use is less desirable
and/or inappropriate.
C.   Permitted uses. The following uses may be permitted subject to
demonstration of architectural compatibility with adjacent uses:
   1.   Residential dwelling units as permitted and subject to the development
standards found in section
17-4-26.
   2.   Professional offices: Law, architectural, engineering, planning,
business and management consulting.
   3.   General offices: Real estate, data processing, executive suites,
photographic services, travel agents, research services, and administrative
offices.
   4.   Medical and dental: Offices, laboratories, clinics, and pharmacies; but
not including drug stores.
   5.   Veterinary clinic, small.
   6.   Financial services: Accounting, auditing, bookkeeping, tax
consultation, collection agencies, credit services, insurance and investment,
security and commodity brokers, dealers and exchanges, insurance and financial
planning.
   7.   Public service: Detective and protective services, employment services
and public utility offices.
   8.   Such other comparable uses as determined by the planning manager.
D.   Accessory uses (reserved).
E.   Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted with the issuance of
a conditional use permit pursuant to the procedure set forth in section
17-3-2 (conditional use permits):
   1.   Restaurants and cafes (not to include drive-ins or carry-outs) subject
to:
      a.   The facility is designed to preclude vehicular ingress and egress in
conflict with existing or planned adjacent residential uses.
      b.   The facility is located and designed to eliminate noise and/or
odors.
      c.   The facility is an integral part of the office building.
   2.   Private schools. Business, music, dance, art, and vocational, which
must be an integral part of the office building.
   3.   Special retail. Specialty retail services such as florist, jewelry,
barber and beauty shops, child care facilities, clothes cleaning and tailor
shops, and such other compatible uses as may be determined by the conditional
use process and which shall all be integral to the primary use as an office
complex.
   4.   Banks and savings and loans.
   5.   Upon annexation and translation of county zoning, any use or uses and
densities that were permitted on the annexed property under the county zoning
at the time of annexation (see section
17-3-2 (conditional use permits), paragraph P).
F.   Temporary uses (reserved).
G.   Prohibited uses (reserved).
H.   Intensity standards.
   1.   Residential. On any parcel or unit of development, the following
intensity standards apply:
      a.   Dwelling unit density: There shall be no more than 25 dwelling units
for each acre of parcel area.
      b.   Building coverage: The sum of all buildings and structures shall
cover no more than 40% of all land area developed.
   2.   Non-residential. The following standards shall apply:
      a.   Building coverage: The sum of all buildings and structures shall
cover no more than 30% of all land area developed.
      b.   Reserved.
I.   Site development standards. The following site development standards shall
apply:
   1.   Street frontage: minimum of 100 feet.
   2.   Lot area:
      a.   Multifamily: minimum of 3.0 acres.
      b.   Non-residential: none
   3.   Front yard: minimum of 25 feet.
   4.   Side yard: minimum of 15 feet for residential uses. No side yard is
required for non-residential uses provided minimum international building code
requirements are met. However, a non-residential use adjacent to a residential
zone shall have a minimum side yard of not less than 15 feet plus an additional
10 feet for each story over one story, or in excess of 18 feet in height,
whichever is greater.
   5.   Street side yard: minimum of twenty-five feet.
   6.   Rear yard: minimum of twenty-five feet.
   7.   Building height: maximum of forty feet.
17-4-25 Mixed-use (MU-1)
A.   Purpose. The purpose of the mixed use zoning district is to promote, and
regulate existing low density mixed uses in areas of the Town where public
facilities and utilities may be limited. The intent of this district is to
encourage orderly growth in semi-rural areas, as well as provide for semi-rural
residential uses. In addition, this zone is intended to allow limited
commercial and industrial development where appropriate and designed to be
compatible or provide the appropriate buffers where potentially incompatible
uses are proposed with the surrounding uses. This zone is to be located only
where existing mixed-uses are historically located and the area is
transitioning into a more intensive use area.
B.   Permitted uses.
   1.   One single-family detached home or caretakers quarters (site built or
manufactured);
   2.   Antique shop;
   3.   Automobile repair garages, provided that no machining is conducted on
the premises; no outdoor storage of parts or outdoor parking of automobiles
waiting for service for more than seven days;
   4.   Aviaries;
   5.   Barber and beauty shop;
   6.   Blacksmith shop;
   7.   Carpentry, upholstery and furniture repair;
   8.   Churches, synagogues, and other places of worship;
   9.   Construction/ contractor's yards;
   10.   Crop production;
   11.   Feed store;
   12.   Foster and group homes;
   13.   Grazing and raising of large and small livestock;
   14.   Kennels;
   15.   Massage therapy establishments;
   16.   Plant nurseries and greenhouses;
   17.   Private stables;
   18.   Professional offices, not including medical (see section
17-3-2 (conditional use permits));
   19.   Raising and marketing of poultry, rabbits and small animals;
   20.   Repair shops for appliances, bicycles, etc.;
   21.   Sales stands for the sale of agricultural and horticultural products
produced or grown on the premises;
   22.   Second hand store;
   23.   Trucking operations and yards;
   24.   Veterinary clinics, small;
   25.   Uses similar to those listed above in this section, as determined by
the planning manager.
C.   Accessory uses (uses incidental to a permitted established use):
   1.   Corrals, barns and other animal-keeping structures;
   2.   Detached accessory buildings and structures;
   3.   Fences and walls;
   4.   Game courts, unlighted;
   5.   Garage, enclosed storage, or barn;
   6.   Guest quarters, provided that no kitchen is provided;
   7.   Home occupations;
   8.   Riding arena, rodeo grounds (private, unlighted); and,
   9.   Swimming pools.
D.   Conditional uses. The following may be permitted with the issuance of a
conditional use permit pursuant to the procedure set forth in section
17-3-2 (conditional use permits):
   1.   Additional building height;
   2.   Apiaries;
   3.   Commercial riding stables and boarding stables;
   4.   Game courts, lighted;
   5.   Health care facilities, including clinics, offices and laboratories;
   6.   Keeping of ratites;
   7.   Keeping of swine;
   8.   Livestock auction yards;
   9.   Stables, public;
   10.   Manufacturing, processing and assembly;
   11.   Mini-storage and/or recreational vehicle storage facilities;
   12.   Restaurants;
   13.   Riding arena, rodeo grounds (private lighted, or any public);
   14.   Sexually oriented business, subject to town code chapter 9-7;
   15.   Veterinary clinic, large;
   16.   Warehouse facilities; and,
   17.   Upon annexation and translation of county zoning, any use or uses and
densities that were permitted on the annexed property under the county zoning
at the time of annexation (see section
17-3-2 (conditional use permits), paragraph P).
E.   Performance standards. The following limitations shall apply to the
conduct of uses within the mixed-use zone:
   1.   More than one use may be permitted on a single parcel if the following
criteria can be met:
      a.   The total of all uses on a single parcel, shall not exceed the Pima
county department of environmental quality and other applicable codes and
ordinances for individual sewage disposal system, this includes lot area,
number of fixtures, required engineering plans, etc.
      b.   Each type of use (residential, commercial and industrial) shall have
its own separate pedestrian entrance;
      c.   Adequate bufferyards are provided between incompatible uses;
      d.   Parking and vehicular accesses are separate between incompatible
uses;
      e.   The proposed use does not exceed the standards of the applicable
codes and ordinances of the Town nor create any overburden of public or private
streets, utilities, emergency services and/or facilities, and;
   2.   No outdoor storage of equipment or materials shall be permitted unless
screened, by a permanent opaque decorative wall at least six feet in height or
by a combination of solid wall or fence and landscape screening accepted by the
town.
   3.   No use shall be established, maintained or conducted within the mixed-
use zone which may cause the dissemination of smoke, gas, dust, odor or any
other atmospheric pollutant that is in violation of Pima county department of
environmental quality. Every use shall be so operated that it does not emit
dust, heat, glare or vibration in such quantities or degree as to be readily
detectable on any property line of the lot upon which it is located.
   4.   No use shall result in the creation of traffic hazards or undue
congestion of any public street or private access.
F.   Development standards. The following standards shall apply to all
developments within the mixed-use zone:
   1.   General development standards.
      a.   Minimum lot area shall be 43,560 square feet (one acre);
      b.   Minimum lot width shall be 100 feet;
      c.   Minimum lot depth shall be 100 feet;
      d.   Minimum required building setback abutting a street or ingress/
egress easement shall be 30 feet. Fifty percent of such setback area shall be
landscaped and shall remain as open space, free from structures and parking/
loading areas.
      e.   Minimum side and rear setbacks shall be 25 feet. A minimum of ten
feet of the setback area shall be landscaped and shall remain free from
structures. This setback may be reduced to include driveways, screening walls,
parking if a permanent opaque decorative screening wall five feet in height is
constructed along the property line;
      f.   Building separation. The minimum distance between two primary
structures shall be 20 feet. The minimum distance between all other structures
shall be ten feet;
      g.   Setback exceptions. Architectural features such as, but not limited
to, eaves, chimneys, bay windows, overhangs, awnings, porches and similar
architectural features may encroach into setbacks by no more than four feet,
subject to compliance with applicable standards of the applicable international
building and fire codes;
      h.   Maximum lot coverage shall not exceed a total of 55% for each
parcel;
      i.   Maximum building height shall be 24 feet. With the issuance of a
conditional use permit pursuant to the procedure set forth in section
17-3-2 (conditional use permits) the planning commission may allow an increase
to the building height, provided that the applicant provides acceptable
justification for the need to exceed the height limit;
   2.   Landscaping. The intent of the landscaping requirements is to provide
residents and businesses with attractive landscaping that creates an
interesting streetscape, and provides a safe and effective transition between
potentially incompatible land uses. In addition, these requirements regulate
the protection of native vegetation as a significant natural resource. All
development within the mixed-use zone shall provide site landscaping, including
the bufferyard, parking lot and any applicable screening as required herein and
in accordance with chapter 1711 of the town code.
   3.   Access and off-street parking. The number, size and design of all
parking spaces, driveways and loading areas for all development within the
mixed-use zone shall comply with the provisions of
chapter 17-9 of the town code and the following requirements listed below:
      a.   All lots must abut a public street or a private street improved to a
standard satisfactory to the town;
      b.   Access control and driveway locations will be evaluated per town
standards. Joint driveways are desirable whenever possible in order to minimize
the number of access points to streets and access easements; and,
      c.   All parking shall be off-street in paved, landscaped parking areas;
   4.   Signs. Sign standards are hereby established to promote a quality
visual appearance throughout the mixed-use zone; to allow individual businesses
to clearly identify themselves and the goods and services offered; to create a
unique environment to attract visitors; to safeguard and enhance property
values; to reduce potential hazards to motorists and pedestrians; and to
eliminate excessive and confusing sign displays. All signs for developments
within the mixed-use zone shall comply with the provisions of town code
chapter 17-10 (signs) and the following additional sign requirements:
      a.   Materials, colors and shades of proposed signs shall be compatible
with the related buildings on the property;
      b.   Monument, wall-mounted and free-hanging signboards shall be the
approved styles;
      c.   Signage shall be limited to one freestanding sign for each street
frontage and one wall sign (near the main entrance). In cases where there are
multiple tenants, each tenant within the property shall be allowed one wall
sign (near each main entrance, with the sign area determined by town code
chapter 17-10 (signs);
      d.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to double-faced, ground-mounted
monument style, with associated landscaping. Freestanding pole signs are
prohibited;
      e.   Freestanding signs shall not exceed eight feet in height (from grade
to the top of sign) and 40 square feet per side and shall be located in such a
manner that does not create a traffic hazard, and;
      f.   Changeable letter boards may make up no more than 20% of the area of
a freestanding sign.
   5.   Screening. To create an attractive environment and visually screen land
uses that are not fully compatible, the following standards shall apply to all
development within the mixed-use zone:
      a.   Service entrances and/or loading areas. All service entrances,
loading areas and spaces must be screened from the abutting property and view
from a public street. Such screening shall consist of a minimum five-foot wide
planting strip consisting of trees, decorative walls and/or landscaping
combination that will provide a six foot high barrier;
      b.   Dumpsters and trash handling areas. All dumpsters and trash handling
areas shall be enclosed and screened from public view. These areas shall be
constructed of materials and colors compatible with those of the primary
buildings. Chain link fencing (with or without slats) is not permitted;
      c.   No articles, materials, trash, equipment or inoperable vehicles
shall be stored or kept in the open or be visible from the street, ingress/
egress easement, and/or adjacent properties. This limitation does not apply to
temporary storage of materials, equipment and supplies needed for the
construction of improvements on a site, provided such items are completely
removed immediately upon completion of the applicable phase of construction,
and;
      d.   Utilities. All utilities including electric power, telephone, gas
and water shall be located underground. Utilities shall be coordinated with
landscape plans to ensure proper screening and landscaping around utility
vaults, box transformers, etc.
   6.   Lighting. Site lighting should serve functional, safety and aesthetic
purposes. Site and security lighting shall be designed to enhance the safety
and quality of the development. Screening of lights from residential areas and
glare from traffic areas shall be required. All site lighting shall be in
compliance with the adopted Marana outdoor lighting code.
17-4-26 R-3.5 Residential
A.   Purpose. The R-3.5 single-family residential zone is primarily intended as
an affordable, compact medium-high density neighbor district. The district
shall contain small-lot single-family homes and/or attached units, with not
more than one dwelling and customary accessory building upon an individual lot,
with a variety of housing sizes and containing a quality design. To ensure
high-quality, well designed development, the alternative neighborhood and
residential design plan standards set forth in
chapter 17-7 shall apply. Except as specifically provided elsewhere in the land
development code, any and every building and premises or land in the R-3.5 zone
shall be used for or occupied, and every building shall be erected,
constructed, established, altered, enlarged, maintained, moved into or within
the R-3.5 zone, exclusively and only in accordance with the regulations set
forth in this section.
B.   Permitted uses. The following shall be permitted in the R-3.5 single-
family residential zone, subject to the development standards contained in this
section.
   1.   One single-family residential detached home of a permanent character
placed in a permanent location;
   2.   Churches, synagogues, and other places of worship;
   3.   Public parks and playgrounds;
   4.   Public schools; and,
   5.   Uses similar to those listed above in this section, as determined by
the planning manager.
C.   Accessory uses. The following accessory buildings and uses may be located
on the same lot with a permitted dwelling, provided that any permanent building
or structure shall be harmonious with the architectural style of the main
building and further provided that all residential accessory uses are
compatible with the residential character of the neighborhood:
   1.   Detached accessory structures, such as tool sheds, patios and cabanas,
noncommercial hobby shops, children's playhouses, etc.;
   2.   Swimming pools, spas, and related structures;
   3.   Garage, carport or enclosed storage;
   4.   Sports courts, unlighted;
   5.   Fences and walls;
   6.   Home occupations, with an approved home occupation permit;
   7.   Community recreation uses, including sports courts, swimming pools,
spas, recreation buildings, patio shelters and other community facilities
common to a homeowner's association, for a specific subdivision;
   8.   Community identification, entry monuments, community design elements,
and other enhancements common to a homeowner's association, and designed for a
specific subdivision; and
   9.   Model homes, within an approved subdivision.
D.   Conditional uses. The following may be permitted subject to conditional
use permits provided for in section
17-3-2.
   1.   Day care center;
   2.   Private schools;
   3.   Group homes; and
   4.   Upon annexation and translation of county zoning, any use or uses and
densities that were permitted on the annexed property under the county zoning
at the time of annexation (see section
17-3-2(P)).
E.   Temporary uses. The following may be permitted for a specified time
period, subject to Section
17-3-3: temporary sales trailer, within an approved subdivision.
F.   Prohibited uses. Uses prohibited in the R-3.5 district are as follows:
   1.   Commercial uses, except those specifically permitted; and
   2.   Industrial uses.
G.   Property development standards - generally. The property development
standards set forth in this section shall apply to all land, structures and
buildings in the R-3.5 zone.
   1.   Lot area. The minimum lot size shall be 3,500 square feet.
   2.   Lot dimensions.
      a.   Width. Lots shall have a minimum width of thirty-five (35) feet.
      b.   Depth. Lots shall have a minimum depth of seventy-five (75) feet.
   3.   Minimum front, side and rear yards (setbacks).
      a.   The required front yard (setback) where front entry garages are
recessed ten feet or more from the livable portion of the dwelling, front
setbacks may be reduced to ten feet, except where garages open or face directly
onto an abutting street, in which case the garage setback shall be a minimum of
20 feet. A maximum of 50% of the lots may have a reduced setback, with the
balance of the setbacks being 20 feet or greater.
      b.   The required side yard (setback) shall be a minimum of five feet,
with a street side yard (setback) having a minimum of ten feet.
      c.   The required rear yard (setback) shall be a minimum of ten feet.
   4.   Building separation. A minimum setback of five feet shall be maintained
from the rear and side property lines for a patio structure that is open and
unenclosed on three sides, as measured to the structure.
   5.   Building heights. Buildings and structures erected in this zone shall
have a height not greater than two-stories or 30 feet.
   6.   Lot coverage. The maximum allowable lot coverage by buildings and
structures shall not exceed 75% of the total lot area.
   7.   Underground utilities. All on-site utilities shall be placed
underground on the site.
   8.   Multi-story dwellings. No more than 60% of the homes may be two
stories.
   9.   Location. This district shall be located in areas where neighborhood
shopping, schools, parks and/or other community services are planned or
existing within one-half mile.
CHAPTER 17-5.
SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 17-5 was inserted into the town code by Ordinance 2015.021 and was
subsequently repealed and replaced in its entirety by Ordinance 2021.010
Sections:
17-5-1   Purpose and intent
17-5-2   Procedure
17-5-3   Subdivision requirements
17-5-4   Performance guarantee
17-5-5   Minor land division
17-5-6   Lot line adjustments, lot ties, and lot combinations
17-5-7   Violations and penalties
17-5-1 Purpose and intent
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly growth and harmonious
development of the town in accordance with the general plan and other adopted
plans and ordinances; to create high quality neighborhoods and ensure adequate
traffic circulation through coordinated street systems, transit, bicycle and
pedestrian systems with relation to major thoroughfares, adjacent subdivisions,
and public facilities; to achieve individual property lots of reasonable
utility and livability; to secure adequate provisions for water supply,
drainage, sanitary sewerage, and other health requirements; to ensure
consideration of adequate sites for schools, recreation areas, and other public
facilities; to promote the conveyance of land by accurate legal description and
plat; and to provide logical procedures for the achievement of this purpose.
17-5-2 Procedure
A.   Overview.
   1.   Except as provided otherwise elsewhere in this code, the preparation,
submittal, review and approval of subdivision plats shall proceed through the
following progressive steps:
      a.   Pre-application meeting with the town.
      b.   Preliminary plat submittal, review, and administrative approval.
      c.   The submittal of engineering plans for the required subdivision
improvements (submittal and review may occur during preliminary plat review).
      d.   The approval of engineering plans for the required subdivision
improvements (must occur prior to final plat approval).
      e.   Final plat submittal, review, and administrative approval.
      f.   Recordation of the approved final plat with the county recorder.
   2.   The following shall be processed in accordance with section
17-5-5:
      a.   Land splits.
      b.   Minor land divisions.
   3.   Subdivisions of ten or fewer lots shall proceed through the following
steps:
      a.   Pre-application meeting with the town.
      b.   The submittal and approval of engineering plans for improvements as
deemed necessary by the town engineer and planning manager prior to final plat
approval.
      c.   Final plat submittal and review, and administrative approval.
      d.   Recordation of approved final plat with the county recorder.
B.   Pre-application meeting
   1.   The pre-application meeting provides an opportunity for the town and
the applicant to review and exchange information regarding a proposed
subdivision prior to the preparation and formal submittal of a subdivision plat
application.
   2.   All applications for subdivision plats shall be prepared and processed
in accordance with procedures and requirements defined in the preliminary plat
application checklist, which town staff will provide to the applicant at the
pre-application meeting.
C.   Preliminary plat
   1.   The applicant shall submit a preliminary plat application in accordance
with the preliminary plat application checklist.
   2.   Town staff and appropriate review agencies will review the plat in
accordance with the checklist and for compliance with legal and regulatory
requirements.
   3.   Preliminary plat approval constitutes authorization for the applicant
to proceed with preparation and submittal of the final plat, landscape plan,
and engineering improvement plans and specifications.
   4.   Preliminary plat approval is subject to the following conditions:
      a.   Changes in conditions such as the land's physical attributes, title
conditions, ownership and similar changes that make development of the affected
land in accordance with the approved plat infeasible shall require the
submission of a new or revised preliminary plat.
      b.   A preliminary plat expires two years from the date of approval
unless:
         i.   A final plat has been submitted for all or a portion of the
property included in the preliminary plat, or
         ii.   The town grants an extension.
      c.   The applicant may submit a written request for a two-year extension
of a preliminary plat approval, which shall be reviewed and considered as
follows:
         i.   The planning manager and the town engineer shall evaluate whether
the preliminary plat and supporting documents remain in compliance with all
applicable town standards and requirements.
      d.   Preliminary plat approval shall be automatically extended for a
period of two years upon submission of a final plat application for any portion
of the land area shown on a preliminary plat.
      e.   Once a final plat has been approved for a portion of the land area
included within an approved preliminary plat, the approval of the preliminary
plat shall be extended for the balance of the land area for a period of two
years from the date of council approval of the final plat.
      f.   If a preliminary plat expires prior to the submittal of an
application for a final plat or prior to the submittal of a request for an
extension of the preliminary plat approval, the preliminary plat shall be
resubmitted as a new application. If the resubmitted preliminary plat has
substantially the same design and configuration as the previously approved plat
and no substantive changes have occurred in the standards and requirements, the
fees associated with the new application shall be 50% of the original
application fees.
      g.   The preliminary plat shall not be recorded.
D.   Final plat
   1.   Final plat submittal:
      a.   The applicant shall submit a final plat application in accordance
with the final plat application checklist.
      b.   Town staff and appropriate review agencies will review the plat in
accordance with the checklist and for compliance with legal and regulatory
requirements.
      c.   Upon receipt of the final plat application, the planning manager
shall check the plat for conformity to the approved preliminary plat, all
applicable conditions of approval and compliance with the requirements for
final plats as set forth in subsection
17-5-2D.2.
   2.   Final plat requirements:
      a.   Each final subdivision plat shall comply with the requirements of
the zoning district within which it is located.
      b.   The final plat shall substantially conform to the approved
preliminary plat, and shall be in compliance with all appropriate town
standards, codes, specifications, and requirements.
      c.   All necessary engineering improvement plans shall be approved prior
to approval of the final plat.
      d.   Any information required as part of the final plat submittal shall
be shown on the plans in a manner consistent with standard engineering practice
and town standards.
         i.   Statement and acknowledgment of the dedication of all streets,
alleys, tracts, drainageways, utility easements, and other easements for public
use by the persons holding title of record, by persons holding title as vendees
under land contract, and by spouses of said parties, if jointly owned. If lands
dedicated are mortgaged, the mortgagee shall also approve the plat (consent to
dedicate by separate instrument may be necessary). Dedications shall include a
written location by section, township, and range of the tract. The dedication
shall include direct wording identifying the town as the new owner of any
tracts or parcels being dedicated. If the plat contains private streets,
provisions shall be made so that the public utilities reserve the right to
install and maintain utilities above, on, and below such private streets or
ways shall be reserved to the public utilities.
         ii.   The following certifications must be included on the final plat:
            a)   Certification by a registered land surveyor preparing the plat
that the plat is correct and accurate, and that the monuments described in it
have been located as described.
            b)   Certification of a registered civil engineer, if engineering
information is represented on the plat.
            c)   Certification of plat approval by the planning manager, town
engineer (or designated representative), and town clerk.
            d)   Certification of plat approval by the authority responsible
for providing wastewater management to the subdivision.
            e)   Certification of plat approval by the authority responsible
for certifying an assured water supply.
         iii.   For subdivisions located within the town's water service area,
the following note must be included on the final plat: "NOTE: This subdivision
is located within the town of Marana water service area, which has been
designated as having an assured water supply under A.R.S. § 45-576." For
subdivisions not located within the town's water service area, consult with the
town engineer and water director for the appropriate statement of assured water
supply.
         iv.   The location of appropriate vehicular no access easements shall
be included on the plat.
         v.   When the plat contains amended development standards or other
requirements, they shall be included in the notes of the plat. This includes
such items as the maximum building envelope containing minimum building
setbacks and maximum lot coverage permitted, conservation easements, etc.
Sufficient typical examples must be included to avoid possible
misinterpretation of irregular, nonstandard lots.
         vi.   Items identified in the final plat review checklist.
   3.   Final plat approval:
      a.   An application for approval of a final plat shall not be filed
unless there is an approved, signed, preliminary plat for the proposed
subdivision as provided for in subsection
17-5-2 C of this chapter. This requirement does not apply to subdivisions of
ten or fewer lots.
      b.   In addition to the requirements of the preceding paragraphs, the
applicant shall provide to the town any additional information, documents, or
other material relevant to the application that planning manager or town
engineer reasonably believes is necessary to evaluate, analyze, and understand
the subject matter of the application.
      c.   An application for final plat approval shall not be deemed to have
been filed or properly submitted until all of the above listed requirements
have been complied with. The planning manager shall determine compliance.
      d.   After a complete application has been submitted, the documents shall
be routed to the appropriate town departments and outside agencies for review
and comment. The applicant is responsible for addressing all comments.
      e.   The plat shall be reviewed for compliance with local, state, and
federal regulations, as well as for compliance with specific plans, development
agreements, and other relevant documents.
      f.   Once all comments have been resolved, the final plat shall be
considered administratively approved and
      the town clerk shall certify the approval on the plat, after determining
that the other required certifications and dedications have been duly signed
and acknowledged.
      g.   After approval of a final plat and compliance with subsection
17-5-3 B, the subdivider shall pay to the town the fee charged by the county
recorder for the recordation of the plat, and the town clerk shall then
promptly record the plat with the county recorder, pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-
463.01(J).
      h.   If the town denies the plat, the town shall state the reasons for
the denial in writing. The final plat application may be re-filed at any time
if revisions can resolve the reasons for the denial.
E.   Plat amendments. An applicant may apply for an amendment to a final plat
which shall proceed through the same progressive steps as provided in this
section for a final plat.
A.R.S. § 9-463.01, paragraph I provides in relevant part: "If the subdivision
is comprised of subdivided lands, as defined in section 32-2101, and is within
an active management area, as defined in section 45-402, the final plat shall
not be approved unless it is accompanied by a certificate of assured water
supply issued by the director of water resources, or unless the subdivider has
obtained a written commitment of water service for the subdivision from a city,
town or private water company designated as having an assured water supply by
the director of water resources pursuant to section 45-576 or is exempt from
the requirement pursuant to section 45-576.”
Ordinance 2025.024 amended sections of paragraphs A and D, and created
paragraph E
17-5-3 Subdivision requirements
A.   Design and documentation requirements. The layout and design of all
subdivisions and engineering plans and the content of all required
documentation shall be in accordance with Arizona revised statutes, this title,
any applicable rezoning or specific plan, and adopted town standards.
B.   Improvement requirements. The following improvements shall be installed to
town standards in every subdivision at no expense to the town:
   1.   Streets. Streets shall be graded and paved, with all accessory drainage
improvements or as adopted in the town street standards and details.
   2.   Sanitary sewers or septic systems. Off-site and on-site sewer lines or
individual septic systems to serve each lot individually.
   3.   Water mains. Off-site and on-site water mains to serve each lot
individually.
   4.   Curb and gutter. All streets shall be bordered by an approved curb and
gutter or as adopted in the town street standards and details.
   5.   Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided as required in the adopted town
street standards and details.
   6.   Multi-use paths. In subdivisions with 30 or more lots and in all
subdivisions connecting to existing multi-use paths, multi-use paths shall be
provided for access to nearby existing or future parks, schools, playgrounds,
shopping centers, public transportation, and other community facilities.
   7.   Stormwater drainage and retention facilities. Off-site and on-site
drainage facilities as required in
chapter 17-15.
   8.   Traffic control devices. Street name signs, street lights, signals and
other traffic control devices.
   9.   Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants as required by town specifications and the
fire district serving the site.
   10.   Landscaping and irrigation. Landscaping and irrigation in accordance
with sections 17-11-7 and 17-11-10.
   11.   Recreational paths: Planned path segments as shown in the most
recently adopted park, trail, and open-space system master plan and located
within or adjacent to the subdivision shall be provided.
   12.   Recreational area.
      a.   Requirement: New residential subdivisions (including re-
subdivisions) with 30 or more lots and whose average lot size is 16,000 square
feet or less shall comply with the recreational area requirements of this
subparagraph
17-5-3 B.12.
      b.   Area:
         i.   General: The minimum area (in square feet) of a subdivision's
recreational areas shall be as follows:
            a)   Apartment or condominium: 100 square feet per unit
            b)   Town home or patio home: 140 square feet per unit
            c)   Single-family residential:
               1)   For subdivisions with an average lot size of 4,000 square
feet or less: 500 square feet per unit
               2)   For subdivisions with an average lot size of 6,000 square
feet or less but larger than 4,000 square: 400 square feet per unit
               3)   For subdivisions with an average lot size of 8,000 square
feet or less but larger than 6,000 square feet: 300 square feet per unit
               4)   For subdivisions with an average lot size of 16,000 square
feet or less but larger than 8,000 square feet: 200 square feet per unit
               5)   For subdivisions whose average lot size is larger than
16,000 square feet: None.
         ii.   Specific plan exception: If an adopted specific plan includes a
subdivision recreation requirement with a different square footage per unit
than set forth in subparagraph i. above, the minimum area of recreational areas
for subdivisions located in the specific plan shall be calculated using the
specific plan's subdivision recreation requirement.
         iii.   Golf courses excluded: Golf courses do not count toward a
subdivision's minimum required recreational area.
      c.   Location:
         i.   Recreational areas shall be located and designed to maximize
proximity to the largest number of homes and to maximize accessibility and
visibility from the front of surrounding and nearby residences.
         ii.   Neighborhoods shall be designed around recreational areas and
open spaces. Recreational areas shall not be located on remnants of land
remaining upon completion of the lotting layout of the subdivision.
         iii.   At least one recreational area shall be located within a
reasonable walking distance of each lot of the subdivision, approximately 2,000
feet measured not as the crow flies but along the most direct route traversable
by a pedestrian over neighborhood sidewalks, paths, and trails.
         iv.   All recreational areas shall be within the boundaries of the
subdivision, except as otherwise provided in a development agreement entered
into pursuant to subparagraph
17-5-3 B.12.g below (in-lieu option).
      d.   Design and facilities: The design of recreational areas and the
recreational facilities included in them shall conform to the most recent
version of the town of Marana subdivision recreational area design manual.
      e.   Prohibited locations. Recreational areas shall avoid the following:
         i.   Land unsuitable for recreation purposes, such as peaks, ridges,
land fragments, land restricted by town policy, condition or ordinance, and
land determined unusable for recreational purposes by planning manager.
         ii.   Known archeological and historical sites.
      f.   Construction timing:
         i.   A subdivision's recreational areas shall be completed or assured
before 50% of the building permits are issued.
         ii.   For purposes of the preceding paragraph, "assured" means that
the subdivider has posted with the town engineer cash, a performance bond, or a
letter of credit securing completion of the recreational areas.
         iii.   The performance bond or letter of credit shall be in a form
approved by the town attorney and shall be in a face amount of at least 115% of
the anticipated cost to complete the recreational areas, as reasonably
determined by the town engineer.
      g.   In-lieu option: Subdivisions may satisfy the requirements of this
subparagraph 17-5-3 B.12 by entering into a development agreement with and
enforceable by the town which, as determined by the town council, provides for
recreational area and recreational facilities equivalent to those otherwise
required in the subdivision under this subparagraph 17-5-3 B.12.
   13.   Permanent survey monuments. Permanent survey monuments shall be
installed in each subdivision, and their location shall be shown on the final
plat. All corners of the subdivision and all lot corners in the subdivision
shall be marked. The permanent survey monuments shall be indicated on the final
plat and shall consist of the state plane coordinate system, Arizona central
zone, north American datum of 1983-high accuracy reference network (HARN), 1993
adjustment. Modified grids and/or constant combined factors are not allowed.
   14.   Environmental hazards. The subdivision layout shall make adequate
provision for natural drainage channels and floodways, which should be retained
in a natural state and left undisturbed where possible. All other environmental
hazards must be eliminated or adequately restricted as directed by the town.
   15.   Underground utilities. All new and existing utilities within or
contiguous to the subdivision, including electric power (except electrical
transmission lines carrying 48 kV or more), telephone lines, cable television,
and fiber optics, shall be located underground, except where the subdivider can
demonstrate to the planning commission that underground installation is not
technically feasible. For purposes of this subsection, economic feasibility is
not considered. All underground installations shall be constructed prior to
surfacing the street. Service stubs shall be placed in a way that avoids
disturbance of street improvements when service connections are made.
Aboveground transformers, cabinets, etc., shall be screened.
   16.   Public safety hazards. The subdivision plat shall make adequate
provision for protection of the public from adjacent irrigation canals,
railroads, airport runways, mines, gravel pits, electrical substations, and
pumps or other stationary equipment that are in existence at the time of
approval of the preliminary plat, where they constitute a significant hazard to
public safety as determined by the town engineer. Such provision may include,
but shall not be limited to, adequate boundary walls or fences.
   17.   Irrigation lines and ditches. All irrigation channels and ditches
within or adjacent to the subdivision, within perimeter easements or the
nearest half of a street or alley right-of-way, shall be reconstructed for the
purposes of enclosure in accordance with a plan and schedule approved by the
town engineer, the subdivider, and the owner of the irrigation facilities.
C.   General requirements
   1.   Streets. All streets shall comply with the following requirements:
      a.   Be dedicated for public use or designated as a private street to be
maintained by the applicable association.
      b.   Conform to the subdivision street standards.
      c.   Conform to the adopted road network map in the most recently adopted
general plan.
      d.   Provide for continuation of the street network onto adjacent
properties, as the town may designate.
      e.   Be arranged to discourage the use of local streets by through
traffic.
      f.   Be configured to minimize cuts and fills, to produce streets of
reasonable gradient, and to facilitate adequate drainage.
   2.   Half streets. The dedication of half streets in any subdivision is
prohibited, except in one of the following circumstances:
      a.   The road is depicted on the road network map in the most recently
adopted general plan.
      b.   The town engineer determines that the adjacent property owner will
likely dedicate the remaining half of the street.
   3.   Lot access to street.
      a.   Each lot of a subdivision shall abut on one of the following:
         i.   A public or private street dedicated by the subdivision plat.
         ii.   An existing dedicated street constructed to town standards.
         iii.   A street constructed to town standards that has become public
by right of use.
         iv.   An access easement providing ingress and egress to a parcel over
another parcel through an area dedicated for such perpetual use.
      b.   Where a proposed subdivision abuts or contains an existing or
proposed arterial or collector, the town may require limited access or reverse
frontage with no-access easements or other restrictions along the arterial or
collector.
   4.   Lot street frontage requirement. Each lot shall have a minimum 30 feet
of street frontage, except in the following circumstances:
      a.   The underlying zoning allows a lot width of less than 30 feet (for
example, in DT and BU-high).
      b.   Topographic or other natural features make a 30-foot street frontage
impracticable and the town and all reviewing agencies determine that adequate
access and utility service can be provided and public safety is not
compromised.
   5.   Lot conformance. All lots must conform to the requirements set forth in
this title and any applicable rezoning or specific plan.
   6.   Lot widths and depths. All lots shall conform to the lot standards for
each zone district as set forth in
chapter 17-4.
   7.   Residential corner lots. Residential corner lots shall be at least five
feet wider than the minimum lot width of the zone to permit conformance with
the required street side yard requirements and sight visibility triangles.
   8.   Double frontage residential lots. Residential lots with streets
abutting the front and rear property lines shall be avoided except where the
street abutting the rear property line is one of the following:
      a.   An arterial, and access from the lots is prohibited by use of a no-
access easement or other restriction.
      b.   Separated from the buildable area of the lot by topographic
features.
   9.   No-access easements. No-access easements shall be identified, showing
where direct vehicular access to a street, common area or other area is
prohibited.
   10.   Remnant. The subdivision shall not include property that does not
conform to lot requirements or is physically unsuitable for improvement, unless
it is dedicated to a homeowners' association, private utility, or other public
purpose, as accepted by the town.
   11.   Solar. To the extent practicable, all subdivisions should be designed
to facilitate solar access and energy efficiency.
   12.   Grade differences. Wherever practicable, all lots shall be graded in a
way that avoids excessive or unnecessary grade differences between adjacent
lots or between lots and adjacent streets.
   13.   School sites and other public spaces. The town may require land areas
within a subdivision to be reserved for parks, recreational facilities, school
sites and fire stations subject to the conditions set forth in A.R.S. § 9-
463.01 (D).
   14.   Registrant. All engineering and surveying work must be done by or
under the direction of a qualified professional registrant of the state of
Arizona.
   15.   Developer responsibility for quality of construction. The developer
shall be responsible for the quality of all materials and workmanship in the
development of an approved subdivision.
   16.   As-builts. As-built plans shall be submitted and approved prior to the
release of performance guarantees, showing the location, size, grade, and depth
of all paving, grading, water and sewer mains, valves, manholes, and other
subsurface utilities and facilities.
   17.   Monuments. All survey monuments and lot corners shall be installed
prior to release of performance guarantees.
   18.   Amended plats. When material changes are made in the plat of a
recorded subdivision, an amended subdivision plat shall be filed and approved
in accordance with the requirements of this code. No change shall be made in an
approved plat unless the change has been approved by the town. For purposes of
this subparagraph "material change" shall be defined as provided in the Arizona
department of real estate regulations.
D.   Non-performance. If any portion of a subdivision remains undeveloped five
years after the subdivision plat was approved by the council, the council may,
after a public hearing and notice to the owner of the property according to
current county assessor's records, vacate all or any part of the undeveloped
portion of the subdivision by recording a revised plat eliminating the vacated
portion. This remedy is in addition to the council's authority to use financial
assurances to complete subdivision improvements under subsection
17-5-4 A. 1 below.
Ordinance 2022.006 amended Section 17-5-3 C.6
Ordinance 2024.014 amended Section 17-5-3 B.15, C.1, and C.1.a, and added
Section 17-5-3 C.3.a.iv.
17-5-4 Performance guarantee
A.   Before a subdivision plat is presented to the council for approval, the
subdivider shall post assurances, in a form acceptable to the town attorney, to
assure the installation of required street, sewer, electric and water
utilities, drainage, flood control, landscaping, park facilities, and other
improvements as required meeting minimum standards of design and construction
established by this title and the subdivision street standards. The purpose of
the assurances shall be to guarantee that the improvements are installed in a
timely manner and paid for without cost to the town.
   1.   Financial forms of assurance, including cash, letter of credit,
performance bond, or other similar instruments, shall be submitted to the town
engineer in an amount equal to the sum of the cost of construction for all
required improvements, including surveying, construction management, testing,
and inspections, as determined by the town engineer, plus a 15% contingency. A
financial form of assurances for the installation of required improvements on
private property shall grant to the town adequate property rights as determined
by the town engineer and town attorney to allow the town or the town's
contractor to complete the installation. Where, in the opinion of the council,
the subdivider has failed or neglected to install the required improvements or
make required corrections within a timely manner, or to pay all liens in
connection with the required improvements, the council may, after a public
hearing on the matter, use the proceeds from the assurances to install or cause
to be installed the required improvements.
   2.   Third party trust forms of assurance prohibiting the transfer of any
individual subdivision lot or block for which required subdivision improvements
have not yet been installed, are permitted in lieu of financial forms of
assurance.
B.   The town manager is authorized to execute substitute subdivision
assurances in a form approved as to substance by the town engineer and approved
as to form by the town attorney, if the town manager and town engineer are
satisfied that the substitute assurances protect the town to an extent equal to
or greater than the original assurances.
   1.   Financial forms of assurance and third party trust forms of assurance
may be used as substitute subdivision assurances.
   2.   Permit hold forms of assurance prohibiting the issuance of any building
permits on any individual subdivision lot or block for which required
subdivision improvements have not yet been installed are permitted as
substitute forms of assurance at the discretion of the town engineer and town
manager when the town engineer and town manager find that the permit hold form
of assurance is an appropriate mechanism to guarantee that required
improvements are installed in a timely manner for the development in question.
C.   Before release of assurances of or guarantees for construction or of
improvements in existing or proposed public rights-of-way, the following listed
documents shall be submitted, where applicable, to the town:
   1.   Formal acceptance and approval of applicable utilities.
   2.   Formal acceptance and approval of sewer line and manhole installation
from the owner of the wastewater utility.
   3.   Applicant's surveyor's record of bench marks set and elevations
thereof, and certification that all monuments are in place as shown on final
plat.
   4.   Certification by a professional engineer that construction has been
completed in substantial conformance with approved plans, specifications, and
applicable town standards, as established by the town engineer, together with
certified as-built plans for all completed construction.
   5.   Certified landscape as-built plans for all irrigation meters, valves,
and service lines within the town’s right-of-way.
   6.   Documentation of all recorded easements not dedicated by the plat.
   7.   Filled-out form for release of assurances.
   8.   Bill of sale to the town for installations to be accepted by the town.
   9.   Tabulation and verification of all fees paid to the town for plan and
report reviews for construction permits; and payment of any remaining or
additional review, permit or inspection fees as required.
   10.   Completed landscape licensing agreement for maintenance of landscaping
in the public right-of-way, if applicable.
   11.   One-year warranty for all public infrastructure.
   12.   A pavement preservation assurance, in the amount and form satisfactory
to the town engineer.
Ordinance 2023.021 added subparagraphs 17-5-4B.1. and 2. Ordinance 2024.011,
adopting changes proposed by Res. 2024-031 amended paragraph C.5.
17-5-5 Minor land division
A.   General.
   1.   A minor land division shall consist of any of the following acts, and
shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter:
      a.   "Land splits" as defined in A.R.S. § 9-463.
      b.   Any division of improved or unimproved land that is not a
subdivision as defined in A.R.S. § 9-463.02, but is located on land that is
subject to a condition of rezoning prohibiting further lot splits without the
approval of the town or the council.
   2.   The preparation, submittal, review, and approval of all minor land
divisions shall proceed through the following progressive stages, except when
otherwise provided in this section:
      a.   Pre-application meeting with the town.
      b.   Submittal of the minor land division application and map for review,
and approval by the planning manager.
      c.   Recordation of minor land division map with the county recorder.
   3.   Minor land divisions shall provide for the dedications of land, rights-
of-way and easements associated with the division of land.
B.   Pre-application meeting. The pre-application meeting provides an
opportunity for the town and the applicant to review and exchange information
regarding a proposed minor land division prior to the preparation and formal
submittal of a minor land division application and map.
C.   Minor land division design standards and requirements. All minor land
divisions shall conform to the subdivision requirements for lot access to a
street (
17-5-3 C. 3), lot street frontage (
17-5-3 C. 4), lot conformance (
17-5-3 C. 5), lot widths and depths (
17-5-3 C. 6), residential corner lots (
17-5-3 C. 7), double frontage residential lots (
17-5-3 C. 8), no-access easements (
17-5-3 C. 9), and remnants (
17-5-3 C. 10).
D.   Action on minor land division applications. The planning manager shall
approve or disapprove applications for minor land divisions as follows:
   1.   Approval.
      a.   If the planning manager approves the minor land division
application, the planning manager shall sign the map's approval block.
      b.   After approval of the minor land division, the applicant shall pay
to the town the fee charged by the county recorder to record the map, and the
town shall then record the map with the county recorder.
   2.   Disapproval.
      a.   If the planning manager disapproves the minor land division
application, the planning manager will send the applicant a letter stating the
reasons for the disapproval.
      b.   A minor land division application and map addressing the
deficiencies noted by the planning manager may be resubmitted without
additional fee within 45 calendar days of the planning manager's disapproval.
   3.   Appeal. An applicant may appeal a final action by the planning manager
to the board of adjustment pursuant to subsection
17-2-2(D)(2).
   See A.R.S. § 9-463 defines "land splits" as "the division of improved or
unimproved land whose area is two and one-half acres or less into two or three
tracts or parcels of land for the purpose of sale or lease"
17-5-6 Lot line adjustments, lot ties, and lot combination
   Lot line adjustments, lot ties, and lot combinations may be administratively
approved by town staff without a public hearing, subject to application and
review procedures established by the planning manager.
Section 17-5-6 created by Ordinance 2025.024
17-5-7 Violations and penalties
A.   It shall be a class 1 misdemeanor to record or attempt to record with the
county recorder a subdivision plat or minor land division map of any land
within the town that has not been approved by the town.
B.   It shall be a class 1 misdemeanor to attempt to achieve a minor land
division or to achieve a minor land division or to attempt to establish a
subdivision or to establish a subdivision of any land within the town without
first having obtained the approval of the town as provided for by this chapter.
Section renumbered by Ordinance 2025.024
CHAPTER 17-6.
GENERAL AND MISCELLANEOUS DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Chapter 17-6 was inserted into the town code by Ordinance 2015.021 and was
subsequently repealed and replaced in its entirety by Ordinance 2021.010
Sections:
17-6-1   Nonconforming structures and land uses
17-6-2   Relationships to streets, other structures, and other property
17-6-3   Sewage sludge restriction
17-6-4   Irrigation lines and ditches
17-6-5   Nuisance uses prohibited
17-6-6   Specifications for the installation of fiber optics
17-6-7   Animal-keeping
17-6-8   Medical marijuana dispensary
17-6-9   Shipping containers
17-6-10   Height of buildings and structures
17-6-11   Solar energy systems and energy storage facilities
17-6-12   Transitional housing
17-6-13   Data centers
17-6-14   Accessory dwelling units
17-6-15   Middle housing
17-6-1 Nonconforming structures and land uses
A.   Continued use.
   1.   The owners of land and structures shall not be deprived of the use of
any property for the purpose to which it was lawfully devoted at the time of
the enactment of this code because of any provision of this code.
   2.   Nonconforming buildings or structures or land uses may be continued to
the same extent and character as that which legally existed on the effective
date of this code and any regulations derived from it.
   3.   Repairs may be made to a nonconforming building or structure or to an
existing building or structure housing a nonconforming use.
B.   Limitations on enlargement. Any nonconforming but otherwise legal use
within a building may be expanded within the same building in which said use is
located, provided that:
   1.   No substantial modifications are made in the building; or
   2.   The increase or expansion is required to comply with an order to
improve issued by a health or safety official.
C.   Restoration of damaged buildings. A nonconforming building or structure or
a building or structure occupied by a nonconforming use which is damaged or
destroyed by fire, flood, or other calamity or act of nature may be restored,
and the building or structure or use of such building, structure, or part
thereof may be continued or resumed provided that such restoration is started
within a period of one year from the date of destruction or damage and is
diligently prosecuted to completion. Such restoration shall not increase the
floor space devoted to the nonconforming use over that which existed when the
building became nonconforming, and such exemption from conforming to this code
shall only be to the extent that the building did not conform in the past.
D.   Discontinuance or abandonment. A nonconforming building or structure or
portion thereof, or a lot or parcel occupied by a nonconforming land use, which
is or which hereafter becomes abandoned or which is removed from use for a
continuous period of one year or more shall not thereafter be occupied except
by a use which conforms to the regulations of the zone in which it is located.
E.   Change to a conforming use. Any nonconforming building or structure or
land use that has been changed to a conforming building or structure or land
use shall not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming building,
structure, or land use.
F.   Change to another nonconforming use. A nonconforming use of a building or
structure shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. Changes in use
shall be permitted only to a conforming use.
17-6-2 Relationships to streets, other structures, and other property
A.   Clear view of intersecting streets. On all lots or parcels of land on
which a front setback is required, no obstruction that will obscure the view of
motor vehicle drivers shall be placed within the triangular area formed by the
intersecting street property lines and a line connecting them at points of 45
feet from the intersection of said street property lines, except that trees may
be permitted within said triangular area provided that those trees are placed
in the street planter strip and the limbs are pruned to at least six feet above
the grade level of the adjacent street.
B.   Effect of street plan. The front or side setback of a building or
structure to be constructed on a lot abutting a street designated in the
general plan or in a specific plan shall be measured from the planned right-of-
way line of the street and not from the existing property line.
C.   Drainage. Surface water shall not be allowed to drain from any lot onto
any adjacent lot, parcel, or easement, except upon written agreement with the
owner of the adjacent lot, parcel, or easement.
17-6-3 Sewage sludge restriction.
The application of sewage sludge to the surface or within eight inches of the
surface of any land within one quarter mile of any human residence shall be
prohibited, except where written permission to do so has been obtained from the
owner of said residence and filed with the town clerk.
17-6-4 Irrigation lines and ditches
Before a permit can be issued for development of parcels or lots with an
irrigation channel either within the parcel or lot or adjacent thereto within
perimeter easements or the nearest half of a street or alley right-of-way, such
irrigation facilities shall be undergrounded in accordance with a plan and
schedule acceptable and agreed upon by the town engineer, the property owner,
and the owner of the irrigation facilities.
17-6-5 Nuisance uses prohibited
A.   Purpose and scope: The purpose of this section is to promote the health,
safety, economic, aesthetic and general welfare of the citizens of the town,
and to protect neighborhoods against nuisances, blight and deterioration, by
establishing requirements for the maintenance of all land, whether improved or
vacant. This section shall apply to all lands within the town, without regard
to zoning or use.
B.   Composting prohibited: No person shall compost or permit the composting of
organic waste; manure; tree, grass or shrub clippings; grease; bio-solids, or
other similar material on any property within the town limits except for
composted material that is utilized directly on the property from which it is
composted and except for permitted accessory composting facilities in the AG
and RR zones.
C.   Used tire storage prohibited.
   1.   No person shall store or allow the storage of used automobile, truck,
or other vehicle tires:
      a.   Of a type different from those used by vehicles owned by that person
and legally parked or stored on the property, or
      b.   In a quantity greater than two spare used tires for each vehicle
owned by that person and legally parked or stored on the property.
   2.   All used tires shall be stored inside a completely enclosed structure.
   3.   This paragraph C shall not apply to a properly licensed and operating
entity engaged in the retail sale or disposal of used tires.
D.   Grease ponds prohibited: No person shall allow a grease pond or open
grease storage facility to be maintained on any property within the town
limits.
E.   Similar uses prohibited. The planning manager may determine other similar
uses to be a nuisance.
17-6-6 Specifications for the installation of fiber optics
A.   Fiber optic cables or lines installed within the municipal limits of the
town shall not be installed as a direct bury cable.
B.   All fiber optic cables or lines shall be installed within a conduit of at
least one inch PVC or other approved material. At the time of initial
installation, one extra conduit of at least one inch PVC or other approved
material for future expansion shall also be installed.
C.   New conduit installation designated for fiber optic cables or lines shall
be encased in a minimum of six inches of concrete on all sides of the conduit
or conduits. New installations shall have a minimum of four feet of cover on
the top of the concrete encasement. A magnetic warning tape shall be placed two
feet above the encasement, which shall include a written message indicating the
presence of fiber optics in the conduit systems installed, even if they are
initially intended to carry standard copper wire cables.
D.   If that fiber optic cables or lines are to be installed in existing
conduit systems, the installation thereof shall comply with the specifications
in the foregoing subsection.
E.   All installations of fiber optic cables or lines, whether in new conduit
installations or existing conduit installations, shall require a permit.
F.   Upon the submission of plans and the application for a permit, it shall be
clearly noted thereon by the applicant that fiber optic cables or lines are to
be installed pursuant to the permit being requested.
G.   Whenever the town, private consultants or entities, or other agencies
request any information on existing utilities to be used on the preparation of
improvement or development or other plans, existing fiber optic cables or lines
shall be clearly indicated on information furnished by the applicable utility
company.
H.   Any of the foregoing plans prepared shall include a special warning of
sufficient size and placed on the plans in such a way that contractors will be
aware of the presence and existence of fiber optic cables or lines.
I.   Any fiber optic cables or lines installed within the town shall be located
in the field, during construction, as part of the "Blue Stake" program.
J.   Any locations marked on the ground surface shall include special notations
that will adequately indicate the existence of fiber optic cables or lines to
the contractor.
17-6-7 Animal-keeping
A.   General.
   1.   Animal density limitations shall not apply to un-weaned animals or
household pets.
   2.   The planning manager may grant exceptions to animal-keeping regulations
for activities sponsored by the 4-H club, future farmers of America, or other
similar nonprofit organization.
B.   Location of animal-keeping structures. See section
17-4-3 (use conditions matrix), table 3 (conditions per use).
C.   General maintenance. Animal-keeping structures shall be arranged,
conducted, and maintained in compliance with title 6 (animal control) and so
that:
   1.   The animal-keeping area is completely enclosed within a fence capable
of containing the animals being kept.
   2.   Construction materials are non-toxic.
   3.   Animal-keeping does not create a nuisance for surrounding properties.
   4.   Generation of dust is minimized.
   5.   Outdoor lighting does not generate glare in the direction of streets
and or adjacent properties; and is consistent with the town lighting code.
D.   When chickens are kept on a single-family detached residential lot of one-
half acre or smaller, the following regulations shall apply:
   1.   Enclosures shall be maintained and manure picked up and disposed of or
composted at least twice weekly.
   2.   Composted manure shall be kept in a way that prevents migration of
insects.
   3.   Water sources shall have adequate overflow drainage.
   4.   Feed shall be stored in insect-proof and rodent-proof containers.
Ordinance 2022.006 and 2025.002 amended Section 17-6-7 B.
17-6-8 Medical marijuana dispensary
A.   The minimum requirements of this section shall apply to any "medical
marijuana dispensary" located in any zoning district.
B.   In addition to any other application requirements, an applicant for any
"medical marijuana dispensary" conditional use permit shall provide the
following:
   1.   A notarized authorization executed by the property owner, acknowledging
and consenting to the proposed use of the property as a medical marijuana
dispensary.
   2.   The legal name of the medical marijuana dispensary.
   3.   The name, address, and birth date of each officer and board member of
the nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary.
   4.   A copy of the operating procedures adopted in compliance with A.R.S. §
36-2804 (B) (1) (c).
   5.   A notarized certification that none of the nonprofit medical marijuana
dispensary officers or board members has been convicted of any of the following
offenses:
      a.   A violent crime as defined in A.R.S. § 13-901.03 (B) that was
classified as a felony in the jurisdiction where the person was convicted.
      b.   A violation of state or federal controlled substance law that was
classified as a felony in the jurisdiction where the person was convicted
except an offense for which the sentence, including any term of probation,
incarceration or supervised release, was completed ten or more years earlier or
an offense involving conduct that would be immune from arrest, prosecution or
penalty under A.R.S. § 36-2811 except that the conduct occurred before the
effective date of that statute or was prosecuted by an authority other than the
state of Arizona.
   6.   A notarized certification that none of the nonprofit medical marijuana
dispensary officers or board members has served as an officer or board member
for a medical marijuana dispensary that has had its registration certificate
revoked.
   7.   A floor plan showing the location, dimensions and type of security
measures demonstrating that the medical marijuana dispensary will be secured,
enclosed, and locked as required by law.
   8.   A scale drawing depicting the property lines and the separations from
the nearest property boundary of the parcel containing the medical marijuana
dispensary to the property boundary of the parcel containing any existing uses
listed in paragraph D below. If any of the uses are located within 50 feet of
the minimum separation, the drawing, showing actual surveyed separations, shall
be prepared by a registered land surveyor.
   9.   A notarized acknowledgment of the requirements of Pima county code
chapter 8.80 ("medical marijuana").
C.   A medical marijuana dispensary shall:
   1.   Be located in a permanent building and may not be located in a trailer,
cargo container or motor vehicle.
   2.   Not have drive-through service.
   3.   Not emit dust, fumes, vapors or odors into the environment.
   4.   Prohibit consumption of marijuana on the premises.
   5.   Not have outdoor seating areas.
   6.   Display a current town of Marana business license applicable to a
medical marijuana dispensary.
   7.   Have operating hours not earlier than 7:00 a.m. and not later than 10:
00 p.m.
D.   A medical marijuana dispensary shall meet the following minimum
separations, measured in a straight line from the boundary of the parcel
containing the medical marijuana dispensary to the property boundary of the
parcel containing any existing uses listed below:
   1.   2,000 feet from any other medical marijuana dispensary or medical
marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location.
   2.   2,000 feet from a residential substance abuse diagnostic and treatment
facility or other residential drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility.
   3.   1,000 feet from a public, private, parochial, charter, dramatic,
dancing, music, learning center, or other similar school or educational
facility that caters to children.
   4.   1,000 feet from a childcare center.
   5.   1,000 feet from a public library or public park.
   6.   1,000 feet from a church.
   7.   1,000 feet from a facility devoted to family recreation or
entertainment.
E.   A medical marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location is prohibited
within the town limits. For purposes of this section, "offsite cultivation
location" is defined as any cultivation site that is located at a separate
physical location or site from a medical marijuana dispensary with a valid,
unexpired conditional use permit.
F.   The number of medical marijuana dispensaries permitted within the town
limits of Marana shall be limited to two. The number of permitted medical
marijuana dispensaries shall be increased by one for each Marana population
increase of 50,000 over and above the official 2010 census figure for Marana.
G.   The medical marijuana dispensary operator and the owner of the property
shall jointly share the rights and obligations of a medical marijuana
dispensary conditional use permit issued under this section.
H.   If a medical marijuana dispensary ceases to operate at a property for
which a conditional use permit has been issued under this section, the owner of
the property shall have the right to lease or sell the property to another
medical marijuana dispensary operator without the need for a new medical
marijuana dispensary conditional use permit, subject to the following
conditions and requirements:
   1.   A new conditional use permit shall be required if the medical marijuana
dispensary conditional use permit expires by operation of section
17-3-2 (conditional use permits) paragraph K (expiration upon discontinuance).
   2.   Before opening to the public, the new medical marijuana dispensary
operator shall provide to the town the information and documentation set forth
in subparagraphs 1 through 7 and 9 of paragraph B of this section.
   3.   The new medical marijuana dispensary operator shall obtain a new
medical marijuana dispensary conditional use permit if the planning manager
determines that the floor plan provided as required by subparagraph 7 of
paragraph B of this section is substantially different from the floor plan
approved in the medical marijuana dispensary conditional use permit. For
purposes of making this determination, the planning manager shall disregard
floor plan changes required by the state as a condition of the operator's state
license.
Ordinance 2022.022 amended Section 17-6-8 E.
17-6-9 Shipping containers
Shipping containers shall not be used as storage facilities in any residential,
commercial, or mixed-use zone, except that a storage pod is permitted for a
period not to exceed 30 days while remodeling or moving.
17-6-10 Height of buildings and structures
A.   Additional height is allowed for ornamental elements of buildings and
structures such as belfries, clock towers, cupolas, domes, spires, and
steeples, subject to the following provisions:
   1.   The element is an integral part of the building's architecture.
   2.   The element is not for human occupancy.
   3.   The element is not used for signage.
   4.   The element shall be set back at least one foot from all property lines
for every foot of height above finished grade. Where the zoning setback exceeds
the height of the element, the zoning setback shall apply.
   5.   Elements higher than 50% above the zoning height limit, or that do not
conform to the increased setbacks specified in section 17-6-10 A. 4, shall:
      a.   require a conditional use permit
      b.   require a viewshed and shadow analysis showing the impact on nearby
properties
      c.   have a combined footprint not exceeding 25% of the roof area of the
principal building
   6.   Lighting or direct illumination of any part of the element above the
zoning height limit shall require a conditional use permit.
B.   Multiple architectural elements may be considered separately when
determining setbacks and the applicability of section 17-6-10 A.5.
Ordinance 2022.006 added Section 17-6-10
17-6-11 Solar energy systems and energy storage facilities.
A.   The minimum requirements of this section, including the development
standards set forth in Table 1 ( Development standards for solar energy systems
or energy storage facilities) below, shall apply to any solar energy system or
energy storage facility located in any zoning district.
Table 1. Development standards for solar energy systems or energy storage
facilities
Development Standard Solar energy systems Energy storage facilities
Table 1. Development standards for solar energy systems or energy storage facilities
Development Solar energy systems                                                      Energy storage facilities
Standard
Maximum     200 acres                                                                 100 acres
site area
Setbacks    AG zone: 40 foot perimeter                                                AG zone: 40 foot perimeter
(minimum)   LI and HI zones: 30 foot perimeter                                        LI and HI zones: 40 foot perimeter
Maximum
structure   16 feet                                                                   16 feet
height
            Parcels containing other solar energy systems: 2,000 feet*                Parcels containing other energy storage facilities: 2,000 feet*
            Major roadways †                                                        Major roadways †
               Interstate 10 (I-10) - Pinal county line south to Twin Peaks Road      Interstate 10 (I-10) - Pinal county line south to Twin Peaks Road
            interchange: 1 mile                                                       interchange: 1 mile
Buffers        Tangerine Road - Dove Mountain Boulevard west to I-10: ½ mile         Tangerine Road - Dove Mountain Boulevard west to I-10: ½ mile
(minimum)      Twin Peaks Road - Saguaro Highlands Drive west to town boundary: ½    Twin Peaks Road - Saguaro Highlands Drive west to town boundary: ½
            mile                                                                      mile
               Avra Valley Road - within town's boundaries: ½ mile                   Avra Valley Road - within town's boundaries: ½ mile
                                                                                        Residential zoned parcel: 500 feet*
                                                                                        Abutting an existing residential dwelling: 1,000 feet*
* Measured in a straight line from the boundary of each parcel
  † Measured from right-of-way centerline on both sides
 
B.   The developer of a solar energy system or energy storage facility must
provide the town with a decommissioning plan for the site at the time of
development plan review. The plan must include the necessary funding assurances
to ensure the property is returned to its pre-development condition, flat state
or better, including remediating any environmental issue caused by the solar
energy system or energy storage facility.
C.   If title to the solar energy system or energy storage facility is vested
in a special purpose entity, a written guaranty from its parent company must be
included with the decommissioning plan required by paragraph B, above, fully
binding the parent company to all the terms and conditions of the
decommissioning plan. If the solar energy system or energy storage facility is
leased, sold, or conveyed, the guaranty shall be fully binding upon the
successors and assigns of the special purpose entity and parent company, as
well as any other subsequent owner/operator of the solar energy system or
energy storage facility.
D.   Solar energy systems and energy storage facilities shall be maintained in
good working order and in accordance with manufacturer and industry standards.
Any solar energy system or energy storage facility, or any component of a
system or facility, which becomes inoperable shall be made operational or shall
be removed from the property within one year of the date the system or facility
became inoperable, all at the owner's expense.
E.   Approval granted to an individual property owner of a solar energy system
shall not be construed to bar owners or tenants of any adjacent property from
ordinary or permitted building, landscaping, or other accessory improvements,
even if such improvements may diminish the function of the solar energy system.
Ordinance 2022.026 added Section 17-6-11
17-6-12 Transitional housing
A.   The purpose of these regulations is to permit persons with disabilities to
reside in single-family residential neighborhoods in compliance with the Fair
Housing Act, while preserving the residential character of the neighborhood.
B.   All transitional housing locations shall obtain and maintain a town
business license in compliance with
Chapter 9-2 of this code.
C.   All transitional housing locations shall comply with the following
standards:
   1.   The number of residents at a transitional housing location, excluding
staff, shall not exceed five.
   2.   No transitional housing location shall house any person whose tenancy
would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals
or result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.
   3.   A transitional housing location shall not be located on a lot that is
within 1,200 feet, measured by a straight line in any direction, from the lot
line of another transitional housing location.
   4.   Transitional housing locations shall have no identification from a
public street by signage, graphics, display, or other visual means.
   5.   Transitional housing locations shall be in compliance with all
applicable town codes, including building codes, fire safety regulations,
zoning, and subdivision codes. If a transitional housing location has one or
more non-ambulatory residents, building code requirements in addition to those
applicable to locations with no non-ambulatory residents shall apply.
   6.   Any parking for a transitional housing location shall be maintained on-
site and comply with requirements set forth
Chapter 17-9 of this code.
   7. Transitional housing locations shall comply with any applicable licensing
requirements.
      a.   If a transitional housing location is required by Arizona law to
obtain and maintain a state license, the transitional housing location shall
provide a copy of that license and all renewals to the town for record-keeping
purposes within ten days of receipt by the operator of the transitional housing
location.
      b.   If a transitional housing location is not required by Arizona law to
obtain and maintain a state license, the transitional housing location shall
obtain and maintain either a certification by the Arizona recovery housing
association or a permanent Oxford House charter, and shall provide a copy of
the certification or charter to the town for record-keeping purposes within ten
days of receipt by the operator of the transitional housing location.
      c.   If a required state license, Arizona recovery housing association
certification, or Oxford House charter is suspended or revoked, the operator of
the transitional housing location shall notify the town's license inspector
within five business days of the suspension or revocation.
   8.   The exterior of the dwelling and yards shall be kept in a condition
that is consistent with requirements set forth in Title 18 of this code.
   9.   All administrative activities, including staffing, counseling, and
other visitations, shall serve only the residents of the transitional housing.
No group staff training with staff from other locations is permitted.
   10.   Large or multiple trash receptacles not usually found in the
residential area where the transitional housing is located shall be blocked
from public view.
   11.   If a transitional housing location ceases operation, the operator
shall notify the development services department within 30 calendar days of the
cessation.
   12.   Any applicable requirements or provisions of state law, including but
not limited to any applicable requirements set forth in Title 36 of the Arizona
revised statutes, shall apply in addition to the provisions set forth in this
section. To the extent that applicable state law conflicts with the provisions
of this section, state laws shall preempt any conflicting provision, but shall
not affect the remaining provisions of this section.
D.   Reasonable Accommodation Waiver.
   1.   The purpose of this paragraph is to establish a procedure for persons
with a disability to make a request for reasonable accommodation in the
application of the town's zoning rules, policies, practices and procedures
pursuant to Section 3604(f)(3)(b) of Title 42 of the Fair Housing Act, as it
may be amended, which prohibits local government from refusing to make
reasonable accommodations when these accommodations are necessary to afford
persons with disabilities equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling.
   2.   A request for a reasonable accommodation waiver must be in writing and
filed with the zoning administrator. In all cases, the zoning administrator, or
designee, shall make findings of fact in support of his or her determination
and shall render a decision in writing.
   3.   The zoning administrator shall engage in an interactive process in
considering the reasonable accommodation waiver request. The zoning
administrator may meet with the person making the request for additional
information, to discuss possible alternative accommodations, or to ascertain or
clarify information sufficiently to make the required findings.
   4.   To grant a reasonable accommodation waiver, the zoning administrator
must affirmatively find all of the following:
      a.   The requesting party or future occupants of the housing for which
the reasonable accommodation has been made are protected under the Fair Housing
Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act;
      b.   The requested accommodation is reasonable and necessary to afford an
individual with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling;
      c.   The requested accommodation will be in compliance with all
applicable building and fire codes;
      d.   The requested accommodation will allow for the maintenance and
preservation of the residential characteristics of the neighborhood and will
not create a substantial detriment to neighboring properties by creating
traffic impacts, parking impacts, impacts on water or sewer system, or other
similar adverse impacts; and
      e.   The requested accommodation will not impose an undue financial or
administrative burden on the town, as "undue financial or administrative
burden'' is defined in federal or Arizona fair housing laws and interpretive
case law.
   5.   Profitability or financial hardship of the owner/operator of a facility
shall not be considered by the zoning administrator in determining whether to
grant a reasonable accommodation waiver.
   6.   A person requesting a reasonable accommodation waiver may request
review of the decision of the zoning administrator by submitting a written
request for review to the zoning administrator within ten calendar days of
receipt of the zoning administrator's determination.
      a.   A review hearing shall be scheduled within 30 calendar days of the
zoning administrator's receipt of the request.
      b.   A hearing officer appointed by the town manager shall conduct the
hearing.
      c.   The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner and the rules
of evidence shall not apply.
      d.   The decision of the hearing officer is final and not subject to any
further administrative review.
Ordinance 2023.032 added Section
17-6-12
17-6-13 Data centers
A.   Data centers are not permitted to operate in the town as a principal use
unless approved in a specific plan or specific plan amendment explicitly
created or amended for the purpose of data center development and adopted
through the rezoning process set forth in section
17-3-1 and as described in section
17-4-15 (Specific plan (SP)). Subject to the requirements of this section
17-6-13, a specific plan may authorize data center development in a specific
geographic area or region of a larger specific plan area.
B.   In addition to the requirements of section
17-4-15(C), an application for a specific plan or a specific plan amendment for
the purpose of data center development shall include the following information:
   1.   The baseline noise study and noise contour exhibit required by
paragraph G below.
   2.   The intended source of electric power for the development and
documentation from the electric utility provider affirming sufficient power
exists to serve the site.
   3.   An assessment of future energy needs for the site.
   4.   An estimate of annual water consumption for the site.
   5.   The intended source of water for the development, and documentation
from the water provider affirming sufficient water resources exist to serve the
site.
   6.   An explanation regarding how the development complies with each of the
requirements of this section
17-6-13; or, if the applicant requests that the council waive a requirement or
requirements, an explanation as to why compliance with the requirement(s) is
not feasible.
C.   The minimum requirements of this section
17-6-13 shall apply to any data center operated as a principal use unless the
council waives a requirement or requirements during the specific plan rezoning
process. In addition to these minimum requirements, the town may impose
additional or more stringent site-specific requirements or regulations during
the specific plan rezoning process, provided that the site-specific
requirements or regulations are reasonably related to the impact of the
development.
D.   The minimum requirements of this section shall apply to any data center
operated as an accessory use only where indicated.
E.   The minimum requirements of this section that are based on the planned or
zoned property uses of adjacent properties shall be established based on the
planned or zoned uses at the time of the specific plan rezoning process.
F.   The provisions of this section are intended to supplement the requirements
of this code. If any provision of this section is found to be in conflict with
any other provision of this code, the provision that establishes the higher or
more restrictive standard shall prevail.
G.   Noise Attenuation. The developer of a data center to be operated as either
a principal or an accessory use must conduct a noise study performed by a
qualified third-party acoustic engineer to document baseline sound levels in
the area of the proposed data center and to produce a noise contour exhibit
depicting the anticipated noise levels to be generated by the data center.
   1.   For purposes of this section
17-6-13:
      a.   "dBA" means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a
sound level meter using the A weighted filter network. The A weighted filter
network is designed to simulate the response of the human ear. The A weighted
sound level is expressed by the symbol "dBA."
      b.   "Daytime" means 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on weekdays, and 9:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m. on Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays observed by the town.
      c.   "Nighttime" means 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, and 8:00 p.m.
to 9:00 a.m. on Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays observed by the town.
   2.   Any noise which emanates from any operation, activity, or source on a
data center site, including, but not limited to, heating and cooling system(s),
shall not exceed the maximum permissible sound levels set forth in Table 2
(Maximum sound levels for data center operation) measured at the property line
of the property affected by the noise.
 
Table 2. Maximum sound levels for data center operation
Planned or zoned use of affected property Maximum dBA Daytime/Nighttime
Residential and mixed-use                 55/55
Agricultural                              60/55
Commercial                                65/60
Industrial                                72/65
 
   3.   Notwithstanding the provisions of Table 2 above, any person performing
site construction work in compliance with section
11-5-4 (Construction noise; extended work permits) shall not be subject to the
maximum sound levels set forth in Table 2 above.
   4.   The data center must be designed and built to incorporate sound
mitigation methods sufficient to prevent the sound levels emanating from the
data center, as determined by a qualified third-party acoustic engineer, from
exceeding the maximum sound levels set forth in Table 2. Design specifications
for the required sound mitigation must be provided to the town before building
permit approval.
   5.   Before issuance of a certificate of occupancy or certificate of
completion, whichever occurs first, the data center operator must conduct a
post-construction noise study performed by a qualified third-party acoustic
engineer to document sound levels emanating from the data center measured at
the property line of the nearest property to the data center property that is
planned or zoned for residential land uses, or other noise sensitive use as
reasonably determined by the zoning administrator, during peak operation of the
data center mechanical equipment. The post-construction noise study must
demonstrate that sound levels do not exceed the maximum sound levels set forth
in Table 2. If sound levels exceed the maximum sound levels set forth in Table
2, the town will issue a temporary certificate of occupancy until the data
center operator demonstrates that the required sound mitigation is achieved. If
the data center operator is unable to demonstrate compliance with the sound
levels set forth in Table 2 before expiration of the temporary certificate of
occupancy, the town will not issue a permanent certificate of occupancy.
   6.   The data center operator must also conduct an additional noise study,
as measured at the property line of the nearest property to the data center
property that is planned or zoned for residential land uses, or other noise
sensitive use as reasonably determined by the zoning administrator, annually
during peak operation of the data center mechanical equipment for five years
after completion of the initial post-construction noise study and when
requested by the town thereafter. The data center operator must provide the
results of the noise study to the town within 30 days of the anniversary of the
date on which the certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion was
issued by the town. If sound levels exceed the maximum sound levels set forth
in Table 2, the data center operator shall take appropriate steps to achieve
the required sound mitigation.
H.   Water. The Marana water department will not provide potable water to a
data center (principal or accessory use) for its cooling system, humidity
control, and other similar operations. The developer must demonstrate an
alternate source of water for these operations.
I.   Site Design Standards. The site design standards in Table 3 (Site design
standards for data center development) apply to the development of land that
will accommodate data centers, as well as the placement of buildings on a given
site. The standards are intended to help minimize the physical, environmental,
and visual impacts of data centers on adjacent development.
Table 3. Site design standards for data center development
Site design standard Requirements
Table 3. Site design standards for data center development
Site design standard                      Requirements
                                          Buildings shall orient principal facades, including visitor, staff and administrative
                                          entrances, to primary adjacent roads.
                                          Loading docks and service entries of buildings shall not face or be visible from
                                          public rights-of-way. When possible, existing buildings may be used to screen loading
                                          docks. Where building locations do not offer screening, and in the case of phased
                                          development plans, screening of loading docks and service entries shall be
                                          accomplished by existing or proposed landscaping, fencing, walls, or similarly
Building placement and orientation        effective methods. [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                                          8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/IMAGES/0-0-0-2302.jpg]
                                          Loading docks are permitted on only one side of the building. [https://
                                          export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/IMAGES/0-0-0-
                                          2302.jpg]
                                          Refuse collection areas must be fully screened on all four sides. [https://
                                          export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/IMAGES/0-0-0-
                                          2302.jpg]
Lighting[https://export.amlegal.com/
media/                                    Must comply with the town of Marana lighting code.
8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2302.jpg]
Lot coverage                              No maximum
                                          Any data center building, equipment for cooling, ventilating, or otherwise operating
                                          the facility, power generator, or other power supply equipment must be located:
                                             •   At least 400 feet from the property line of any adjacent property that is
Setbacks                                  planned or zoned for residential land uses, or other noise sensitive use as reasonably
                                          determined by the zoning administrator.[https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                                          8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/IMAGES/0-0-0-2302.jpg]
                                             •   At least 100 feet from the property line of any adjacent property that is
                                          planned or zoned for any use other than residential or industrial uses.
                                          Generators and generator use must be in compliance with all applicable state and
                                          federal regulations.
Generators[https://export.amlegal.com/    If a data center uses diesel generators, only tier IV or newer generators are
media/                                    permitted.
8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/ Except for generator testing or commissioning activities, generator use is limited to
IMAGES/0-0-0-2302.jpg]                    backup/emergency use only.
                                          Generator testing shall be limited to weekdays between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except
                                          in emergencies.
Screening of mechanical equipment and     Substations and mechanical equipment shall be screened from public and private rights-
substations[https://export.amlegal.com/   of-way (except for private rights-of-way that are within the data center site) and
media/                                    from any adjacent property that is planned or zoned with any use other than industrial
8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/ uses using one or multiple of the following methods of screening:
IMAGES/0-0-0-2302.jpg]                       •   Existing vegetation that will remain on the property
                                             •   Landscaping improvements constructed on the property
                                             •   A visually solid fence, screen wall or panel, parapet wall, or other visually
                                          solid screen that shall be constructed of materials compatible with those used in the
                                          exterior construction of the principal building; these features shall be at least ten
                                          feet in height; chain link fencing with slats is not permitted to satisfy this
                                          requirement
                                          Ground mounted mechanical equipment is prohibited in front yards.
                                          Solid screening walls must be constructed with a design, materials, details, and
                                          treatment compatible with those used on the nearest principal facade of a building,
                                          but may include perforated surfaces as needed for ventilation of mechanical equipment.
                                          Mechanical equipment shall be located and screened with materials that provide
                                          appropriate levels of noise attenuation to reduce sound impacts on surrounding
                                          properties. On properties adjacent to residentially zoned/planned properties,
                                          mechanical equipment must be screened on all four sides by an acoustical barrier. For
                                          purposes of this section, "acoustical barrier" is defined as an exterior solid or
                                          louvred wall containing sound-proofing materials designed to absorb noise and protect
                                          neighboring properties from noise pollution, or another effective mitigation measure
                                          specified by a qualified third-party acoustic engineer when found by the zoning
                                          administrator to provide appropriate levels of noise attenuation.
                                          Electric power lines, except electrical transmission lines carrying 48 kV or more,
                                          shall be located underground.
                                          In lieu of the landscape buffer requirements in section
                                          17-11-7(F) (Landscape buffer standards), any side or rear yard of a data center site
                                          abutting property that is planned or zoned for any use other than industrial uses
                                          shall include one of the following:
                                             •   Agricultural and commercial zoned/planned properties: A minimum 50-foot buffer.
                                          This may be achieved through existing mature landscaping or a landscaped earthen berm
                                          that screens the site. Berms shall have a slope no steeper than 2:1 with a minimum
                                          height of four feet and planted with a minimum of 320 plant units* per 100 feet of
                                          right-of-way or property line.
                                             •   Residential or mixed-use zoned/planned properties: A minimum 100-foot buffer.
Landscape buffers                         This may be achieved through existing mature landscaping or a landscaped earthen berm
                                          that screens the site. Berms shall have a slope no steeper than 2:1 with a minimum
                                          height of six feet and planted and planted with a minimum of 320 plant units* per 100
                                          feet of right-of-way or property line.
                                          Notwithstanding the requirements of this section, use of natural topography and
                                          preservation of existing vegetation, supplemented by new vegetation, if needed, or on
                                          the outside of a six-foot-tall solid fence, may be substituted for the above
                                          requirements when found by the zoning administrator to provide visual screening from
                                          adjacent land uses at the density, depth, and height equivalent to the landscape
                                          buffer with earthen berm.
                                          To protect the landscaping and the preservation of open space, linear co-location of
                                          utilities shall not be located within the buffer.
Fencing[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ Fencing of the property is permitted; however chain-link fencing, with or without
8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/ slated inserts, and barbed wire fencing are prohibited along public or private street
IMAGES/0-0-0-2302.jpg]                    frontages.
* See Table 4 (Plant unit equivalents)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/IMAGES/0-0-0-2302.jpg] Requirement applies to data
centers operated as accessory uses
 
 
Table 4. Plant unit equivalents
Plant type                                              Plant unit(s)
1 large deciduous or evergreen tree                     10
1 medium, small, or compact deciduous or evergreen tree 5
1 shrub                                                 2
1 ornamental grass                                      1
1 perennial                                             0.25
 
J.   Building Design Standards. The building design standards in Table 5
(Building design standards for data centers) are intended to guide the
development of data center buildings and associated equipment. The goal of the
standards is to ensure more visually appealing and welcoming data center
developments that also minimize negative impacts in the built environment.
Table 5. Building design standards for data centers
Building design standard Requirements
Table 5. Building design standards for data centers
Building design standard Requirements
                         Buildings shall use broad, large-scale architectural
                         gestures to provide variety and modulation in facade
                         and massing as seen from public rights-of-way.
                         Variation at the ground plane shall be provided to
Massing and scale        create transitions in scale and mass as viewed from
                         public rights-of-way.
                         Additive and subtractive shifts in the building
                         footprint shall be provided to reduce mass and scale
                         and to provide outdoor amenity spaces for employees
                         and visitors.
                         A maximum building height of 55 feet is allowed, with
                         an additional 10 feet permitted for rooftop mounting
                         of screened mechanical equipment. This building
Building height          height limitation does not apply to utility
                         substations, associated utility infrastructure such
                         as utility poles, or accessory communication towers,
                         but a height limitation for this infrastructure must
                         be specified in the specific plan application.
                         Principal facade requirements apply to all building
                         facades that face adjacent existing or planned public
                         roads or that face property that is planned or zoned
                         for any use other than industrial uses.
                         Principal facades must incorporate differentiated
                         surfaces at horizontal linear intervals that may vary
                         in frequency, including:
                         • Fenestration; and
                         • A change in one of the following design elements:
Principal facade         ° Building material;
                         ° Pattern;
                         ° Texture;
                         ° Color; or
                         ° Accent materials.
                         Principal facades must include building step-backs or
                         recesses, which shall be a minimum of two feet in
                         depth.
                         When a building has more than one principal facade,
                         the principal facades must be consistent in terms of
                         design, materials, details, and treatment.
                         Each principal facade must include fenestration
                         comprising at least 20% of the total surface coverage
Fenestration             area of the principal facade.
                         The fenestration must be compatible with the other
                         design, materials, details, and treatment used on the
                         same principal facade.
                         A data center building must include a main entrance
                         feature that is differentiated from the remainder of
Main building entryways  the building facade by a change in building material,
                         pattern, texture, color, or accent material. The
                         entrance feature must also either project or recess
                         from the adjoining building plane.
                         Primary building facades shall use a neutral color
                         palette and avoid high-contrast colors. [https://
                         export.amlegal.com/media/
                         8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/IMAGES/0-0-
                         0-2302.jpg]
                         Accent colors shall be selected to complement the
                         dominant building color, and any color change shall
                         occur where changes in the building plane or recesses
                         are provided. [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                         8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/IMAGES/0-0-
                         0-2302.jpg]
                         Colors shall not act as advertisements or billboards.
                         [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                         8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/IMAGES/0-0-
                         0-2302.jpg]
                         Building exteriors shall use materials with texture
                         and character. [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Exterior colors and      8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/IMAGES/0-0-
materials                0-2302.jpg]
                         Changes in materials shall be reflected in massing or
                         offsets. The number of disparate materials shall be
                         limited to a maximum of three primary materials to
                         avoid a busy appearance. [https://export.amlegal.com/
                         media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
                         IMAGES/0-0-0-2302.jpg]
                         Design elements shall be used to enhance the overall
                         expression of data center buildings, with an emphasis
                         on the pedestrian experience, particularly at
                         entryways. All buildings shall include at least five
                         of the following architectural features:
                         •   Overhang
                         •   Canopy or portico
                         •   Recesses or projections
                         •   Arcade
                         •   Raised corniced parapets over the entrance
                         •   Tower elements
                         •   Variation in the roof line
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2302.jpg] Requirement applies to data centers operated as
accessory uses
 
Ordinance 2024.029 added section
17-6-13.
17-6-14 Accessory dwelling units
A.   Purpose. This section is adopted to comply with state law requiring
municipalities with a population over 75,000 to allow accessory dwelling units
on a lot or parcel with zoning that allows a single-family dwelling.
   1.   These regulations are in addition to the town's residential building
codes, fire codes, public health and safety regulations, and other regulations
of general applicability.
   2.   To the extent any provision in this section conflicts with state law,
state law shall control.
B.   Definitions. The following definitions apply to this section:
   1.   "Accessory dwelling unit" means a self-contained living unit that is on
the same lot or parcel as a single-family dwelling of greater square footage
than the accessory dwelling unit, that includes its own sleeping and sanitation
facilities, and that may include its own kitchen facilities.
   2.   "Gross floor area" means the interior habitable area of a single-family
dwelling or an accessory dwelling unit.
   3.   "Permitted use" means approved without requiring a public hearing,
variance, conditional use permit, special permit, or special exception, other
than a determination that a site plan conforms with applicable zoning
regulations.
   4.   "Restricted-affordable dwelling unit" means a dwelling unit that,
either through a deed restriction or a development agreement with the town,
shall be rented to households earning up to 80% of area median income.
   5.   "Short-term rental" means rental use in which the tenant holds a lease
of less than ninety days or that meets the definition of "vacation rental" or
"short-term-rental" in A.R.S. § 9-500.39.
C.   Accessory dwelling unit as a permitted use. If the town determines that
adequate public utility services are available and the application complies
with this title and the town's building codes, fire codes, and public health
and safety regulations, the following are permitted uses on any single-family
lot or parcel that contains a primary dwelling:
   1.   One attached accessory dwelling unit and one detached accessory
dwelling unit.
   2.   One additional detached accessory dwelling unit on a lot or parcel that
is one acre or more in size if at least one accessory dwelling unit on the lot
or parcel is a restricted-affordable dwelling unit.
D.   Development standards and requirements.
   1.   Size. An accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed the lesser of 75% of
the gross floor area of the existing single-family dwelling on the same parcel
or 1,000 square feet.
   2.   Setbacks. An accessory dwelling unit shall meet the setbacks for
accessory buildings in the applicable zoning district, except that the rear and
side setbacks for an accessory dwelling unit shall be a minimum of five feet.
   3.   Heights. An accessory dwelling unit shall meet the height limit for a
single-family dwelling within the applicable zoning district.
   4.   Lot coverage. Lots with one or more accessory dwelling units must meet
the lot coverage requirements of the applicable zoning district.
   5.   Short-term rental. An accessory dwelling unit may be used for short-
term rental only if and while the owner resides on the property that contains
the accessory dwelling unit.
   6.   Easements. An accessory dwelling unit may not be built on a current or
planned public utility easement unless the property owner receives written
consent from any utility that is currently using the public utility easement or
that may use the public utility easement in the future.
E.   Exceptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to any single-
family lot or parcel located on any of the following:
   1.   Tribal land.
   2.   Land in the vicinity of a military airport or ancillary military
facility as defined in A.R.S. § 28-8461.
   3.   Land in the vicinity of a federal aviation administration commercially
licensed airport.
   4.   Land in the vicinity of a general aviation airport.
   5.   Land in the vicinity of a public airport as defined in A.R.S. § 28-
8486.
F.   Appeals. If an application for a proposed accessory dwelling unit is
denied or deemed not to be a permitted use, the applicant may appeal the town's
decision to the board of adjustment.
G.   Effective date. This section becomes effective when the town's population
reaches 75,000 persons as determined by the United States census bureau or by
official acknowledgment by the town council or any other governmental body with
jurisdiction to determine the town's population.
Ordinance 2024.028 added section
17-6-14.
17-6-15 Middle housing
A.   Purpose. This section is adopted to comply with state law requiring
municipalities with a population over 75,000 to allow middle housing in certain
specified circumstances.
   1.   These regulations are in addition to the town’s residential building
codes, fire codes, public health and safety regulations, and other regulations
of general applicability.
   2.   To the extent any provision in this section conflicts with state law,
state law shall control.
B.   Definitions. For purposes of this section only, the following definitions
apply:
   1.   Building code: The construction code adopted by the town. Includes a
model building code, commercial code, plumbing and mechanical code, electric
code, energy conservation code, fire code, property maintenance code,
neighborhood preservation code, anti- blight code or other similar code.
   2.   Central business district: An area or series of areas designed by the
town that are primarily nonindustrial and that attract community activity,
including the entire geographic area that the town has officially designated as
its downtown or equivalent on the effective date of this section. The town’s
central business district for purposes of this section is the downtown Marana
overlay district (DO), as described in section
17-4-12 and depicted in Marana ordinance no. 2018.010.
   3.   Duplex: Two dwelling units on the same parcel or lot in attached,
detached, or semi-detached arrangements that are designed for residential
occupancy by not more than two households living independently from each other.
   4.   Floor area ratio: The ratio of allowed square footage in a middle
housing project to the square footage of the parcel on which it is built.
   5.   Fourplex: Four dwelling units on the same parcel or lot in attached,
detached, or semi-detached arrangements that are designed for residential
occupancy by not more than four households living independently from each
other.
   6.   Household:
      a.   A single person living or residing in a dwelling or place of
residence; or
      b.   Two or more persons living together or residing in the same dwelling
or place of residence.
   7.   Middle housing: Buildings that are compatible in scale, form and
character with single-family houses that contain two or more attached,
detached, stacked or clustered homes. Includes duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes,
and townhouses.
   8.   Permitted use: The ability for a development to be approved without
requiring a public hearing, variance, conditional use permit, special permit or
special exception, other than a discretionary zoning action to determination
that a site plan conforms with applicable zoning regulations.
   9.   Townhomes or townhouses: Dwelling units that are constructed in a row
of two or more attached units in which each dwelling unit shares at least one
common wall with an adjacent unit and that are accessed by separate outdoor
entrances.
   10.   Triplex: Three dwelling units on the same parcel or lot in attached,
detached or semi-detached arrangements that are designed for residential
occupancy by not more than three households living independently from each
other.
C.   Middle housing as a permitted use. Subject to the requirements of this
section, a duplex, triplex, fourplex, or townhome is allowed as a permitted use
on:
   1.   A lot zoned for single-family residential use within one mile of the
town’s central business district; or
   2.   At least 20% of a new development of more than ten contiguous acres.
D.   Application. A property owner seeking to develop an eligible middle
housing project shall submit an application that includes the following:
   1.   Evidence satisfactory to the planning manager that the proposed duplex,
triplex, fourplex, or townhome is eligible as a permitted use in accordance
with this section.
   2.   A site plan in conformance with section
17-3-5.
   3.   Evidence of sufficient urban services for the entire proposed
development.
   4.   Evidence of adequate existing public sewer and water service for the
entire proposed development.
   5.   Compliance with all applicable codes, including building code,
commercial code, plumbing and mechanical code, electric code, energy
conservation code, fire code, property maintenance code, neighborhood
preservation code, anti-blight code or other similar code.
E.   Utilities. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, a utility
provider impacted by an application under this section shall have the
opportunity to review and approve the site plan for the development.
F.   Development standards and requirements. Middle housing shall comply with
the applicable development standards and requirements of the zone district
where the middle housing is located.
G.   Exceptions. The following areas are not eligible to construct a duplex,
triplex, fourplex, or townhome as a permitted pursuant to this section:
   1.   Areas that are not incorporated.
   2.   Areas that lack sufficient urban services, as determined by the
planning manager.
   3.   Areas that are not served by water and sewer services.
   4.   Areas that are not zoned for residential use.
   5.   Areas that are not incorporated and are zoned under an interim zoning
designation that maintains the area’s potential for planned urban development.
   6.   Areas covered under A.R.S., title 48, chapter 6, article 4 (Alternative
Form of Government for Domestic Water Improvement Districts and Domestic
Wastewater Improvement Districts).
   7.   Land within the town in the vicinity of a public airport as defined in
A.R.S. § 28-8486 or to the extent this section would interfere with the public
airport’s ability to comply with the laws, regulations and requirements of the
United States related to applying for, receiving or spending federal monies.
   8.   Land within the town in the vicinity of a military airport as defined
in A.R.S. § 28-8461.
H.   Appeals. If an application for proposed middle housing is denied or deemed
not to be a permitted use, the applicant may appeal the town’s decision to the
board of adjustment.
Ordinance 2025.023 added section 17-6-15
CHAPTER 17-7.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS
Chapter 17-7 was inserted into the town code by Ordinance 2021.010
Sections:
17-7-1   Purpose
17-7-2   Applicability
17-7-3   Neighborhood design plan submittal
17-7-4   Neighborhood design plan basic standards
17-7-5   Residential design plan submittal
17-7-6   Residential design plan basic standards
17-7-7   Alternative residential design plan
17-7-8   Setback, lot coverage, and building height modifications
17-7-1 Purpose
The purpose of the neighborhood and residential design standards is to foster
the establishment of neighborhoods that avoid the appearance of "production,"
leading to greater diversity and quality of residential development within the
town by:
A.   Fostering variety of architectural style, house and lot size within and
among residential neighborhoods.
B.   Creating pedestrian friendly neighborhood streets through reduced pavement
and increased landscaping.
C.   Providing visual relief and shade through landscaping along streets,
common entryways, common areas, and on individual lots.
D.   Integrating roads, paths, and trails within neighborhoods and through
adjacent neighborhoods.
E.   Incorporating parks and open space into the fabric of the neighborhood.
17-7-2 Applicability
A.   Neighborhood design standards shall apply to any subdivision containing
one or more lots 16,000 square feet or smaller, unless the subdivision is part
of a specific plan governed by neighborhood design regulations tailored to that
plan.
B.   Residential design standards shall apply to all detached dwellings in
subdivisions containing one or more lots 16,000 square feet or smaller, unless
the residential lot is within a specific plan governed by residential design
regulations tailored to that plan.
C.   Where an application for a subdivision contains multiple blocks, the
standards of this chapter shall apply to each block as if it were a single
subdivision.
D.   The standards of this Ordinance 2021.010 supplement the standards of
chapter 17-5 (subdivisions). Where there is a conflict between this ordinance
and either of these titles, the standards of this ordinance shall apply.
17-7-3 Neighborhood design plan submittal
A.   Time of submittal. A property owner shall submit a neighborhood design
plan in accordance with these regulations as part of the preliminary plat
submittal. Where a preliminary plat consists of one or more parcels or a block
plat to be further subdivided into lots, the adopted neighborhood design plan
shall apply to all subsequent subdivisions and resubdivisions, unless a new
neighborhood design plan has been approved.
B.   Submittal process. The applicant shall provide information, documents, or
other relevant material that the planning manager believes is reasonable and
necessary to evaluate, analyze, and understand the application.
17-7-4 Neighborhood design plan basic standards
A.   Basic standards. The neighborhood design plan shall be at a minimum
comprised of the following basic standards as described below, or as described
in section
17-7-7, to accomplish the purpose of this chapter.
B.   Site planning standards.
   1.   Streetscape standards.
      a.   All subdivision streets shall depict street layout, curbs,
sidewalks, and landscaping and their relationship to building frontages.
      b.   Where a submittal includes only parcels or blocks, but not
individual lots, the neighborhood design plan shall depict all collectors
within the subdivision and points of access to adjacent streets.
   2.   Common area and recreation area standards.
      a.   Public neighborhood parks and open spaces shall comply with section
17-5-3(B)(9) (recreational area) and the town of Marana subdivision
recreational area design manual.
      b.   All subdivisions shall contribute to the town's regional park and
trail system, either through land donation and/or an impact fee.
      c.   Drainage ways and detention/retention areas shall be designed to
create a natural appearance, with meandering channels rather than linear and
trapezoidal channels.
      d.   Land shall be graded to balance cut-and-fill areas and to distribute
grade changes throughout the subdivision, to avoid where practicable grade
differences and cut slopes greater than 4:1 between adjacent lots and between
lots and adjacent rights of way.
   3.   Street trees.
      a.   A local street plan shall depict sidewalks separated from the curb
by a landscaped curbway not less than six feet wide.
      b.   At least one street tree shall be planted every 50 feet along the
curbway.
      c.   The homeowners' association shall maintain all landscaping in the
right-of-way as provided for in a license agreement from the town.
      d.   The town may consider an alternative street tree plan where the
applicant can show the plan integrates with an acceptable precedent of
landscaping set by existing development or site conditions.
      e.   All trees and plants shall meet Arizona nursery association minimum
guidelines as to caliper and height and the town's official regulatory plant
list.
C.   Entry and edge standards.
   1.   Entry landscaping.
      a.   The main entrance to the subdivision shall be landscaped to visually
enhance the character of the neighborhood and complement the community.
      b.   Secondary entry landscaping treatments shall be used at access
locations other than the main entrance to the subdivision.
   2.   Edge landscaping. Where a subdivision abuts an existing collector or
arterial, the applicant shall provide a landscape plan for the abutting right-
of-way in consultation with the planning manager and town engineer.
   3.   Irrigation. All plants shall be on an underground drip irrigation
system.
   4.   Perimeter walls. Walls visible from the public right-of-way and
adjacent existing residential development shall not be made of uncolored grey
block and shall incorporate one or more of the following:
      a.   One or more visually appealing design treatments, such as the use of
two or more decorative materials like stucco, tile, stone, wrought iron, or
brick.
      b.   A visually interesting design on the wall surface.
      c.   Varied wall alignments, such as a jog, curve, notch, or setback.
      d.   Trees and shrubbery in voids created by wall variations.
   5.   View fencing. View fencing shall not be used abutting a public street.
17-7-5 Residential design plan submittal
A.   Plan required. An applicant shall submit a residential design plan prior
to applying for a building permit.
B.   Submittal process. The applicant shall submit all documents, exhibits,
including building elevations, as required by the town. The applicant shall
provide additional information or other relevant material that the planning
manager believes is reasonable and necessary to evaluate, analyze, and
understand the application.
C.   Review process. The planning manager or designee shall review residential
design plans according to the standards of subsections
17-7-6 or
17-7-7.
17-7-6 Residential design plan basic standards
A.   Architectural standards.
   1.   Multi-story development.
      a.   Not more than 50% of the lots in a subdivision may contain multi-
story dwellings.
      b.   All multi-story houses must display four-sided architecture, except
where a wall is on a lot line.
   2.   Garage layout. Not more than 50% of the lots in a subdivision shall
have garages flush with or that project in front of the livable space of the
dwelling. Where a front porch or courtyard extends five feet or more in front
of a garage the garage shall not be considered to be flush or projecting.
   3.   Color. Color schemes other than a dwelling's trim color shall not
exceed a light reflectivity value of 60%. The residential design plan shall
include a color palette that ensures variety along the streetscape and within
the neighborhood. The plan shall describe how the color palette will be
implemented.
   4.   Front dwelling facade. The residential design plan shall incorporate a
range of details and massing conditions for each dwelling that, when placed
together, will provide an attractive, unique street scene. Each front dwelling
facade on any residential street shall include at least three of the following
design features, or shall present an alternative that achieves the intent of
these regulations:
      a.   Varied roof line, wherein elements of the dwelling display different
heights, or where roof design changes more than two planes or directions.
      b.   Windows recessed at least two inches from the building wall, or
casement windows.
      c.   Bay window or other similar projection.
      d.   A front facade that displays a contrasting building material,
including, but not limited to, stone, brick, or tile.
      e.   Front porches or courtyards 50 square feet or larger that project
five feet or more from the dwelling facade.
      f.   Garages entered from a side street crossing a side lot line of the
lot or a side entry garage located perpendicular to the front facade of the
dwelling. The wall of the garage facing a street shall include at least one
window.
      g.   Front entry garages recessed seven feet or more from the livable
area of the dwelling.
      h.   Rear entry garages from an alley or parking court, where there is an
approved alternative neighborhood design plan.
   5.   Corner lots, lots adjacent to a park, or lots separated by an easement
or common area. Where a house is located on a corner lot, is adjacent to a
park, or where two lots are separated by an easement or common area, the house
on such lots shall display four-sided architecture except where a wall is on a
lot line.
B.   Individual lot landscaping.
   1.   An individual lot shall contain a minimum of one tree planted in the
front yard.
   2.   Where drainage permits, landscaping shall be required within abutting
side yards between two adjacent dwellings.
   3.   All trees and plants shall meet Arizona nursery association minimum
guidelines for caliper and size and shall conform to the town's official
regulatory plant list.
   4.   All screen walls enclosing individual side and rear lots shall be
uniform throughout the subdivision and shall be designed to incorporate color
or contrasting materials or design elements. No uncolored grey block shall be
allowed. View fencing may be required in certain locations where houses back
onto natural features or other amenities.
   5.   Air conditioners, pool equipment, or other mechanical equipment shall
be fully screened from view by a screen wall.
C.   Lots adjacent to major roads. Any house located adjacent to a major road
shall display four-sided architecture; no adjacent houses may display the same
rear elevation.
D.   Multi-story dwellings. Multi-story dwellings shall be prohibited on those
lots along the edge of a subdivision where adjoining existing lots have one-
story dwellings. This provision shall not apply to subdivisions located
adjoining each other within a master planned community approved under a common
rezoning.
E.   Building materials. Materials may include stucco, brick, adobe, rock,
flagstone, wood, metal, and other similar distinct materials. Where metal is
used, including window shades, it shall be treated so that its light reflective
value does not exceed 50%.
F.   Architectural variety.
   1.   For subdivisions with 30 lots or more, the residential design plan
shall include at least four different base models with three different front
elevations per model; the number of elevations per model may be reduced to two
if the residential design plan provides five or more models.
   2.   For subdivisions with fewer than 30 lots, the residential design plan
shall include at least two different base models with two elevations per model.
   3.   For subdivisions with 30 lots or more no front elevation may be
repeated more than one house in every five along a single side of a street.
   4.   For subdivisions with fewer than 30 lots no two houses shall display
the same elevation.
   5.   The base color of a house may be repeated no more than one house in
every three along a single side of a street.
17-7-7 Alternative residential design plan
A.   Alternative residential plan. An alternative residential design plan is
required when an alternative neighborhood design plan requests multi-story
dwellings for more than 50% but no more than 60% of the subdivision.
B.   Architectural standards.
   1.   Color. Color schemes other than a dwelling's trim color shall not
exceed a light reflectivity value of 60%.
   2.   Front dwelling facade. The front dwelling facade shall include:
      a.   Varied roof line, wherein elements of the dwelling display different
heights, or where roof design changes more than two planes or directions; or
where adjacent houses display different heights or different roof styles.
      b.   Windows recessed at least two inches from the building wall, or
casement windows, or bay windows or other similar projection as a structural
element.
   3.   Front porches. At least 50% of all dwellings in a subdivision shall
include front porches or courtyards 50 square feet or larger that project five
feet or more from the dwelling facade.
   4.   Front entry garages.
      a.   Where front entry garages are used, not more than 25% of those
garages may be flush with or project in front of the livable space of the
dwelling. Where a front porch or courtyard extends five feet or more in front
of a garage the garage shall not be considered to be flush or projecting.
      b.   Garages that are not flush with or do not project in front of the
livable space of the dwelling shall be set back at least seven feet from the
livable space of the dwelling.
   5.   Side entry garages. Garages entered from a side street crossing a side
lot line of the lot or a side entry garage located perpendicular to the front
facade of the dwelling. The wall of the garage facing a street shall include a
window or other architectural detail.
   6.   Rear entry garages. Rear entry garages where access is taken from an
alley or parking court may be used, in accordance with an approved alternative
neighborhood design plan.
   7.   Corner lots. Where a house is located on a corner lot it shall display
four-sided architecture except where a wall is on a lot line.
C.   Individual lot landscaping.
   1.   An individual lot shall contain a minimum of one tree planted in the
front yard.
   2.   Where drainage permits, landscaping shall be required within abutting
side yards between two adjacent dwellings.
   3.   All trees and plants shall meet Arizona nursery association minimum
guidelines for caliper and size and shall conform to the town's official
regulatory plant list.
   4.   All screen walls enclosing individual side and rear lots shall be
uniform throughout the subdivision and shall be designed to incorporate color,
or contrasting materials or design elements. No uncolored grey block shall be
allowed. View fencing may be required in certain locations.
   5.   Air conditioners, pool equipment, or other mechanical equipment shall
be fully screened from view by a screen wall.
D.   Lots adjacent to major roads. Any house located adjacent to a major road
shall display four-sided architecture except where a wall is on a lot line.
E.   Building materials. Materials may include stucco, brick, adobe, rock,
flagstone, wood, metal, and other similar distinct materials. Where metal is
used, including window shades, it shall be treated so that its light reflective
value does not exceed 50%.
F.   Architectural variety.
   1.   For subdivisions with 30 lots or more, the residential design plan
shall include at least four different base models with three different front
elevations per model; the number of elevations per model may be reduced to two
if the residential design plan provides five or more models.
   2.   For subdivisions with fewer than 30 lots, the residential design plan
shall include at least two different base models with two elevations per model.
   3.   For subdivisions with 30 lots or more no front elevation may be
repeated more than one house in every five along a single side of a street.
   4.   For subdivisions with fewer than 30 lots no two houses shall display
the same elevation.
   5.   The base color of a house may be repeated no more than one house in
every three along a single side of a street.
17-7-8 Setback, lot coverage, and building height modifications
A.   The planning manager may approve the modifications set forth in this
section in conjunction with a basic residential design plan to achieve the
purpose of this chapter.
B.   Setbacks. Setbacks shall adhere to the requirements of
chapter 17-4 (zoning), except for the following:
   1.   Front setback.
      a.   Front entry garages. Where front entry garages are recessed ten feet
or more from the livable portion of the dwelling, front setbacks may be reduced
to ten feet.
      b.   Side entry garages. Where a side entry garage is located
perpendicular to the front facade of the dwelling, the front setback may be
reduced to five feet. However, the driveway must provide a 20-foot space to
accommodate a parked vehicle without blocking the sidewalk or a driveway less
than eight feet, so that a vehicle must be parked in the garage to avoid
blocking the sidewalk. The garage wall facing the street must have at least one
window or other architectural detail.
      c.   Front porches or courtyards. Front setbacks may be reduced to five
feet. However, the driveway must provide a 20-foot space to accommodate a
parked vehicle without blocking the sidewalk or a driveway less than eight
feet, so that a vehicle must be parked in the garage to avoid blocking the
sidewalk.
   2.   Rear setback.
      a.   Front entry garages. Where front entry garages are recessed ten feet
or more from the livable portion of the dwelling, the rear setback may be
reduced to five feet.
      b.   Rear entry garages. Where there are rear entry garages, the dwelling
area rear setback may be reduced to five feet. Parked cars shall not block
alley access.
C.   Lot coverage. Where a garage is recessed ten feet or more from the livable
portion of the dwelling, or where there is a rear entry garages, lot coverage
may be increased to 55% of the lot.
D.   Height. Building height may be increased to 30 feet to meet the design
objectives of a residential design plan.
CHAPTER 17-8.
MULTI-FAMILY, COMMERCIAL, AND INDUSTRIAL DESIGN STANDARDS
Chapter 17-8 was inserted into the town code by Ordinance 2021.010
Sections:
17-8-1   Definitions; purpose; intent; applicability
17-8-2   Site layout and building orientation
17-8-3   Circulation and access
17-8-4   Pedestrian amenities for commercial centers
17-8-5   Off-street loading
17-8-6   Storage
17-8-7   Mechanical equipment and ductwork
17-8-8   Cart storage areas for commercial centers
17-8-9   Architectural character
17-8-10   Parking structures
17-8-11   Commercial and light industrial building massing
17-8-12   Building transparency in commercial centers
17-8-13   Exterior building materials and colors
17-8-14   Perimeter landscaping
17-8-15   Entryways
17-8-16   Fencing and walls
17-8-1 Definitions; purpose; intent; applicability
A.   The following definitions shall be used in this chapter, unless a
different meaning is clearly indicated by the context:
   1.   Building form: The shape and structure of a building as distinguished
from its substance or material.
   2.   In-line commercial center: Multiple commercial uses organized in an in-
line fashion. Individual stores within the center are attached, sharing one or
more side walls but have separate entrances. In-line commercial centers
typically share a single parking area that is located at the front or front and
side of the center.
B.   Purpose. These design and development standards promote high-quality,
attractive development compatible with the town's general plan principles and
policies.
C.   Intent. These standards are intended to:
   1.   Encourage consistency in the quality of multi-family, commercial, and
industrial development within the town;
   2.   Assure the fair and consistent application of the town's design
objectives for multi-family, commercial, and industrial projects; and
   3.   Ensure that multi-family, commercial and industrial development is
functional and safe.
D.   Applicability.
   1.   Except where explicitly stated otherwise, these standards apply to all
new multi-family, commercial, and industrial development in MR-1, MR-2, RR, NC,
VC, LI, HI, and BU medium and high intensity zones.
   2.   These standards serve as the baseline for the development of any multi-
family, commercial, and industrial uses incorporated into a newly established
specific plan.
   3.   These standards apply to an addition, major renovation, or retrofit of
an existing development. Major renovation does not include routine maintenance
and repair of a structure or other feature within the development, such as roof
replacement or general repairs to a parking area or other non-structural site
feature.
17-8-2 Site layout and building orientation
A.   Intent. This section is intended to accomplish the following goals in
multi-family, commercial, and industrial developments.
   1.   To ensure that the organization of buildings helps to define primary
street frontages and development entrances; to establish a more compact,
pedestrian-friendly pattern of development.
   2.   To encourage a less engineered, more passive approach to the treatment
of washes, drainage basins, and other natural features.
B.   Standards.
   1.   General.
      a.   Orient the primary building entrance facing the primary public
street, to the extent feasible considering topographical or other site
features.
      b.   Design the layout of large developments to break the site into a
series of smaller "blocks" defined by pad site buildings, pedestrian walkways,
streets or other vehicular circulation routes.
   2.   Primary building entrance. Except in the HI zone, the primary building
entrance must be visually prominent and provide shade for pedestrians, through
the use of two or more of the following features:
      a.   A canopy, portico, archway, arcade, or similar overhang that
provides architectural interest and pedestrian protection;
      b.   A raised corniced parapet over the door;
      c.   An outdoor pedestrian feature such as a seat wall with landscaping;
      d.   Architectural detailing such as tile work and moldings integrated
into the building structure; and
      e.   A peaked roof form.
      f.   Other elements as determined by the planning manager.
   3.   Multi-story buildings. Multi-story buildings must incorporate changes
in material, architectural accents, or other features.
   4.   Building relationships and orientation. Buildings within multi-building
developments must be arranged and grouped so their primary orientation does one
or more of the following:
      a.   Frames the corner of an adjacent street intersection or entry point
to the development;
      b.   Frames and encloses a "main street" pedestrian and/or vehicle access
corridor within the development site;
      c.   Frames and encloses parking areas, public spaces, or other site
amenities on at least two sides; or
      d.   Frames and encloses outdoor dining or gathering spaces for
pedestrians between buildings.
   5.   Washes and natural features. Natural topography should be integrated
into the site design to the extent feasible.
      a.   Washes with significant quality vegetation or other significant
natural features must be incorporated into the overall design and layout of a
development as visual and functional amenities, rather than being piped and
placed underground.
      b.   Finished slopes should taper or terrace to match existing grades and
the grades on adjacent streets and properties.
      c.   Grade changes and berming should be used as a design element and to
screen undesirable views.
      d.   Retaining walls may not exceed six feet in height.
   6.   Adjacency to AG, RA, ER, NR, and GR. When commercial or industrial
development is adjacent to AG, RA, ER, NR, and GR zones or groups, side and
rear setbacks must equal or exceed the height of the primary building on the
site.
17-8-3 Circulation and access
A.   Intent. This section is intended to accomplish the following goals in
multi-family, commercial, and industrial developments.
   1.   Provide safe, efficient, and convenient vehicular and pedestrian access
and circulation patterns within and between developments.
   2.   Preserve the efficiency of arterials as additional development occurs.
   3.   Ensure that service areas (delivery, trash, and loading facilities) are
located and sized to function without impeding regular vehicular and pedestrian
circulation and access routes.
B.   Vehicular circulation and access.
   1.   Uses shall not access local streets unless a local street provides the
only legal access to the lot.
   2.   The number and location of access driveways must be approved by the
town engineer.
   3.   Vehicular connections shall be provided from a development site to
abutting roadways or circulation routes on adjacent properties to allow
convenient access to multiple businesses and to help reduce the overall number
of access points on arterials.
   4.   Circulation patterns for drive-thru facilities shall be designed to
accommodate the stacking of vehicles without interfering with the movement of
vehicles or pedestrians on primary circulator routes.
   5.   To the maximum extent practicable, drive aisles shall utilize a two-way
traffic circulation pattern unless buildings are configured in a "main street"
pattern that can efficiently accommodate on-street parking, a one-way traffic
flow, or other alternative circulation pattern
   6.   The preferred parking design shall be 90-degree parking stalls, with
two way traffic.
C.   Refuse containment:
   1.   All outdoor trash and refuse storage areas must be enclosed from view
on all sides by opaque fencing and solid gates made of materials and colors
consistent with on-site building materials and design.
   2.   Trash may be contained within an enclosable metal bin if screened from
public view.
D.   Pedestrian circulation and access.
   1.   All sidewalks and pedestrian walkways must be a minimum of five feet in
width. A minimum of eight feet is required where wheel stops are not used and
parked vehicles overhang sidewalks.
   2.   A continuous network of on-site pedestrian walkways must be provided to
allow for direct access and connections to and between the following:
      a.   The primary entrance or entrances to each commercial building on the
site, including pad site buildings;
      b.   Any sidewalks or walkways on adjacent properties that extend to the
boundaries shared with the commercial development;
      c.   Public sidewalk along the perimeter streets;
      d.   Adjacent land uses and developments; and
      e.   Any adjacent public park, greenway, or other public or civic use.
   3.   On-site pedestrian walkways may not end without a logical current or
future connection.
   4.   At each point that a pedestrian walkway crosses a parking lot, street,
or driveway, the walkway must be clearly visible to pedestrians and motorists
through the use of two or more of the following methods:
      a.   A change in paving material or paving color;
      b.   A change in paving height;
      c.   Decorative bollards;
      d.   A painted crosswalk;
      e.   Signage; or
      f.   A raised median walkway buffered by landscaping.
17-8-4 Pedestrian amenities for commercial centers
A.   Intent. This section is intended to accomplish the following goals in
commercial centers.
   1.   To provide opportunities for outdoor patio dining, plazas, and other
outdoor gathering spaces that encourage pedestrian activity.
   2.   To provide opportunities for pedestrians to seek refuge from the harsh
desert elements.
   3.   To provide convenient "comfort stations."
B.   Design standards for commercial centers.
   1.   Outdoor gathering spaces.
      a.   The incorporation of plazas, pocket parks, and patio dining spaces
is strongly encouraged.
      b.   Outdoor gathering spaces must be integrated as part of the overall
design of a commercial center.
      c.   In-line commercial centers with a limited site area must incorporate
outdoor gathering spaces by expanding pedestrian walkways along the front or
side of the building.
      d.   Outdoor gathering spaces must incorporate a variety of pedestrian-
scaled features such as:
         i.   Tables and chairs;
         ii.   Benches;
         iii.   Seat walls and/or raised landscape planters;
         iv.   Shade trees;
         v.   Shade structures;
         vi.   Flower pots or hanging baskets; and
         vii.   Sculptures or other public art features.
   2.   Pedestrian refuge areas. Primary pedestrian circulation routes must be
anchored by pedestrian refuge areas where pedestrians are physically separated
from the flow of vehicular traffic and/or are protected from the desert
elements.
17-8-5 Off-street loading
A.   Stores must have a rear or side entrance that is accessible to a loading
area or a service driveway.
B.   Service driveways must be:
   1.   A minimum of 20 feet in width.
   2.   Separate from the driveways or circulation system used by the vehicles
of shoppers and/or fire lanes.
C.   The arrangement of truck loading and unloading facilities for each store
may not block or extend into any fire lane or any other private or public
driveway or street used for vehicular circulation.
D.   Loading and delivery zones must be clearly marked.
E.   Joint-use loading and delivery shopping spaces may be permitted as a part
of the approval of a complex.
Ordinance 2022.006 amended Section 17-8-5 A.
17-8-6 Storage
Open storage of equipment and materials is prohibited. Open storage of stock-
in-trade is permitted. For purposes of this section, “stock-in-trade” is
defined as the goods kept on hand by a business for the purposes of its trade.
Ordinance 2022.006 amended Section 17-8-6
17-8-7 Mechanical equipment and ductwork
A.   All roof mounted equipment and ductwork must be screened by an enclosure
consistent with the architecture of the building.
B.   Mechanical equipment, except utility equipment owned by the providers of
those utilities, may not be exposed on an exterior wall surface of a building,
and must be concealed or screened to the maximum extent practicable.
C.   Use of an incinerator is permitted only in industrial zones upon the
issuance of a conditional use permit (see section
17-3-2).
17-8-8 Cart storage areas for commercial centers
A.   Intent. This section is intended to accomplish the following goals in
commercial centers.
   1.   To ensure that cart storage areas minimize conflicts with primary drive
aisles, parking areas, and pedestrian walkways.
   2.   To ensure the appearance is consistent with the overall theme of the
development in terms of materials, color, and design character.
   3.   To distribute storage areas throughout the development.
B.   Long-term cart storage areas must be located behind a decorative screening
wall that is at least as high as the height of the carts.
C.   Corrals that provide short-term cart storage must be designed with durable
materials and design features that complement the architectural character of
the center.
17-8-9 Architectural character
A.   Intent. This section is intended to accomplish the following goals in
multi-family, commercial, and industrial developments.
   1.   To achieve a unified appearance through the use of compatible
materials, colors, and architectural character.
   2.   To ensure building materials are durable and have low maintenance
requirements.
B.   The architectural design must provide harmony in the character, materials,
texture, color, and scale used on the buildings.
C.   Buildings must include features such as, but not limited to:
   1.   Architectural shade devices;
   2.   Low-slung buildings with a strong, horizontal orientation;
   3.   Deeply recessed windows;
   4.   Covered porches or arcades;
   5.   Shed roof forms; and
   6.   The use of earthy materials, colors, and textures.
D.   Blank walls void of windows, architectural details or other variation are
prohibited.
E.   Pad site buildings in a commercial center must incorporate materials and
colors similar to those used on the primary building.
17-8-10 Parking structures
A.   Parking structures must be designed to incorporate a comparable level of
architectural detailing and quality of materials as found on primary buildings
on the site.
B.   Parking structures must be integrated with active uses.
17-8-11 Commercial and light industrial building massing
A.   Intent. This section is intended to accomplish the following goals in
commercial and light industrial developments.
   1.   To add character and visual interest to the large building forms
typical of commercial and industrial development.
   2.   To break up the visual mass of large-format uses.
   3.   To establish a more pedestrian-friendly scale at the street level and
at primary entrances.
B.   The perceived mass and scale of buildings must be reduced by incorporating
at least four of the following design elements consistent with the
development's architectural character:
   1.   Variations in roof form;
   2.   Variations in parapet heights;
   3.   Wall plane off-sets;
   4.   Distinct changes in texture and color of wall surfaces;
   5.   Ground level arcades;
   6.   Second floor galleries/balconies;
   7.   Protected or recessed entries;
   8.   Other elements as determined by the planning manager.
C.   Building walls that exceed 100 feet in length must incorporate a minimum
of four of the following elements:
   1.   Distinct change in color;
   2.   Distinct change in material or texture;
   3.   Change in plane of the building wall that incorporates offsets or
archways;
   4.   Windows offset from wall plain;
   5.   Awnings or pedestrian canopies;
   6.   Ground level arcades;
   7.   Other elements as determined by the planning manager.
D.   This section does not apply to industrial uses in the HI zone.
17-8-12 Building transparency in commercial centers.
A.   Pad site buildings in commercial centers must devote a minimum of 30% of
the length of the front facade to windows or transparent entrances.
B.   Commercial centers must devote a minimum of 25% of the length of each
tenant space to windows or transparent entrances.
C.   A retail store containing 100,000 square feet or more (gross floor area)
must devote a minimum of 10% of the length of the front facade to windows or
transparent entrances.
17-8-13 Exterior building materials and colors
A.   Intent.
   1.   To encourage the creative incorporation of a broad range of colors in
commercial and industrial development.
   2.   To achieve a unified appearance for multi-building or phased commercial
and industrial developments through the use of compatible materials and colors.
B.   Permitted materials include:
   1.   Brick;
   2.   Stone;
   3.   Integrally-colored, split face or ground face concrete masonry units;
   4.   Traditional cementitious stucco;
   5.   Exterior insulation and finish systems;
   6.   Standing seam metal roofs;
   7.   Concrete and clay tile roofs;
   8.   Clear and tinted glass;
   9.   Mosaic tile;
   10.   Wood (limited to architectural accents); and
   11.   Architectural metal.
   12.   Other materials of a comparable quality, durability, and character as
approved by the planning manager.
C.   Prohibited materials (except as accent material) include:
   1.   Untextured or unarticulated tilt-up concrete panels;
   2.   Prefabricated steel panels;
   3.   Corrugated metal or plastic;
   4.   Asphalt shingle roofs; and
   5.   Mirrored or otherwise highly reflective material.
   6.   Other materials of a similar nature as determined by the planning
manager.
D.   Exterior color and materials of all buildings and block walls facing
residential areas must be harmonious with the residential development. All
exterior walls must be either painted or surfaced with decorative materials.
E.   This section does not apply to industrial uses in the HI zone.
17-8-14 Perimeter landscaping
A.   Applicability. The requirements of this section supplement the
requirements found in section
17-11-7. Where conflicts arise between the requirement of this section and the
requirements of section
17-11-7, the requirements of this section shall take precedence.
B.   With a town right-of-way license and town-approved landscape design,
landscaping may be located in the public right-of-way.
C.   All buffers shall contain the following minimum plant materials for each
1,500 square feet or fraction thereof: Six 15-gallon trees, 15 one-gallon
shrubs and ten one-gallon ground cover plants
D.   Screen walls and landscaping shall not be located in an area that impedes
site visibility for vehicles entering or exiting the site.
17-8-15 Entryways
A.   Projects ten acres or larger in size shall incorporate prominent focal
points at major entrances to the center. Focal points shall be created through
the use of:
   1.   Gateway monuments;
   2.   Sculpture or other public art elements;
   3.   Intense concentrations of vertical landscape forms or seasonal color;
   4.   Distinctive landforms;
   5.   Monument signage; or
   6.   Other features as appropriate to define entrances as visual gateways to
the development.
B.   Projects 15 acres or larger in size shall incorporate a landscaped median
at major entrances to separate ingress and egress lanes and to enhance the
appearance of the project gateway.
17-8-16 Fencing and walls
A.   Intent. This section is intended to accomplish the following goals in
multi-family, commercial, and industrial developments.
   1.   To promote visually interesting and attractive streetscapes along the
town's arterials.
   2.   To encourage creativity in the design of fencing and walls.
   3.   To ensure that fencing and walls are consistent with the character of
the development they serve.
B.   Design standards.
   1.   Colors, materials, and forms used for fences and walls shall complement
the architectural character of the primary building or overall development.
   2.   Materials must be durable and easily maintained to resist graffiti.
   3.   The maximum length of continuous, unbroken fence or wall plane shall be
30 feet. Walls shall be articulated using a combination of the following to
break up the length of longer spans:
      a.   Decorative columns;
      b.   Diversity in texture and/or materials;
      c.   Offsets;
      d.   Landscape pockets;
      e.   Serpentine design; or
      f.   Similar features.
   4.   Screen walls located along a primary street frontage or that are
visible from interstate-10 shall provide a higher level of design detail for
visual interest.
   5.   The use of chain link fencing or exposed cinder block walls is not
permitted in areas visible from the street or surrounding residential
properties.
CHAPTER 17-9.
PARKING
Sections:
17-9-1   Purpose.
17-9-2   Parking requirements.
17-9-3   Access and circulation.
17-9-4   Bicycle parking.
17-9-1 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure new development and redevelopment have
flexibility in addressing parking demand, and to improve the visual appeal of
the town by regulating the placement, layout, and design of parking areas and
garages.
17-9-2 Parking requirements.
A.   General.
   1.   At least two off-street spaces within a fully enclosed garage shall be
provided for residential uses on lots of 16,000 square feet or less.
   2.   For all other uses, a parking justification analysis shall be provided.
      a.   The parking justification analysis shall include the following
minimum contents:
         i.   An analysis of the parking demand from the existing and proposed
onsite buildings or uses, including hours of operation and peak use time and
demand for each proposed building or use.
         ii.   The number and location of proposed onsite parking spaces
(including accessible parking spaces).
         iii.   The data source used to establish the number of proposed onsite
parking spaces.
         iv.   The existing and future anticipated available parking within and
in the vicinity of the proposed development.
         v.   If parking demand is proposed to be addressed offsite, reference
to or copies of any shared parking agreement or other evidence of a right to
park in that location.
         vi.   The location and distance from the site to existing residential
neighborhoods and an explanation of how or why the proposed buildings or uses
will not place a parking burden on residential streets.
         vii.   Discussion of whether the proposed development or uses will be
catering to or may likely attract bicyclists, and if so, the location and
number of bicycle racks.
         viii.   Off-street loading requirements and impacts on surrounding
uses and properties.
         ix.   Any other information deeded appropriate by the town engineer,
including without limitation a traffic study.
      b.   The parking justification analysis process:
         i.   Submission to the planning manager.
         ii.   Approval or rejection with explanation.
         iii.   Revision or appeal to board of adjustment.
      c.   Standards for parking justification analysis consideration
         i.   The planning manager may reject the parking justification
analysis if it fails to address any adverse impacts on surrounding properties
or the public.
         ii.   Parking demand shall be determined using standard modeling
practices.
         iii.   Available parking shall include any parking available within
660 feet of the proposed use.
         iv.   Where the proposed development or uses will be catering to or
may likely attract bicyclists:
            a)   Parking areas that exceed 20 spaces must provide at least one
bicycle parking space for each 20 vehicle parking spaces or fraction thereof.
            b)   Spaces are determined by the number of bicycles that the
manufacturer specifies that the bicycle rack will accommodate, subject to
section
17-9-4 B.
B.   Water harvesting. Parking areas that exceed or are planned to exceed 400
spaces must incorporate water harvesting, consisting of one or more of the
following elements, which can be credited against detention/retention
requirements of this title:
   1.   Bioretention areas—planted areas designed to filter, store, and
infiltrate stormwater by utilizing mulch, soil and plant root systems to
retain, degrade and absorb pollutants.
   2.   Pervious pavement systems—pavement comprised of a permeable surface
with an underlying aggregate base course, allowing stormwater to infiltrate
through the surface for direct recharge into the soil or collection into a
bioretention area.
   3.   Site grading and drainage designed and constructed to direct runoff to
bioretention and pervious pavement areas.
   4.   Curb-cut inlets and outlets that direct runoff into and out of
bioretention and pervious pavement areas.
C.   Accessible parking. Accessible parking must be provided for all
multifamily and non-residential uses as required by law.
D.   Location. The requirements of this paragraph apply in all zones except
downtown and blended use zones.
   1.   Required parking spaces for residential uses must be located on the
same lot as the residential use, or in a designated shared parking area located
on an abutting lot or on a lot directly across a neighborhood street or
collector.
   2.   Parking for residential uses on lots of 16,000 square feet or less is
prohibited on any portion of the front yard setback other than on a driveway.
   3.   No unenclosed residential parking area or space may be used for the
repair, dismantling, or servicing of vehicles or equipment or for the storage
of vehicles, equipment, materials, or supplies.
   4.   A commercial motor vehicle as defined in A.R.S. § 28-5201 may not be
parked or stored in an unenclosed residential parking area or space or
driveway.
E.   Design.
   1.   General. The following standards apply to proposed development of
parking areas that meet the size threshold listed below.
      a.   Each surface parking lot with parking spaces abutting a public
street requires screening along the street in the form of walls, evergreen
landscaping, or a combination of the two. Screening must be a minimum of 42
inches high, and must be located outside the site visibility triangle. Where
walls are provided, they must harmonize with building colors and materials.
      b.   Each surface parking lot containing more than 100 spaces must divide
the parking lot into separate areas each containing fewer than 100 spaces that
are separated by one or more of the following:
         i.   Landscaped swale.
         ii.   Landscaped pedestrian path not less than 10 feet wide.
         iii.   Primary or accessory building.
      c.   Each surface parking lot containing more than 400 spaces must
incorporate water harvesting (see paragraph B above)
   2.   Dimensions. Off street parking spaces are subject to
table 14 below, as measured along the curb for stall width and perpendicular to
the curb for stall depth. The length of a parking space may be reduced by up to
one and one-half feet for a vehicle overhang area. The parking space must have
a vertical clearance of at least seven feet.
 
Table 14. Parking lot dimensions
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-118.png]
 
      a.   All spaces must include striping to meet the minimum dimensions for
parking stalls.
      b.   No more than 30% of the required off-street parking spaces may be
for compact cars and must be marked as such. Compact car space requirements are
subject to
table 14 above.
Ordinance 2021.004 replaced “planning director” with “planning manager” in
paragraphs A.2.b.i and a.2.c.i
Ordinance 2021.010 amended paragraph D.1.
17-9-3 Access and circulation.
The following standards apply to driveways, access drives, and parking areas,
unless an exception or different standard is provided elsewhere in this title.
A.   All residential other than multi-family.
   1.   The maximum width for surfaced parking and driveways in the front yard
setback must not exceed 30 feet.
   2.   Access must be at least nine feet in width and paved in accordance to
town standards.
   3.   Two adjacent townhomes may share a driveway centered on the property or
parcel line with a maximum combined width of 30 feet.
   4.   In the downtown and blended use areas, tandem parking is permitted. A
tandem parking space may be counted toward off-street parking requirements if
both spaces are under the control of the same party.
   5.   No more than two access points are permitted from any one street.
B.   All other uses.
   1.   Public parking areas must be designed so vehicles do not have to back
out of the parking area onto a public street.
   2.   Driveways must be a minimum of ten feet wide for a single lane. A two-
lane driveway must be twenty feet in width.
   3.   Access points to public roadways, distances between driveways,
separations from intersections, and other similar traffic safety conditions
shall meet current town engineering requirements and be approved by the town
engineer.
   4.   Surfacing and drainage:
      a.   Driveways, parking lots, and display areas for vehicle parking must
be surfaced to current town engineering requirements and be approved by the
town engineer.
      b.   Every parking lot is subject to approval of a site plan review
process.
17-9-4 Bicycle parking.
A.   Bicycle parking installation. Bicycle racks should be:
   1.   Located in highly visible, well-lit areas,
   2.   Placed on and accessible by hard and stable surfaces,
   3.   Securely and permanently anchored to the ground, and
   4.   Installed in such a manner that the rack’s parking capacity can be
fully utilized.
B.   Bicycle parking design. Each bicycle rack shall be constructed of durable
material and capable of accommodating more than one bicycle.
C.   Bicycle racks must not be located within five feet of hydrants, loading
zones and bus stop markers.
D.   Bicycle racks installed perpendicular to walkways must allow for a minimum
clearance of six feet for pedestrian paths.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-120.png]
Ordinance 2021.010 amended paragraphs A. B. and C. by removing certain
specifications for bicycle racks
CHAPTER 17-10.
SIGNS
Chapter 17-10 was inserted into the town code by Ordinance 2019.004.
Sections:
I. Administration and general
17-10-1   Purpose
17-10-2   General
17-10-3   Definitions and sign types
17-10-4   Prohibited signs
17-10-5   Exempt signs
17-10-6   Permits
17-10-7   Sign design and construction
17-10-8   Sign measurement
17-10-9   Sign illumination
17-10-10   Sign maintenance
17-10-11   Areas with special sign regulations
17-10-12   Planned sign programs
17-10-13   Legal nonconforming signs
17-10-14   Abandoned signs
17-10-15   Classification; enforcement; removal
II. Regulations by sign type
17-10-16   Awning signs
17-10-17   Directory signs
17-10-18   Drive-through signs
17-10-19   Electronic message displays
17-10-20   Flags and flag poles
17-10-21   Freestanding interstate signs
17-10-22   Freestanding monument signs
17-10-23   Shingle signs
17-10-24   Sign walkers
17-10-25   Signs in residential areas
17-10-26   Subdivision entry signs
17-10-27   Vehicle signs
17-10-28   Wall signs
17-10-29   Window signs
III. Regulations for temporary signs
17-10-30   Temporary signs—general requirements
17-10-31   Banners
17-10-32   Development activity signs
17-10-33   Inflatable and air activated signs
17-10-34   Portable directional signs
17-10-35   Portable signs
17-10-36   Quill signs
17-10-37   Residential subdivision sign program
17-10-38   Roadway construction business identification banners
I. Administration and general
17-10-1 Purpose
This chapter establishes reasonable regulations for the design, placement,
construction, and maintenance of all signs within the town, to protect the
public interest and achieve these community objectives:
A.   To minimize the risk of personal injury and property damage from
unregulated and improper sign placement, construction, and maintenance;
B.   To balance private and public interests by providing opportunities for
adequate signage for business identification and essential communication while
preserving and enhancing the community environment, unique character and
qualities of the town;
C.   To promote the use of signs that are well-designed, of appropriate scale,
and appropriately integrated into the built environment; and
D.   To preserve and enhance the streetscape appearance throughout the town and
the general appearance of business corridors.
17-10-2 General
A.   No content restrictions.
   1.   Any sign allowed under this chapter may contain, in lieu of any other
copy, any otherwise lawful message that complies with applicable size,
lighting, dimension, design, spacing, and permitting requirements of this
chapter.
   2.   This chapter is intended to regulate signs in a manner that does not
favor commercial speech over non-commercial speech and does not regulate non-
commercial speech by message content.
   3.   Any regulation that distinguishes between on-site and off-site signs
applies only to commercial messages, and allows any non-commercial message.
B.   Conformity.
   1.   No sign shall be installed, placed, or maintained within the town
except in conformance with this chapter or as allowed by a state or federal law
preemption of this chapter.
   2.   If provisions of this chapter are in conflict with any other provision
of the code, the more restrictive requirement shall apply.
   3.   Signs maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter are
declared to be nuisances and may be abated as provided by law.
17-10-3 Definitions and sign types
A.   The following definitions supplement those found elsewhere in the town
code and land development code. In the event of conflicting definitions related
to signs, the definitions in this section prevail.
   1.   Abandoned sign: A sign associated with a business, use, occupancy,
product, or activity that has already occurred or has not existed for a period
of 30 consecutive days, for reasons attributable at least in part to the sign-
property owner.
   2.   A-frame: A portable sign typically constructed of wood or plastic that
folds out to form the shape of an ‘A’.
   3.   Animation: The movement, or optical illusion of movement, of any part
of a sign structure, design, or pictorial segment including the movement of any
illumination, flashing, or variation of light intensity, and including but not
limited to the automatic changing of all or part of a sign achieved through
mechanical, electrical, or environmental means including motion by activity
such as wind, thermal changes, or other naturally occurring external forces.
   4.   Awning: An architectural projection or shelter projecting from, and
supported by the exterior wall of, a building and composed of a covering of
rigid or non-rigid materials and/or fabric on a supporting framework that may
be either permanent or retractable.
   5.   Awning sign: A sign displayed on or attached to the surface of an
awning.
   6.   Balloon: An airtight bag filled with helium, hot air, or other gas,
that is anchored to a building or structure with rope, cable or similar
material.
   7.   Banner: A temporary sign constructed of a flexible material on which
copy or graphics may be displayed.
   8.   Billboard: A sign not associated with a business, use, occupancy,
product, or activity located or occurring on the sign-premises and with a sign
area 24 square feet or larger.
   9.   Canopy: A multi-sided overhead structure or architectural projection
supported by attachment to a building on one or more sides and cantilevered
from the building or supported by columns.
   10.   Change of sign copy: A replacement or modification of the message or
design of an existing sign face without modifying the size, shape, framework or
structure of the sign.
   11.   Commercial sign: Any sign that does not fit the definition of non-
commercial sign.
   12.   Development activity sign: A temporary freestanding sign consisting of
a rigid, durable sign face mounted on wood or metal posts embedded in the
ground without the use of concrete or other permanent footing material, and
conforming to the requirements of subparagraph
17-10-32 (development activity signs).
   13.   Directory sign: A monument sign that complies with the requirements of
section
17-10-17 (directory signs).
   14.   Drive-through sign: A sign that complies with the requirements of
section
17-10-18 (drive-through signs).
   15.   Electronic message display: An electronically activated changeable
message sign.
   16.   Elevation: An exterior side of a building which includes the building
wall face, parapet, fascia, windows, doors, canopies, and visible roof
structures.
   17.   Exceptional design: Refers to a freestanding sign with an
architecturally interesting design that complies with the following:
      a.   At least 50% of all surfaces of the sign structure shall consist of
one or more of the following materials:
         i.   Brick
         ii.   Decorative block
         iii.   Natural or simulated stone
         iv.   Decorative or treated wood
         v.   Decorative unpainted or unfinished metal
         vi.   Other similar materials approved by the planning manager
      b.   Except as described in subparagraph c below, the area of the sign
structure must equal or exceed the sign area for each sign face.
      c.   If at least 50% of the sign copy is mounted independently and in
relief of the sign face or background and utilizes back-lighting (halo or
reverse channel illumination), the required area of the sign structure may be
reduced by 50%.
      d.   For purposes of this definition, the sign structure includes the
entire structure of the sign other than the sign area.
      e.   For purposes of subparagraphs b and c above, the sign structure is
measured as the surface area of the side of the structure that contains the
sign face.
   18.   Flag: Fabric, vinyl, or similar flexible material typically attached
at one edge to a staff.
   19.   Freestanding interstate sign: A freestanding sign that complies with
the requirements of section
17-10-21 (freestanding interstate signs)
   20.   Freestanding monument sign: A freestanding sign that complies with the
requirements of section
17-10-22 (freestanding monument signs).
   21.   Freestanding sign: A sign erected or mounted on a self-supporting
permanent base detached from supporting elements of a building.
   22.   Fuel service pump topper sign: A sign affixed to the top or side of an
operable fuel dispensing pump.
   23.   Government sign: A sign constructed, placed, or maintained by a
government agency or a sign that a government agency requires to be
constructed, placed, or maintained.
   24.   Illuminated sign: A sign that uses artificial light, either projecting
through its surface (internal illumination) or reflecting off its surface
(externally illuminated).
   25.   Legal nonconforming sign: A sign that was legally installed in
conformance with all applicable sign regulations and ordinances in effect at
the time of its installation; but that does not comply with current
regulations.
   26.   Non-commercial sign: A sign containing no message, statement, or
expression related to commercial interests. Noncommercial signs include, but
are not limited to:
      a.   Government signs
      b.   Signs expressing political, religious, or ideological views or
positions
      c.   Signs with information about or announcements of non-profit
organizations
   27.   Non-residential area: Any land that is not in a residential area.
   28.   Polyhedron: A three-dimensional solid figure formed by plane faces
that are polygons.
   29.   Portable directional sign: A portable sign directing the traveling
public to a real estate open house or to an event or a portable sign with any
particular non-commercial message.
   30.   Portable sign: A freestanding, moveable sign not permanently affixed
to any building, structure, or embedded into the ground. Examples include A-
frames and T-frames.
   31.   Projected image sign: A temporary sign which is projected by an
electronic device onto a building, structure, sidewalk or other surface.
   32.   Quill sign: A temporary sign constructed as a banner, typically in the
shape of a feather or sail, attached to a pole assembly embedded in the ground
and designed to move in the wind.
   33.   Reasonable repairs or alterations: Repairs or alterations determined
by Arizona case law as being consistent with the “reasonable repairs and
alterations” provision of A.R.S. § 9-462.02 (A). In the absence of case law
guidance, reasonable repairs or alterations include repairs or alterations that
cost less than half of the cost to replace the sign.
   34.   Residential area: All of the following:
      a.   Land zoned AG, RD-180, R-144, R-80, R-36, R-20, R-16, R-12, R-10, R-
8, R-7, R-6, R-3.5, MR-2, MR-1, RV, and MH.
      b.   Land zoned A, B, and C, except those portions that have an existing
non-residential use.
      c.   Portions of land zoned D and E that have an existing residential
use.
      d.   Land with residential land use designations within specific plan
areas (areas zoned F).
      e.   Parcels devoted solely to residential, park, or open space uses.
   35.   Roadway construction business identification banner: A sign that
complies with the requirements of section
17-10-38 (roadway construction business identification banners).
   36.   Shingle sign: A wall mounted or hanging sign, located under a covered
porch, walkway, extended roof or other similar structure.
   37.   Sight visibility triangle: An area extending along an intersection
approach leg and across the included corners that must be kept clear of
obstructions that might block a driver’s view of potentially conflicting
vehicles or pedestrians.
   38.   Sign: A name, identification, description, display or illustration
affixed to or painted or represented directly or indirectly on a building or
other outdoor surface that directs attention to or is designed or intended to
direct attention to the sign face or to an object, product, place, activity,
person, institution, organization or business. Does not include anything that
meets this definition but that is located completely within an enclosed
building and is not visible from outside the building. A statue is a sign if it
calls attention or relates to an activity or use located on the sign-premises.
   39.   Sign area: The area of a sign determined in accordance with paragraph
17-10-8 below.
   40.   Sign copy: All letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos, and graphic
elements comprising the content or message of a sign.
   41.   Sign face: The entire display surface area of a sign upon, against, or
through which copy is placed.
   42.   Sign-premises:
      a.   In residential areas, the sign-property plus adjacent right-of-way
used by the sign-property owner under a license from the town.
      b.   In non-residential areas, the entire shopping center or industrial
center where the sign is located plus adjacent right-of-way used by the sign-
premises owner, owners, or owners association under a license from the town.
   43.   Sign-property: The specific lot or parcel of land upon which the sign
is placed or erected. Adjacent lots or parcels under the same ownership and
with the same use shall be considered one sign-property.
   44.   Sign walker: A person who carries, holds or balances a sign.
   45.   T-frame: A portable sign typically constructed of wood or plastic with
a structure in the appearance of an inverted ‘T’.
   46.   Temporary sign: A portable sign, a sign not permanently embedded in
the ground, or a sign not permanently affixed to a building or permanent sign
structure.
   47.   Tenant space: The area or portion of a building leased by an
individual or entity.
   48.   Vehicle sign: A sign mounted, painted, attached or affixed to a truck,
car, boat, trailer, or other vehicle or similar equipment.
   49.   Wall sign: A permanent sign fastened, attached, or connected to, or
supported in whole or in part by, a building or structure.
   50.   Window sign: A sign affixed to the interior or exterior of a window,
or placed immediately behind a window, and visible from outside of the
building.
Ordinance 2021.004 replaced “planning director” with “planning manager” in
paragraph A.17.a.vi
Ordinance 2022.006 amended Section 17-10-3 A.29
17-10-4 Prohibited signs
All signs not expressly allowed under this chapter are prohibited, including
but not limited to:
A.   Billboards.
B.   Flashing, blinking, reflective, inflatable or animated signs, including
signs with an intermittent or varying color or intensity of artificial
illumination, whether deliberate or as a consequence of a defect in the sign or
illumination source, except as expressly allowed by the provisions of section
17-10-19 (electronic message displays) or section
17-10-33 (inflatable and air activated signs).
C.   Projected-image signs.
D.   Ribbons, streamers, balloons, or pin flags, except as expressly allowed by
the provisions of section
17-10-33 (inflatable and air activated signs).
E.   Searchlights.
F.   Signs projecting sound, except as expressly allowed by the provisions of
section
17-10-18 (drive-through signs).
G.   Signs that obstruct free and clear vision of motor vehicle operators.
H.   Signs located in a sight visibility triangle, unless approved by the
planning manager.
I.   Signs placed in any location where by reason of position, shape, or color
may interfere with or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or
device.
J.   Signs placed on any curb, sidewalk, post, pole, hydrant, bridge, tree or
other surface located on public property or over or across any street or public
thoroughfare, or in the public right-of-way, except as expressly allowed by
this chapter.
K.   Signs projecting above the top of the wall parapet, or roofline, or
mounted on a roof.
Ordinance 2021.004 replaced “planning director” with “planning manager” in
paragraph H
17-10-5 Exempt signs
The following signs shall be exempt from the application and permit
requirements of this chapter. Exempt signs must comply with all other
applicable regulations contained in this chapter, if any.
A.   Flags that comply with the requirements of section
17-10-20 (flags and flag poles)
B.   Fuel service pump topper signs.
C.   Government signs.
D.    Grave markers, headstones, statues, historical markers, and cornerstones.
E.   Hazard warning and parking signs measuring three square feet or less.
F.   Portable signs that comply with the requirements of section
17-10-35 (portable signs).
G.   Portable directional signs that comply with the requirements of section
17-10-34 (portable directional signs).
H.   Roadway construction business identification banners that comply with the
requirements of section
17-10-38 (roadway construction business identification banners).
I.   Signs carried or displayed by a sign walker in compliance with the
requirements of section
17-10-24 (sign walkers).
J.   Signs integrated into the design of an automated bank teller machine.
K.   Signs relocated as the result of town construction projects.
L.   Vehicle signs that comply with the requirements of section
17-10-27 (vehicle signs).
M.   Window signs that comply with the requirements of section
17-10-29 (window signs).
N.   Temporary signs in residential areas that comply with the requirements of
paragraph
17-10-25 C.
O.   Any sign authorized by this chapter that is six square feet or smaller,
unless an application and permit are expressly required by this chapter.
17-10-6 Permits
A.   General.
   1.   The sign-property owner or the sign-property owner’s representative may
apply for a sign permit.
   2.   Except as provided in subparagraph 3 below, a sign permit is required
prior to constructing, installing, placing, altering, or relocating any sign
within the town.
   3.   A sign permit is not required for any of the following:
      a.   Change of sign copy
      b.   An exempt sign as defined in this chapter
      c.   A sign allowed by a state or federal law preemption of this chapter
      d.   Sign maintenance that does not change the design of the sign
B.   Permit fees. Upon approval of an application for a sign permit, the
applicant shall pay the applicable fee assessed in accordance with the fee
schedule adopted and amended from time to time by the council.
C.   Application.
   1.   A sign permit application shall be submitted for all signs requiring a
permit.
   2.   A sign permit application must be accompanied by all items required by
the sign permit application checklist.
D.   Permit suspension or revocation. In addition to enforcement pursuant to
chapter 5-7 of the town code, the planning manager may suspend or revoke a sign
permit issued as a result of the applicant’s material omission or misstatement
of fact. The planning manager shall give notice of any suspension or revocation
to the applicant and to the sign-property owner.
Ordinance 2021.004 replaced “planning director” with “planning manager” in
paragraph D
17-10-7 Sign design and construction
A.   All signs shall incorporate design elements consistent with the overall
architectural character of buildings and other improvements on the sign-
premises.
B.   Electric raceways and transformers shall be located to minimize
visibility.
C.   All signs shall be designed and constructed in conformance with current
town building codes (see town code title 7).
D.   All temporary signs shall be constructed using suitably durable materials
as approved by the planning manager.
Ordinance 2021.004 replaced “planning director” with “planning manager” in
paragraph D
17-10-8 Sign measurement
A.   Sign area shall be measured as follows:
   1.   Sign copy mounted on or painted on a background panel or area
distinctively painted, textured, or constructed as a background for the sign
copy shall be measured as that area contained within the sum of the smallest
rectangles that will enclose both the sign copy and the background.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-122.png]
   2.   Sign copy mounted as individual letters or graphics against a wall,
fascia, mansard, or parapet of a building or other structure that has not been
painted, textured, or otherwise altered to provide a distinctive background for
the sign copy shall be measured as a sum of the smallest polygon of not more
than 12 sides that will enclose each word and each graphic in the total sign.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-124.png]
   3.   Signs with multiple faces shall be measured as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-126.png]
      a.   The area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of
the sign, except that only one face of a double-faced sign shall be considered
in determining the sign area when both faces are parallel and the greatest
distance between faces does not exceed five feet, or when the interior angle of
the sign faces does not exceed 45 degrees in the case of a ‘V’- configured
sign. If the area of one sign face exceeds the area of the sign’s opposing
face, the area of the larger face shall be used to determine the sign area.
      b.   The area of a sign that contains three or more faces shall be
calculated as 50% of the sum of the area of all faces.
      c.   Spherical, free-form, sculptural, or other non-planar sign area is
measured as 50% of the sum of the areas using only the four vertical faces of
the smallest six-faced polyhedron that will encompass the sign structure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-128.png]
B.   Sign height shall be measured as follows:
   1.   The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured as the vertical
distance from the finished grade beneath the sign, exclusive of any filling,
berming, mounding or landscaping done solely for the purpose of locating the
sign, to the highest point of the sign. If the sign is proposed in a location
in which the finished grade beneath the sign is lower than the grade of the
adjacent roadway surface, the sign height shall be measured from the top of the
curb, or crown of the adjacent roadway surface where no curb exists. The height
of any monument base or other structure erected to support or ornament the sign
shall be measured as part of the sign height.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-130.png]
   2.   Wall fascia, mansard, and parapet-mounted signs shall be measured as
the vertical distance to the top of the sign or sign structure from the base of
the wall on which the sign is located.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-132.png]
17-10-9 Sign illumination
A.   Signs may be illuminated, except where expressly prohibited in this
chapter.
B.   All illuminated signs shall be constructed and operated in compliance with
the outdoor lighting code.
17-10-10 Sign maintenance
A.   Any sign or sign component shall be promptly repaired or replaced if it:
   1.   Is damaged or deteriorated,
   2.   Constitutes a danger or hazard to public safety, or
   3.   Is reasonably determined by the planning manager, by reason of its
appearance as viewed at ground level from the public right-of-way or from
neighboring properties, to:
      a.   Be detrimental to property value
      b.   Be offensive to the senses, or
      c.   Reduce the aesthetic appearance of the area.
B.   Maintenance of a sign shall include all of the following:
   1.   Periodic cleaning
   2.   Replacement of defective light sources
   3.   Repair or replacement of any faded, peeled, cracked, or otherwise
damaged or broken parts
   4.   Any other activity necessary to restore the sign to compliance with the
requirements of the sign permit issued for its installation and the provisions
of this chapter.
Ordinance 2021.004 replaced “planning director” with “planning manager” in
paragraph A.3
17-10-11 Areas with special sign regulations
A.   Special sign districts. Special sign districts may be established by
ordinance. Special sign districts may have unique regulations applicable to
them, which differ from those set forth in this chapter.
B.   Specific plans. Sign regulations approved as part of a specific plan take
precedence over this chapter within the specific plan area. Particular signage
elements not addressed by the specific plan sign regulations shall be governed
by this chapter.
C.   Planned sign program. Sign regulations approved as part of a planned sign
program take precedence over this chapter. Planned sign programs shall be
reviewed by staff and subject to consideration and approval by the planning
commission.
17-10-12 Planned sign programs
A.   A planned sign program is available for development projects consisting of
multi-tenant buildings, non-residential developments with multiple buildings or
mixed-use developments. The program shall be reviewed by staff and subject to
consideration and approval by the planning commission. A planned sign program:
   1.   Is intended to allow flexibility in order to achieve exceptional
project design through architectural integration of the site, buildings, and
signs.
   2.   Is intended to provide for design compatibility of all signs and to
establish and maintain a consistent design theme within a development.
   3.   Shall be in substantial conformance with the general intent of the
regulations of this chapter, but may establish reasonable and appropriate
alternatives to the standard provisions of this chapter.
   4.   Shall establish design standards, including, but not limited to, sign
types, placement, size, design, colors, materials, textures, and method of
illumination.
   5.   Shall provide adequate identification and information for the
development.
   6.   Shall provide aesthetic appeal, promote traffic safety, and maintain
consistency with other town regulations.
B.   A planned sign program application shall be submitted to the planning
department and must be accompanied by all items required by the planned sign
program application checklist and all applicable fees.
C.   All freestanding signs approved through a planned sign program and allowed
an increase in either area or height above the basic standards for freestanding
signs must be constructed to the standards of exceptional design as defined in
this chapter (see subparagraph
17-10-3 A. 17 above).
17-10-13 Legal nonconforming signs
A.   Legal nonconforming signs are allowed, subject to the requirements of this
section.
B.   Any legal nonconforming sign shall be permitted to remain, so long as it:
   1.   Is not increased in area or height and remains structurally unchanged,
except for reasonable repairs or alterations; or
   2.   Is not relocated, unless at the request or requirement of the town so
as to comply with applicable safety requirements.
C.   A legal nonconforming sign shall be rebuilt, repaired, or replaced only in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter if it is:
   1.   Structurally changed, except for reasonable repairs or alterations;
   2.   Damaged by half or more of the cost to replace the sign as a result of
fire, lack of maintenance, or other causes; or
   3.   Temporarily or permanently moved or removed by any means, including an
act of God, except as provided in subparagraph
17-10-13 B. 2 above.
17-10-14 Abandoned signs
A.   The planning manager shall, upon determining that a sign is an abandoned
sign, give notice to the sign owner that the sign is deemed an abandoned sign.
B.   Within 30 days after receipt of the planning manager’s notice, the sign
owner shall take one of the following actions:
   1.   Remove the sign and its supporting structure;
   2.   Remove the sign face and replace it with a blank sign face; or
   3.   Reverse the sign face and not illuminate the sign from the interior.
17-10-15 Classification; enforcement; removal
A.   General. Violation of this chapter is a civil infraction and shall be
enforced pursuant to
chapter 5-7 of the town code.
B.   Removal of signs by town; notice; fees.
   1.   A code compliance officer or other authorized representative of the
town may immediately remove or cause the removal of a sign in either of the
following circumstances:
      a.   When the sign is unlawfully placed in the public right-of-way or on
public property.
      b.   When the sign poses an immediate hazard to persons or property.
   2.   If possible, when exercising its right to immediately remove or cause
the removal of a sign, the town shall provide the sign owner with verbal or
written notification of the removal at the time of the removal. The notice
shall include all of the following:
      a.   The reason or reasons for the removal.
      b.   The location where the sign owner may claim the sign.
      c.   Notification that if the sign owner does not claim the sign within
five days of the notice, the town may destroy or reuse the sign.
   3.   If a sign is placed in violation of this chapter but does not pose an
immediate hazard to persons or property and is not located in the public right-
of-way or on public property, a code compliance officer or other authorized
representative of the town shall provide written notice of violation to the
sign owner.
      a.   The notice shall include all of the following:
         i.   The reason or reasons the sign is in violation.
         ii.   Notification that if the sign is not removed within 48 hours of
the notice, the town will remove the sign.
         iii.   The location where the sign owner may claim the sign if it is
removed.
         iv.   Notification that if the sign is removed and the sign owner does
not claim the sign within five days of the notice, the town may destroy or
reuse the sign.
      b.   The notice shall be delivered either by personal delivery or, if the
town is unable to determine the owner of the sign, by affixing it to the
offending sign.
      c.   If the offending sign is not removed within the 48-hour period, a
code compliance officer or other authorized representative of the town may
remove or cause the removal of the sign.
   4.   The town’s cost to remove or store a sign shall be borne by the sign
owner in the amount set forth in the fee schedule approved by the council and
amended from time to time.
C.   Effect. Neither the suspension nor revocation of a sign permit, nor the
removal of a sign by the town, shall be a defense against prosecution.
Ordinance 2022.022 amended Section 17-10-15 B.
II. Regulations by sign type
17-10-16 Awning signs
A.   An awning sign shall be allowed in lieu of, or in conjunction with, a wall
sign.
B.   Awning sign area shall be calculated as part of the allowable area for
wall signage for any given elevation.
17-10-17 Directory signs
Directory signs are allowed in non-residential area developments and multi-
family complexes subject to the following:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-134.png]
A.   Each sign premise shall be allowed one directory sign at each entrance on
each street frontage.
B.   Sign height shall not exceed eight feet.
C.   Sign area shall not exceed 40 square feet.
D.   Signs shall be located at least 100 feet from any abutting street right-
of-way unless a building or other structure blocks the sign’s visibility from
the street.
17-10-18 Drive-through signs
A.   Drive-through signs may be freestanding or wall-mounted.
B.   Drive-through signs shall be limited to two signs per drive-through lane.
C.   Each drive-through sign shall be no greater than ten feet in height.
D.   Each drive-through sign shall be located adjacent to a drive-through lane.
E.   Drive-through signs may include electronic message displays subject to the
requirements and limitations of section
17-10-19 (electronic message displays), except that the display may occupy the
entire area of the sign face.
F.   Sound emitted by drive-through signs must not be audible from any
residential property.
17-10-19 Electronic message displays
A.   Electronic message displays are permitted as an integral component of
either of the following:
   1.   A permitted freestanding monument sign.
   2.   A sign type whose regulations refer to this section, subject to any
additional limitations on electronic message signs set forth in the regulations
for that sign type.
B.   Except as provided in section
17-10-18 (drive-through signs), electronic message displays may occupy up to
50% of the allowable area of a sign face.
C.   Electronic message displays may be full color and shall consist only of
static messages that change not more frequently than once every 7.5 seconds.
D.   Electronic message display messages must transition by instant change
method. Scrolling, travelling, flashing, full-motion video, use of sound, and
similar operational effects are prohibited.
E.   Electronic message displays shall conform to the regulations of the
outdoor lighting code.
F.   An electronic message display visible from an existing residential use
shall be installed a minimum of 150 feet from the property line of the
residential use.
17-10-20 Flags and flag poles
A.   Each sign-property may contain one flagpole bearing one or more flags,
except as otherwise permitted under section
17-10-12 (planned sign programs) or section
17-10-37 (residential subdivision sign program).
B.   A flag pole shall not exceed a height of 25 feet when accessory to a
residential use. In all other situations, a flag pole shall not exceed the
higher of:
   1.   30 feet, or
   2.   1.25 times the height of any building within 200 feet of where the
flagpole is to be constructed, but in any event not to exceed 50 feet.
C.   The length of a flag shall be no greater than one-fourth of the height of
the flag pole.
D.   A flag shall not encroach beyond the sign-premises.
E.   A flag shall not create a safety hazard.
F.   A flag may be illuminated in conformance with the outdoor lighting code.
17-10-21 Freestanding interstate signs
Freestanding interstate signs shall be allowed only upon approval by the
planning commission of a conditional use permit or a planned sign program and
shall be subject to the following:
A.   A freestanding interstate sign may be allowed for commercial, industrial,
or mixed-use sign-premises that are:
   1.   A minimum of one acre in size,
   2.   Within 250 feet of the interstate right-of-way or within 250 feet of
the railroad right-of-way, and
   3.   Within 250 feet of the right-of-way of an arterial roadway intersecting
the interstate.
B.   A freestanding interstate sign shall not exceed a height of 65 feet above
the finished grade beneath the sign, exclusive of any filling, berming,
mounding or landscaping done solely for the purpose of locating the sign.
C.   A freestanding interstate sign shall not exceed an area of 300 square
feet.
D.   A freestanding interstate sign shall not be located within 500 feet of
another freestanding interstate sign.
E.   A freestanding interstate sign shall be a minimum of 500 feet from the
property line of any existing residential use.
F.   A freestanding interstate sign may include an electronic message display
component subject to section
17-10-19 (electronic message displays).
17-10-22 Freestanding monument signs
A.   A freestanding monument sign shall be allowed in non-residential areas
subject to the following:
   1.   One sign shall be allowed per street frontage of sign-premises provided
that the sign-premises has a minimum street frontage of 100 feet.
   2.   Two signs shall be allowed per street frontage for sign-premises with
600 feet or more of street frontage, and more than one entrance to the sign-
premises on that frontage. One additional freestanding monument sign shall be
permitted for each additional 300 feet of street frontage with an additional
entrance.
   3.   The sign area shall not exceed 40 square feet for a single tenant sign-
premises.
   4.   The sign area for sign-premises occupied by two or more tenants shall
not exceed 80 square feet.
   5.   The sign height shall not exceed eight feet.
   6.   A 25% increase in the area and/or height of a sign will be allowed for
a sign of exceptional design as defined in subparagraph
17-10-3 A. 17 above.
   7.   A sign-premises containing two or more tenants shall be allowed an
increase in the area and height of one freestanding monument sign per street
frontage subject to the following:
      a.   One sign of increased area and height shall be allowed for each
sign-premises street frontage exceeding 500 linear feet.
      b.   The sign area shall not exceed 150 square feet.
      c.   The sign height shall not exceed 20 feet.
      d.   The sign shall be constructed to the standards of exceptional
design, as defined in subparagraph
17-10-3 A. 17 above, and shall not be allowed an increase in area or height.
   8.   The width of the base of a monument sign must be equal to or greater
than 75% of the width of the sign face.
   9.   Signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any road right-of-
way, and 30 feet from any residential area property line.
   10.   A freestanding monument sign shall be located at least 50 feet from
any other freestanding monument sign.
B.   Multi-family residential complex containing 12 units or more, including
apartments, condominiums, townhome complexes, manufactured home parks,
recreational vehicle parks, and similar uses, shall be allowed a freestanding
monument sign subject to the following:
   1.   One freestanding monument sign shall be allowed per street frontage of
the sign-premises.
   2.   Signs shall not exceed 40 square feet in area and eight feet in height.
   3.   A 25% increase in the area and height of a sign will be allowed for a
sign of exceptional design as defined in subparagraph
17-10-3 A. 17 above.
17-10-23 Shingle signs
A.   Shingle signs shall be limited to one per tenant space frontage and shall
be located at a point of public access.
B.   Shingle sign area shall not exceed five square feet.
C.   A shingle sign shall be located in front of the tenant space it pertains
to and shall be suspended from a covered porch, walkway, extended roof or
similar architectural element.
D.   A minimum clearance of eight feet shall be maintained beneath a shingle
sign.
17-10-24 Sign walkers
Sign walkers are allowed subject to the following:
A.   Sign walkers are prohibited in parking aisles or stalls, in driving lanes
or driveways, in construction zones.
B.   Sign walkers are prohibited from operating in any manner that obstructs
visibility or movement of pedestrians, motorists or cyclists.
C.   Signs displayed by sign walkers shall not include any form of
illumination, animation, or attachment.
D.   Signs displayed by sign walkers shall not exceed eight square feet in
area.
17-10-25 Signs in residential areas
Signs are allowed in residential areas subject to the following requirements:
A.   All signs shall comply with the regulations of this chapter applicable to
the sign type, as further regulated by this section.
B.   All signs shall be displayed on the sign-property.
C.   Temporary signs in residential areas are subject to the requirements of
section
17-10-30 (temporary signs—general requirements), and each temporary sign must
be clearly labeled with the name and telephone number of the sign owner.
D.   Signs shall not exceed six feet in height unless attached to a wall or
structure.
E.   Each single-family residential sign-property shall be allowed a cumulative
sign area of six square feet with no limit on the number of signs.
F.   For multi-family uses, each residential unit shall be allowed a cumulative
sign area of five square feet with no limit on the number of signs.
G.   Signs have no display period limitations.
H.   Signs may not advertise offsite commercial activities.
17-10-26 Subdivision entry signs
A subdivision entry sign, consisting of a wall sign or freestanding monument
sign, may be placed at a main entrance to a residential subdivision or complex,
subject to the following:
A.   Subdivision entry wall signs may be mounted on a perimeter or landscape
wall on both sides of a main entrance to a subdivision or complex. The
cumulative wall sign area at each entrance to a subdivision shall not exceed
100 square feet
B.   Subdivision entry freestanding monument signs shall be limited to one sign
at each main entrance to a subdivision or complex subject to the following:
   1.   The sign area shall not exceed 100 square feet.
   2.   The sign must be setback a minimum of one foot from any property line.
   3.   The sign may not include an electronic message display.
17-10-27 Vehicle signs
A vehicle sign may be displayed only when all of the following conditions are
met:
A.   Signs must be painted on or applied directly to the vehicle and may not
extend beyond the horizontal or vertical profile of the vehicle.
B.   Signs shall not be mounted in the bed of a truck.
C.   The vehicle displaying the sign must be operable, registered, licensed,
and driven at least once a week.
D.   The vehicle displaying the sign must be parked in a legal parking space.
17-10-28 Wall signs
A.   Wall signs may be mounted flush, angled, bowed, or perpendicular to the
wall.
B.   Wall signs in residential areas shall be subject to the following:
   1.   In addition to an address sign as required by this chapter, a single-
family residence shall be allowed one wall sign, not to exceed three square
feet.
   2.   Wall signs on single-family residences shall not be placed higher than
10 feet above finished grade.
   3.   Multi-family residences shall be allowed one sign per dwelling unit,
not to exceed three square feet.
   4.   A multi-family residential complex containing 12 units or more shall be
allowed a maximum of 32 square feet of wall signage per street frontage.
   5.   Illumination of signage shall be prohibited with the exception of
multi-family residential complexes containing 12 units or more.
C.   Wall signs in non-residential areas shall be subject to the following:
   1.   Shall be allowed on no more than three elevations of any building.
   2.   The allowable sign area shall be calculated at a rate of 1.5 square
feet for each linear foot of building elevation or tenant space frontage up to
a maximum of 200 square feet per elevation.
   3.   Shall only be placed on the first and top stories of a multi-story
building.
   4.   Shall be allowed on parapet walls that are structurally integrated into
the original building design, and shall not be placed on parapet extensions
added to an existing building.
   5.   Signs up to a cumulative total of 75 square feet of signage per canopy
are allowed on all sides of a freestanding canopy structure, calculated in the
same manner as any other wall sign.
17-10-29 Window signs
A window sign may be painted on, adhered to, or suspended behind a glass door
or window surface, subject to the following:
A.   In non-residential areas, window signs shall cover no more than 40% of the
window upon which the sign is displayed.
B.   Window signs shall only be displayed on first floor windows.
C.   Window signs shall only be internally illuminated.
D.   Portions of window signs consisting of electronic message displays shall
be limited to five square feet and shall be subject to the requirements of
section
17-10-19 (electronic message displays).
III. Regulations for temporary signs
17-10-30 Temporary signs—general requirements
The requirements set forth in this section apply to all temporary signs.
A.   Temporary signs shall be constructed of fabric, plastic, wood, metal, or
similar durable weather-resistant materials.
B.   Temporary signs shall be maintained free of chipped paint, cracks, loss of
text or graphics, or similar defects.
C.   No temporary sign shall be placed upon any other sign assembly, utility
pole, authorized traffic control device, utility box, fence, freestanding wall,
boulder, tree, planter, vehicle, or similar structure.
D.   Temporary signs shall be placed in a manner that prevents displacement
during adverse weather conditions and does not result in a safety hazard to the
public.
E.   Except as expressly allowed by this chapter, temporary signs shall not be
located within the public right-of-way.
F.   Temporary signs shall not interfere with the free movement of pedestrians,
bicycles, or vehicles.
G.   Temporary signs shall not include amplified sound, animation, motion or
attachments such as balloons, flags, streamers, pinwheels, or ribbons, except
as specifically authorized by section
17-10-33 (inflatable and air activated signs).
H.   Temporary signs shall not be illuminated other than by ambient light
present on the property or by existing illumination intended for other uses.
I.   All temporary signs require a sign permit except portable signs (section
17-10-35), portable directional signs (section
17-10-34), and temporary signs in residential areas (paragraph
17-10-25 C) (see section
17-10-5, exempt signs).
17-10-31 Banners
Banners are temporary signs which are allowed in non-residential areas subject
to the requirements of section
17-10-30 (temporary signs—general requirements) and the following additional
requirements:
A.   Shall be displayed on the sign-premises.
B.   Shall be limited in quantity to one per business.
C.   Building-mounted banners shall not exceed a height of 25 feet or the top
of the parapet, whichever is less.
D.   Freestanding banners shall not exceed a height of ten feet above grade.
E.   Sign area shall not exceed 40 square feet.
F.   May be displayed up to 21 days, four times per calendar year per business.
17-10-32 Development activity signs
Development activity signs are temporary signs which are allowed in non-
residential areas subject to the requirements of section
17-10-30 (temporary signs—general requirements) and the following additional
requirements:
A.   Signs shall be displayed on the sign-premises.
B.   Signs may be displayed at the beginning of the duration of an activity,
and shall be removed within seven days of the completion of the duration of the
activity. The duration of an activity is the period of time between any of the
following:
   1.   From development plan approval to the earlier of:
      a.   The completion of the improvements shown on the development plan, or
      b.   The second anniversary of development plan approval.
   2.   From the issuance of a building permit for a development project to the
earliest of:
      a.   The issuance of a certificate of occupancy,
      b.   The final inspection approval, or
      c.   The second anniversary of the issuance of the building permit.
   3.   From the date of listing a property for sale or lease to the earlier
of:
      a.   The consummation of the sale or lease or
      b.   The second anniversary of the listing date.
C.   No more than three signs shall be allowed per street frontage.
D.   Each sign shall not exceed eight feet in height.
E.   Each sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area.
F.   A development activity sign shall not be permitted on a residential
subdivision that has an approved residential subdivision sign program (see
section
17-10-37).
17-10-33 Inflatable and air activated signs
Inflatable and air activated signs are temporary signs which are allowed in
non-residential areas subject to the requirements of section
17-10-30 (temporary signs—general requirements) and the following additional
requirements:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-136.png]
A.   May be displayed in conjunction with a special event or activity.
B.   May be displayed for a period of up to three consecutive days and no more
than two display periods shall be allowed per calendar year.
C.   Shall be located on the sign-premises.
D.   No more than two signs may be displayed concurrently on a sign-premises.
E.   Shall be setback a distance equal to or greater than the height of the
sign from all property lines.
F.   Shall maintain 18 feet of clearance from overhead utility lines.
G.   Shall be placed and operate in accordance with applicable building and
fire codes including proper anchoring to the ground.
H.   Shall not be placed on the roof of any building or structure.
17-10-34 Portable directional signs
Portable directional signs are permitted subject to the requirements of section
17-10-30 (temporary signs—general requirements) and the following additional
requirements:
A.   Each sign must be clearly labeled with the name and telephone number of
the sign owner.
B.   Each sign may not exceed six square feet in area and 30 inches in height.
C.   No more than eight signs may be placed:
   1.   Directing the public to any particular real estate open house,
   2.   Directing the public to any particular event, or
   3.   With any particular non-commercial message.
D.   Signs directing the public to a property or event must be located within
five miles of the property or event.
E.   All signs with any particular non-commercial message must be located
within a five-mile radius of one another.
F.   One sign may be placed at each major change in travel direction along the
route leading to the property or event.
G.   On routes with infrequent major changes in travel direction, signs may be
located at each intersection of collector or larger roadways.
H.   No sign shall be placed within 20 feet of another sign authorized by this
section.
I.   Signs shall only be displayed between sunrise and sunset and must be
removed daily.
J.   Signs shall not be displayed more than four days in any week.
K.   Signs shall not be placed within a median, sidewalk, multi-use path, or
any location that would create an obstacle for pedestrians.
L.   Signs may be placed in the public right-of-way subject to the following
additional requirements:
   1.   On curbed roadways, signs within the public right-of-way shall be
placed at least two feet from the back side of the curb and at least two feet
from a sidewalk or shared-use path.
   2.   On roadways without curbs, signs within the public right-of-way shall
be placed at least six feet from the edge of the paved surface.
   3.   Signs shall not be placed between a shared-use path and the paved
surface of the roadway unless there is adequate distance to maintain a six-foot
setback for the sign from the edge of the roadway and a two-foot setback for
the sign from the edge of the path.
M.   For purposes of this section, an event is one of the following:
   1.   A non-commercial assembly.
   2.   A yard sale in a residential area.
17-10-35 Portable signs
Portable signs are temporary signs which are allowed in non-residential areas
subject to the requirements of section
17-10-30 (temporary signs—general requirements) and the following additional
requirements:
A.   Each sign must be clearly labeled with the name and telephone number of
the sign owner.
B.   Shall be limited in quantity to one per business.
C.   Must be located within 30 feet of a building entrance on the sign-
property.
D.   May only be displayed during hours of operation and must be removed at the
end of each business day.
E.   Sign area shall not exceed 12 square feet.
17-10-36 Quill signs
Quill signs are temporary signs which are allowed in non-residential areas
subject to the requirements of section
17-10-30 (temporary signs—general requirements) and the following additional
requirements:
A.   Shall be displayed on the sign-premises.
B.   One sign per 100 linear feet of street frontage up to six signs per
frontage.
C.   A maximum of two signs may be displayed for any business.
D.   Each sign shall not exceed ten feet in height.
E.   Each sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in area.
F.   Each sign shall be no closer than 50 feet to another quill sign.
G.   May be displayed up to 21 days, four times per calendar year per business.
H.   Quill signs are not permitted within the downtown neighborhood (DN) or
downtown (DT) zones.
17-10-37 Residential subdivision sign program
Residential subdivisions with a sales office and offering new homes for sale
may submit a proposed residential subdivision sign program to regulate the use
of temporary signs for the subdivision, subject to the requirements of section
17-10-30 (temporary signs—general requirements) and the following additional
requirements:
A.   A proposed residential subdivision sign program shall be submitted to the
planning manager, who shall approve, deny, or require modification and
resubmission based on the proposed program’s compliance with the requirements
of this section.
B.   A residential subdivision sign program must include:
   1.   A site plan showing the location of all proposed signs; and
   2.   A description of the type, number, size, placement, and materials of
all proposed signs.
C.   The residential subdivision sign program shall expire when the sales
office is permanently closed.
D.   All signs shall be removed upon expiration of the residential subdivision
sign program.
E.   A residential subdivision sign program may include the following on-site
signage:
   1.   A maximum of 500 square feet of signage per builder.
   2.   No individual sign may exceed an area of 128 square feet or a height of
20 feet.
   3.   Temporary signs, flags (subject to the provisions of
17-10-20, flags and flag poles), and banners.
F.   A residential subdivision sign program may include off-site directional
signs subject to the following additional requirements:
   1.   Signs must be located within a reasonable distance of the subdivision,
considering its remoteness from major transportation routes.
   2.   One sign may be placed at each major change in travel direction along
the route leading to the subdivision.
   3.   On routes with infrequent major changes in travel direction, signs may
be located at each intersection of collector or larger roadways.
   4.   Signs for an individual builder for multiple subdivisions shall be
combined into a single sign; and
   5.   Signs of multiple builders for any particular master development shall
be combined into a single sign.
   6.   If the requirements of paragraphs 4 and 5 above would result in three
or more builders or subdivisions being combined on any particular sign and if
the planning manager determines that the sign cannot provide clear direction to
the motoring public, the planning manager may allow a residential subdivision
sign program to include a separate sign that meets all other applicable
requirements of this section.
G.   In addition to the requirements of paragraph F above, residential
subdivision sign program offsite directional signs within the public right-of-
way are subject to the following requirements:
   1.   Each sign may not exceed six square feet in area and 30 inches in
height.
   2.   Each sign must be clearly labeled with the permit number and the name
and contact information of the sign permit applicant.
   3.   The sign owner must comply with right-of-way use permit requirements
(see
chapter 12-7, construction in town rights-of-way).
H.   In addition to the requirements of paragraph F above, residential
subdivision sign program offsite directional signs on private property are
subject to the following requirements:
   1.   Written permission of the sign-property owner is required.
   2.   Each sign may not exceed 32 square feet in area and eight feet in
height.
Ordinance 2021.004 replaced “planning director” with “planning manager” in
paragraphs A and F.6
17-10-38 Roadway construction business identification banners
A.   An existing use within a commercial, mixed-use, or industrial zoning
district and within an area subject to long-term or substantial road
construction activity performed by the town or other public entity or utility
company may display one roadway construction business identification banner on
each adjacent street frontage of sign-premises.
B.   Banners shall be located on the sign-premises.
C.   Banners shall not exceed 40 square feet.
D.   Banners may be displayed throughout the period of construction.
CHAPTER 17-11.
ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE PRESERVATION, NATIVE PLANT PROTECTION,
AND LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 17-11 was inserted into the town code by Ordinance 2021-010
Sections:
17-11-1   Purpose
17-11-2   Definitions
17-11-3   Site resource inventory
17-11-4   Riparian areas, wildlife corridors and areas of significant
vegetation
17-11-5   Native plant protection
17-11-6   Protected native plant list
17-11-7   Landscape requirements
17-11-8   Landscaping standards for off street parking areas
17-11-9   Roadway landscape standards
17-11-10   Maintenance
17-11-11   Compliance
17-11-12   Plan approval prior to permitting
17-11-13   Assurances
17-11-1 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to respect the character of the town's natural
environment by preserving natural habitat, scenic corridors, unique or
significant ridges, peaks, riparian areas, wildlife corridors, rock
outcroppings, and areas of significant vegetation.
17-11-2 Definitions
The following definitions apply to this chapter.
A.   Native plant plan: A plan that specifies the proposed treatment of
protected native plants being disturbed by development.
B.   Noxious or invasive species: Species not native to Marana and adversely
affecting species native to Marana. Noxious or invasive species include but are
not limited to desert broom, tamarisk, Mexican palo verde, buffelgrass, and
tree of heaven.
C.   NUOS: Natural undisturbed open space.
D.   Plant community: An area of vegetation dominated by one or more species
that creates an environment that is beneficial, unique, or valuable to the
desert ecosystem.
   1.   Climate, elevation, soil type and other factors ultimately determine
the limits and boundaries of particular plant communities.
   2.   Examples of a plant community dominated by one species are grassland
and creosote bush association, or a grove of trees, for example a mesquite
bosque.
   3.   These communities can form almost pure stands of single species.
   4.   Examples of co-dominant communities are Cottonwood-Willow and Palo
Verde - Saguaro associations.
E.   Ridges/peaks: Raised land formations that are a dominant feature in the
surrounding landscape or constitute a significant linking element, including
the following:
   1.   Any parcel, lot, or project site containing slopes of 15% or greater,
which are both longer than 50 feet when measured in any horizontal direction
and higher than seven and one-half feet when measured vertically.
   2.   Areas which exhibit slopes that fail to meet the aforementioned
standards but contain boulder collapse, boulder rolling, rockfalls, slope
collapse, and/or talus slopes shall also be considered significant and/or
unique and subject to the preservation standards described in section
17-11-3 below.
F.   Riparian area: Area adjacent to or occurring on or near a watercourse or
drainage feature containing a moderate to high density of healthy and diverse
species and habitats, including but not limited to any area within a
jurisdictional delineation established by the United States fish and wildlife
service.
G.   Rock outcropping: Land containing a diversity of rock groupings, structure
types, exposed bedrock, or any significant geomorphic formation of varying
dimension and texture.
H.   SRI: Site resource inventory; that is, a map and inventory of significant
features of a site, meeting the requirements of section 1711-3 and containing
the information required by the town's SRI check list.
I.   Unique significant vegetation: One or more specific plant communities,
unique plant occurrences, or unique individual specimens, any of which has
special value to the Sonoran desert ecosystem because of one or more of the
following:
   1.   Plant species are native to the area.
   2.   Plant species composition is typical for the area.
   3.   Plants are generally healthy and will survive for five or more years.
   4.   Plant density is unusually high for the conditions (soil, slope,
orientation, water availability).
   5.   An unusually large number of mature specimens of individual trees and/
or columnar cactus species are present.
   6.   Noxious or invasive species are few and not visually prominent.
   7.   Grading or clearing has not substantially altered the landscape in the
area.
J.   Unique plant: Any native tree, shrub or cacti with extraordinary
characteristics such as, but not limited to, age, size, shape, form, canopy
cover or aesthetic value. An example may be crested saguaros, a rare, massive,
ancient tree or specimen tree with an unusual shape.
K.   Unique plant occurrences: Areas of vegetation that exist in contrast to
the majority of the surrounding vegetative community due to either
microclimates or availability of water resources. Examples are stands of
ironwood trees and riparian areas.
L.   Wildlife corridor: Land area that provides a source of connectivity
between two or more isolated habitat islands in a region where habitat is
fragmented by urbanization that compromises natural animal movement. Wildlife
corridor designation is designed to increase the confluence of the natural
landscape and the degree of animal mobility. Any land identified as a wildlife
corridor must be suitable for wildlife movement and must include enough native
resources to sustain migrating animals.
17-11-3 Site resource inventory
A.   A site resource inventory (SRI) shall be prepared for any development on a
site that contains unique or significant ridges, peaks, riparian areas,
wildlife corridors, and significant vegetation. These areas shall be protected
and preserved unless the town determines that it is not possible to do so
without depriving the property owner of any economically viable use of the
property.
B.   The SRI shall guide the site design (site plan, rezoning, subdivision
plat, and/or development plan) and shall be used to determine compliance with
the native plant program.
C.   A SRI shall be submitted with the pre-application materials for rezoning,
preliminary plat and development plan submittals or one month before
development submittal.
D.   The SRI shall be based on an aerial photograph of the site that is no
older than two years from the date of submittal.
E.   Preservation of unique significant vegetation should emphasize contiguous
groups of natural areas and unique significant vegetation. Areas of unique
significant vegetation include, but are not limited to, other natural areas
protected by this code.
17-11-4 Riparian areas, wildlife corridors and areas of significant vegetation
The following information shall be required, as it may apply:
A.   The property owner shall provide the town with a complete SRI per the
requirements of section
17-11-3.
B.   Biological linkages between existing wildlife and riparian corridors shall
be maintained.
C.   The size and shape of riparian areas and wildlife corridor linkages shall
be:
   1.   Determined based on existing studies or the town-accepted
recommendations of a qualified biologist; and
   2.   Delineated in the SRI.
D.   A riparian area or wildlife corridor linkage may be protected and enhanced
by a buffer of natural open space, open space, or golf course. The combined
linkage and buffer shall be wide enough to accommodate the wildlife species
most sensitive to human encroachment and known to inhabit the riparian area or
to traverse the wildlife corridor.
E.   Riparian areas and wildlife linkages delineated in the SRI and slated for
protection shall remain undisturbed throughout the course of development and
shall be fenced-off during construction.
F.   Any grading of the riparian and wildlife corridors and linkages shall be
mitigated at 100% by re-vegetation with plantings chosen to match adjacent
undisturbed natural areas with a minimum of five years growth and irrigation
supplied for two years to ensure the plants become established. Plant materials
shall be introduced to closely match existing species in terms of size, massing
and quality, as approved by the planning manager.
17-11-5 Native plant protection
A.   Purpose. These regulations provide for the preservation, protection,
transplanting, and replacement of existing designated native plants including
cacti, succulents, trees, and shrubs through the establishment of comprehensive
procedures, requirements, and standards which protect the public health,
safety, and general welfare.
B.   Findings. The town has determined that:
   1.   Native vegetation within the town is a unique natural resource that
promotes tourism and contributes to the economic and aesthetic well-being of
the community.
   2.   Native vegetation, as an integral part of the Sonoran desert,
contributes to the high property values, high quality of life, and unique
lifestyle which the community enjoys.
   3.   Native vegetation is important in stabilizing desert soils and
providing food and protection for many types of desert wildlife.
   4.   Native vegetation is more drought tolerant, requires less maintenance,
and uses less water than other types of landscaping.
   5.   Native vegetation is a slow growing type of plant material that cannot
always be successfully relocated. A plant of like character cannot replace
certain specimen plants, because of their form, age or location.
C.   Native plant protection. No person shall destroy, mutilate, remove from
the premises or relocate to another place on the premises any cacti, indigenous
trees and/or shrubs which are four inches or greater in caliper measured at the
base, any plants listed in the endangered species act as threatened,
endangered, and category 1, 2 and 3 species, and any plants included in the
Marana protected native plant list, without first applying for and submitting a
native plant plan to the town. Native understory plants shall be maintained in
an existing stand of plants and preserved in place.
D.   Applicability. A native plant plan shall be required for all of the
following:
   1.   All new development.
   2.   Expansions of existing development.
      a.   If the expansion is less than 25% of the area of the lot or parcel,
the requirements of this chapter apply only to the proposed expansion area.
      b.   If the expansion is 25% or greater or if expansions after October 2,
2001, cumulatively result in a 25% or greater expansion in land area, floor
area, lot coverage, or vehicular use area, the requirements of this chapter
apply to the proposed expansion area and the remaining undeveloped site area.
E.   Exceptions. A native plant plan shall not be required for the following:
   1.   On sites for which a grading plan is not required or where the total
area covered by all grading permits is 14,000 square feet or less.
   2.   A project on a site that does not contain any plant on the town's
protected native plant list, demonstrated by the applicant through photographic
and/or on-site verification, subject to the planning department's
determination. Supporting photographic verification must be submitted to the
planning department for review and approval at the time of development
application.
   3.   Previously graded sites containing no significant native vegetation may
apply for a native plant plan exception. Supporting photographic verification
must be submitted to the planning department for review and approval at the
time of development application.
   4.   A project that maintains a minimum 30% of the project area as NUOS. The
perimeter boundary of the NUOS shall be described and depicted with bearings
and distances to assure that the set-aside area equals a minimum of 30% of the
project area.
F.   Professional expertise. Preparation of all elements of the native plant
plan and on-site monitoring shall be performed by one of the following plant
professionals:
   1.   A landscape architect registered in the state of Arizona.
   2.   An arborist certified by the international society of arboriculture.
   3.   A horticulturist, biologist, or botanist with a minimum B.A. or B.S. in
an appropriate arid environment natural resource field.
   4.   An individual accepted by the planning manager based on his or her
credentials.
G.   Native plant permit approval or denial. A native plant plan application
may be approved, approved conditionally, or denied.
   1.   Where the planning manager determines that the application is in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter the plan shall be approved with
such conditions and assurances attached as necessary to ensure that the site
resource inventory and native plant plan are successfully accomplished.
   2.   Where the planning manager determines that the application is not in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, the application shall be
denied.
   3.   A new native plant plan shall be required to modify, alter or amend an
approved native plant plan.
   4.   Every native plant plan shall expire and become null and void if the
work authorized under the provisions of this chapter is not commenced within
six months from the date the native plant plan was approved unless otherwise
specified as a condition of the plan approval.
   5.   Before work can be recommenced, a new native plant plan shall be
submitted and approved pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   6.   The planning manager shall have the authority to grant a single
extension not to exceed 180 days, for completion of the work upon written
request of the applicant. Failure to comply with the time limitation without an
extension authorized by the town shall require application for a new native
plant plan pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
H.   Revegetated areas. Areas the planning manager determines have been
successfully revegetated with the type and density of native plants similar to
adjacent areas may be considered NUOS.
I.   Native plant inventory methodologies. Any combination of at least one or
more of the following three methodologies shall be utilized to prepare a native
plant plan. The applicant shall conform to all requirements of the applicable
set aside methodology, plant inventory methodology or the plant appraisal
methodology.
   1.   Set aside methodology. The preservation and mitigation requirements of
this section shall be satisfied by the set aside of an area of the site as NUOS
in conformance with the following requirements.
      a.   The provisions of this section may be combined, or used in
conjunction with the provisions of other plant protection methodologies of this
section.
      b.   A minimum of 30% of the site shall be set aside in perpetuity as
NUOS.
      c.   The NUOS set aside area shall consist of the area or areas with the
highest resource value as determined by the SRI or other method approved by the
planning manager.
      d.   Boundaries of all NUOS shall be clearly delineated on an aerial
photograph and site plan, development plan, or subdivision plat and fenced for
the duration of any construction activities.
      e.   NUOS protection shall include control of invasive species within the
area.
   2.   Plant inventory methodology. The plant inventory methodology is based
upon a native plant inventory of all plants on the Marana protected native
plant list. The criteria set forth in section
17-11-5 L shall be used to determine the viability and transplantability of
protected native plants as well as to determine the numbers and locations of
plants required for preservation-in-place (PIP) or transplanted-on-site (TOS).
The minimum number of protected native plants required for PIP and/or TOS is
based upon a percentage of the viable and transplantable protected native
plants inventoried on-site.
      a.   The minimum standards for the preservation of protected native
plants in the plant inventory methodology shall be satisfied as follows:
         i.   Endangered species and "crested" saguaros. 100% of federal
endangered species and crested saguaros shall be preserved-in-place or salvaged
and transplanted on-site.
         ii.   Saguaros and ironwoods. At least 50% of all viable saguaros and
ironwood trees shall be preserved-in-place or salvaged and transplanted on-
site.
         iii.   Other protected native plants. At least 30% of each genus and
species of other viable and transplantable protected native plants shall be
preserved-in-place or salvaged and transplanted on-site.
         iv.   The provisions of this subsection may be combined, or used in
conjunction, with other plant preservation methodologies specified in this
section.
   3.   Plant appraisal methodology. The preservation and mitigation
requirements of this section shall be satisfied when the monetary replacement
value is determined for each genus and species of protected native plant which
is removed from the site, damaged, or destroyed. The provisions of this
subsection may be combined, or used in conjunction, with other plant
preservation methodologies specified in this section.
      a.   Site appraisal. A plant appraisal shall be prepared which shall
identify and state the financial value of each protected native plant which is
proposed to be removed from the site, damaged, or destroyed and shall be keyed
to the native plant inventory of the native plant program. The monetary value
of these plants shall be paid into an escrow account of the town's choosing, to
be used for public works landscaping projects within the town. The plant
appraisal shall be conducted by a recognized plant professional according to
the most current methods and procedures accepted by the council of tree and
landscape appraisers.
      b.   Expiration of appraisals. Appraisals shall be current within six
months of submittal of the native plant program and shall be valid for a period
of two years after the plan approval date. A revised appraisal value shall be
required for development which does not proceed before the two year time limit
of the appraisal has expired.
      c.   Amendment of appraisals. Where any protected native plant is removed
from the site, damaged, or destroyed and is not identified on the appraisal
prepared in conformance with the native plant program, the protected native
plants shall be appraised pursuant to this section, and the appraisal shall be
amended to include all additional protected native plants removed and their
financial value.
   4.   Preservation and mitigation requirements. Protected native plants which
are proposed to be or are removed from the site, damaged, or destroyed during
development shall be replaced by plants of the same genus and species at a rate
of 1.5:1 to account for mortality. The native plant preservation plan shall
detail the size and value of replacement plants to demonstrate that the
monetary value of replacement plants shall be equal to the monetary value of
each species of protected native plant which is removed from the site, damaged,
or destroyed.
J.   General provisions and submittal requirements. The following general
provisions and submittal requirements shall apply to the submittal of all
native plant programs and native plant permits:
   1.   Submittals required.
      a.   The native plant program shall consist of the information required
in this section. Additional information may also be required by the planning
manager to insure that the findings of this code are fulfilled.
      b.   Native plant inventory, containing:
         i.   Aerial photograph and site plan overlay at a minimum scale of 1"
= 100' showing the location of all protected native plants within the proposed
affected area and
within ten feet of any construction limits.
         ii.   List of the number, species, size, general condition, and
salvage status of all protected native plants within the proposed affected area
that are to be either transplanted on or off-site or preserved in-place. This
inventory shall be based upon the criteria set forth in section
17-11-5 L of this code.
         iii.   The native plant inventory methodology selected from subsection
17-11-5 I, shall include the proposed location of all protected native plants
to be relocated within the proposed affected area.
         iv.   Native plant holding nursery site location where plant material
is to be stored.
         v.   Locations of riparian and xeroriparian areas.
      c.   If the plant appraisal methodology is selected, a plant appraisal
based on a native plant inventory for each plant to be removed from the site
shall be submitted.
      d.   If the set aside methodology is selected; no grubbing, grading,
construction, or salvaging of any plants on the site shall take place prior to
the submittal and approval. Protected native plants designated shall not be
destroyed, damaged, salvaged, transplanted, or removed from the site except in
accordance with the approved plan.
K.   Plant disposition. The native plant preservation plan shall indicate the
disposition of protected native plants in excess of those needed to meet the
requirements of this code and other applicable regulations. It is encouraged
that all protected native plants that are not proposed to remain on-site be
salvaged and transplanted off-site. The plan shall indicate conformance with
the requirements of the federal endangered species act and the Arizona native
plant law. The planning department shall be provided with verification of
required salvage permits from the U.S. fish and wildlife service for the
applicable endangered and threatened genus and species and verification of
required notification to the Arizona department of agriculture prior to the
issuance of a grading permit.
L.   Criteria. Protected native plants shall not be destroyed, mutilated, or
removed from the premises, or relocated on the premises except in accordance
with an approved native plant program required in conjunction with the issuance
of native plant permit. No native plant program shall be approved until it has
been demonstrated that the following criteria have been met:
   1.   The density/ intensity of the development for the approved land use
shall be an important element in the determination of the base requirements for
plant retention and salvage. A site resource inventory (section
17-11-3) shall be submitted and approved prior to submittal element of the
native plant program. The native plant program shall provide reasonable plant
salvage, protection, and storage and shall insure consistency with existing
neighborhood character.
   2.   The site plan shall be consistent with the site resource inventory and
be designed to protect and incorporate significant on site natural amenities
(i.e. unique or significant vegetation, unique or significant rock
outcroppings, significant riparian habitats and wildlife corridors, etc.) and
minimize the number of salvageable plants which need to be removed to allow
reasonable construction on the site. These relationships shall promote and
enhance the character of the native environment rather than contrast or
domesticate it.
   3.   A vegetation inventory and analysis shall provide a clear,
comprehensive review and listing of plant materials, their condition and
physical relationships on site so as to aid the site planning and determination
of plant salvageability. The native plant viability and transplantability
status shall be determined for each native plant of the minimum size and shall
be used to determine the numbers and locations of plants required for
preservation. The following plant viability and transplantability criteria
shall be used:
      a.   Plant viability criteria. Plant viability is based upon plant
health, age and form. Plants rated low are not considered viable and are not
required to be assessed according to the transplantability criteria. Plants
rated medium or high are considered viable and shall be further assessed under
the transplantability criteria.
         i.   High. A high plant viability rating shall be assigned to plants
meeting the following criteria.
            a)   Health: plant is good to excellent with no major infestations
of insects or apparent diseases.
            b)   Age: plant age is young or mature with likely chance of long
survival.
            c)   Form: plant is relatively undamaged with a healthy branching
habit.
         ii.   Medium. A medium rating shall be assigned to plants which do not
meet all of the criteria for a high rating but have sufficient merit to warrant
preservation, in the opinion of the qualified plant professional conducting the
inventory.
         iii.   Low. A low plant viability rating shall be given to plants
meeting any one or more of the following:
            a)   Health: plant health is poor. Generally the result of severe
infestations of pests or diseases or lack of water over time.
            b)   Age: Plant is in a state of decline, suggesting a low
probability of lengthy survival.
            c)   Form: Plant form and character is severely damaged. For trees,
this may include new branches from large, old, dead trunks or weak branching
habit.
      b.   Plant transplantability criteria. Plant transplantability is based
upon plant genus and species, size, soils, context and topography. The
following five categories shall be inventoried to determine the ability to
salvage the viable plants, which will not be preserved-in-place. Plants rated
low for transplantability should not be considered for salvage and transplant.
Plants rated medium to high that are not preserved-in-place should be
considered for salvage and transplant on-site or off-site.
         i.   High. A high rating for transplantability shall be assigned to
viable plants which also meet the following criteria:
            a)   Genus and species: Has a high survival rate for
reestablishment after transplant.
            b)   Size: Overall plant dimensions are suitable for transplanting
based upon the genus and species.
            c)   Soils: Can be excavated, are cohesive, and seem capable of
supporting the rootball system.
            d)   Topography: Permits access with the appropriate equipment
needed to remove plants and their rootball systems.
            e)   Context: Adjacent plants do not possess a likely interference
with root systems or interfere with plant removal.
         ii.   Medium: A medium transplantability rating shall be assigned to
plants which do not meet all of the criteria for a high rating but do have
sufficient merit, in the opinion of the qualified plant professional conducting
the inventory, to warrant transplanting.
         iii.   Low: A low rating shall be assigned to plants which meet the
following criteria:
            a)   Genus and species: Has a low survival rate for reestablishing
after transplant.
            b)   Size: Overall plant dimensions are not suitable for
transplanting based upon the genus and species.
            c)   Soils: Too rocky, sandy, or shallow to excavate a cohesive
rootball system.
            d)   Topography: Seriously limits access to the specimen by the
appropriate equipment (i.e., steep slopes, rock barriers).
            e)   Context: Adjacent plants interfere with removal or present
likely conflicts with the rootball system.
   4.   Areas of the site shall be inventoried to estimate representative
numbers of protected native plants. Areas of the site must be inventoried by
sampling typical identifiable areas for each genus and species and estimating
representative plant numbers per square acre of the total site area. The
samples must be representative of the viable species found on site and shall
not be less than 20% of the total site. If different plant communities (upland,
riparian, valley floor, etc.) are found on one site, then a sample of not less
than 20% of each defined community, shall be inventoried.
   5.   All plants which are salvaged and transplanted on-site shall be rated
as viable and transplantable prior to relocation.
   6.   All protected native plants shall be properly tagged and/ or permitted
in accordance with the federal endangered species act, the Arizona native plant
law, and this article, as applicable.
   7.   Once the inventory by sampling is complete, then the field tagging and
protection of those plants to be preserved-in-place (PIP) or transplanted-on-
site (TOS) can take place.
   8.   All PIP plants must be identified on an aerial photo and fenced for
protection prior to subsequent grading of the site and construction activities.
Fencing should include sufficient area to avoid compaction of plant roots.
Plants within a designated natural undisturbed open space, under any method, do
not require individual tagging since their boundaries will be fenced.
   9.   Plants to be TOS may be identified and included in a TOS 'pool'. A
summary report shall be prepared that identifies all TOS plants by quantity,
genus and species. This summary shall be located on the native plant program
plan and any associated landscape plan. The selection of specific TOS plants
may vary according to field conditions and therefore, final selection will be
made by the "plant professional" and the salvage contractor. Once the total
numbers of plants to be TOS have been identified in the field, they must be
field tagged for TOS.
   10.   All protected native plants scheduled to remain in place (except those
scheduled to remain in place as part of a NUOS area) or authorized for
relocation by the approved native plant permit must be tagged with an embossed
metal inventory number which cross references to the inventory list and aerial
photograph submitted as part of the native plant program, so that the
disposition of each plant can be easily identified. Tags required by this
article shall be affixed in a visible location on the plant, preferably on the
north side of each plant, whenever possible. Once affixed, the tags shall not
be removed until the plants are removed or relocated in compliance with the
native plant permit and a final inspection has been made.
   11.   All protected native vegetation to remain in-place as part of a NUOS
area shall be adequately protected during grading and construction through
placement of a fence barrier surrounding the entire NUOS area. NUOS plants that
are to remain in-place as part of a NUOS area, do not require tagging.
   12.   A conceptual analysis and design of the site vegetation and/or
landscaping shall insure that the character of the project be consistent with
the natural density, distribution, and maturity of vegetation on adjacent
properties.
   13.   If the conceptual analysis and design reveals an excess supply of
onsite salvageable plants, the relocation program shall designate alternative
projects within areas of suitable habitat, in municipal, county, state and
federal reclamation and re-vegetation projects in addition to off-site
privately owned properties.
   14.   To assure full implementation and completion of the approved plans and
permits, the town will require a mutual consent agreement between the town and
the applicant signed and guaranteed by cash or a bond acceptable to the town
attorney in an amount set by the town manager to guarantee performance of the
provisions of the mutual consent agreement.
   15.   On-site monitoring of all aspects of site clearing, grading, plant
protection, preservation, salvage, and mitigation shall be provided during
project construction, at the expense of the developer, for all residential
development that is over five acres and for all commercial and industrial
development that is over one acre. The monitoring shall be performed by an
individual who is qualified in arid lands native plant resource identification
and protection as specified in subsection
17-11-5 F. The monitor shall provide periodic progress reports to the developer
outlining the status of work accomplished and any problems encountered. The
town shall receive a copy of these reports for the project file.
      a.   The monitor shall be responsible for an assessment of the condition
of the site's plants one year after the final inspection has been performed on
the site. The monitor shall visit the site and prepare a report on plant
status, including general plant condition, the identification of plants under
stress and the appropriate method to relieve the stress, and recommendations
for replacement of plants that are dead or dying. Dead or dying plants shall be
replaced with the same size plant at a one-to-one ratio of like genus and
species. Copies of the report shall be submitted to the site owner/developer
and to the planning department. The owner shall respond to the plant needs as
outlined in the status report within 90 days of report submittal or within a
shorter period if required to improve the health of stressed plants and prevent
plant loss.
17-11-6 Protected native plant list
All sites proposed for development shall be inventoried for each of the
protected native plants set forth on the town of Marana protected native plant
list.
17-11-7 Landscape requirements
A.   Purpose.
   1.   To provide landscaping requirements and standards that reflect the
character and enhance the image of the community.
   2.   To minimize the potential adverse impacts associated with adjacent or
abutting land uses of varying intensities.
   3.   To provide the landowner, developer, or designer with flexibility while
protecting the public interest.
B.   Intent and objectives.
   1.   To visually soften and unify the appearance of commercial and
industrial developments.
   2.   To define major entryways, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, and
parking patterns.
   3.   To buffer less intensive adjacent land uses.
   4.   To integrate the rugged and colorful landscape character of the Sonoran
desert into the town's commercial and industrial developments.
   5.   Conserve groundwater resources in conformance with the Arizona
groundwater code, A.R.S. title 45, chapter 2, by:
      a.   Specifying the use of xeriscape design principles and standards;
      b.   Using water harvesting techniques to help control and utilize
stormwater runoff;
      c.   Specifying xeriscape plant materials from approved lists; and
      d.   Encouraging the use of reclaimed water.
   6.   Protect the general public health, safety, and welfare by incorporating
design guidelines that:
      a.   Minimize noise, air, water, dust and visual pollution;
      b.   Screen and buffer incompatible land uses;
      c.   Preserve property values and the character of neighborhoods;
      d.   Reduce the heat and glare absorbed and radiated by development;
      e.   Conserve energy resources;
      f.   Control soil erosion;
      g.   Control growth of noxious, invasive plants; and
      h.   Increase traffic safety.
   7.   Reduce the negative impacts between potentially incompatible uses and
zones by buffering or screening.
   8.   Encourage preservation-in-place of healthy native plants through
sensitive design.
C.   Landscape plan requirement.
   1.   An approved landscape plan, including a planting plan and irrigation
plan, is required for all of the following:
      a.   Prior to approval of the development plan, preliminary plat and
final plat or issuance of building permits.
      b.   Additions to buildings which increase the gross building area by 25%
or more.
      c.   All off-street parking areas and landscape buffers.
   2.   All landscape plans shall be sealed by a registered landscape
architect.
D.   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any of the
following:
   1.   Individually owned residential lots.
   2.   Additions of less than 25% of total floor area of non-residential
buildings.
   3.   Any preliminary plat or development plan submitted prior to the
effective date of this section.
E.   Landscape plan content, standards, form, submission and filing fee. Refer
to the landscape plan application checklist for additional requirements.
   1.   General.
      a.   Plant materials shall be graphically delineated on the plan with
written information in list format on the plan, that includes genus and species
name, common name, size and quantity;
      b.   Proposed location of all new and salvaged plant materials.
      c.   All inorganic materials such as crushed rock or decomposed granite
groundcovers, paving materials, boulders, benches, fountains, water features,
sculpture, and trash receptacles shall be shown graphically and include
information regarding size, quantity, color, and location.
      d.   Water harvesting, detention/retention basins, and berms used for
water collection shall be graphically shown on the plan and shall include a
written explanation of their purpose and anticipated runoff collection.
      e.   Irrigation plans shall show size and location of all equipment
needed to irrigate the site to industry standards.
   2.   Landscaping plans in specific plan areas.
      a.   When proposed development falls within a specific plan the landscape
guidelines for that plan shall be adhered to.
      b.   If the plan does not provide guidelines for any standard as defined
in this code, this code shall override the specific plan.
      c.   If the specific plan landscape design guidelines are less
restrictive than related guidelines in this code, the more restrictive of the
two shall be adhered to.
   3.   Plants must conform to the town's official regulatory plant list. If a
designer wishes to use a plant not found on the list a written request must be
made. The request shall state the plant's characteristics which make it
compatible with the regulations.
   4.   The landscape design shall be consistent with the environmental context
of the development site. Preservation of native on-site vegetation shall be a
primary objective of site planning and development. Specimen plants shall be
given particular consideration for retention on site.
   5.   Any part of a development site which has been disturbed and is not
required for buildings, structures, private residential yards, loading and
vehicular access ways, streets, paved parking and utility areas, pedestrian
walks and hard-surfaced activity areas shall be landscaped.
   6.   Natural undisturbed desert is an acceptable form of landscaping.
Wherever the undisturbed natural desert landscape cannot be preserved,
landscape design and construction shall promote the use of transplanted on-site
desert plants, container-grown native plants, seeded desert plants and
inorganic groundcover.
   7.   Xeriscape design principles and plant selection based on function,
water requirement and most suitable environmental exposure of the plant
materials shall be included in all proposals.
   8.   Turf applications for parks, recreational facilities, golf courses,
school grounds, institutions and cemeteries are regulated by the Arizona
department of water resources and are not covered in this chapter. All other
building uses are covered in subsection
17-11-7 B.
   9.   Landscape designs shall be in harmony with the environmental context of
the development site.
      a.   Plants shall be selected from the town's official regulatory plant
list.
      b.   Trees and shrubs.
         i.   Trees shall be at least fifteen-gallon size at planting time.
         ii.   Shrubs shall be at least one-gallon size at planting time.
         iii.   Trees and shrubs shall be planted so that at maturity they do
not interfere with overhead or underground service lines, traffic sight lines
and the property rights of adjacent property owners.
         iv.   Trees with invasive roots which are planted near public
sidewalks or curbs shall be installed with suitable root diverters to minimize
heaving of those improvements.
         v.   Plants shall be grouped, clustered or unevenly spaced to prevent
an unnatural landscape appearance.
         vi.   Multi-stemmed plants shall be included in the planting matrix to
provide a natural looking landscape.
      c.   Groundcover.
         i.   Inorganic groundcover shall be used in combination with trees and
shrubs and shall not exceed two-thirds of the total landscaped area, devoted to
groundcover.
         ii.   All unpaved landscape areas shall be planted with shrubs,
accents or vines, or covered with appropriate organic or inorganic groundcover.
      d.   Irrigation and water features.
         i.   All water use for landscape irrigation and enhancement shall
conform to the Arizona groundwater code, A.R.S. title 45, chapter 2.
         ii.   Irrigation plans shall indicate how each introduced planting is
served by a water-conserving, underground irrigation system. Water harvesting
and drip irrigation are recommended methods. Irrigation shall be designed to
avoid watering hardscape areas and built structures.
         iii.   Reclaimed water irrigation shall be encouraged for all
landscaped and turf areas.
         iv.   Landscape designs shall be integrated with hydrology, grading
and earthwork plans for the site and shall make maximum use of site stormwater
run-off for irrigation purposes.
         v.   Water design features, such as ponds and fountains, shall be at a
scale and design compatible with the desert environment.
      e.   Natural and built features.
         i.   Earth berms shall be designed with a reverse curve at the
base to allow a natural transition to existing grades. They shall not exceed a
slope of 3:1 and shall be adequately covered with plant material, groundcover
or rip-rap to control erosion. Planted berms shall be designed to retain
irrigation water.
         ii.   Walls, fences, signs, landscaping and other potential
obstructions shall be located to minimize sight line or view limitations.
         iii.   If boulders are used one third of the approximate volume shall
be buried to provide a natural appearance.
      f.   Oasis exception.
         i.   An oasis area is a zone of planting where non-drought tolerant
plant materials and turf are allowed. Turf use shall not exceed 20% of the
total landscaped area. This area must be located near an area of high
pedestrian use such as an entry, a recreation area, break area, clubhouse,
courtyard, seating or dining area. Consideration will be made for areas
developed as special focal points. There are two methods of determining the
allowed oasis area. The calculation must be shown on the plans.
            a)   Multifamily uses: Multiply net site area by 5%.
            b)   All other uses: Multiply net site area by 2.5%.
         ii.   If a site is being phased, only that phase or area presented for
development will be considered a part of the net site area.
F.   Landscape buffer standards.
   1.   Purpose.
      a.   Landscape buffers provide the following four distinct functions:
         i.   Serve as landscape screens to mitigate visual impacts;
         ii.   Provide a landscape setback to reduce noise;
         iii.   Physically separate incompatible adjacent land uses; and
         iv.   Provide an aesthetic transition between adjacent compatible land
uses.
      b.   In addition, landscape buffers function to eliminate or minimize
potential nuisances such as dirt, litter, noise, glare of lights, and signs.
They also visually soften and screen unsightly buildings or parking areas.
Landscape buffers are also designed to ensure a desired character along public
streets and roads.
   2.   A landscape buffer may be used for passive recreation. It may contain
pedestrian, bike and equestrian trails. Where appropriate, linkages shall be
encouraged within or along a landscape buffer as long as the total width of the
buffer is maintained, and all other regulations of the code are met. Swimming
pools, tennis courts, sports fields, golf courses, parking lots, or other uses
requiring structures or removal of vegetation shall not be permitted within a
landscape buffer.
   3.   Landscape buffers shall be located on the outer perimeter of a lot or
parcel, extending to the property or boundary lines and shall be determined in
accordance with the landscape buffers matrices set forth in subparagraph 5
below.
   4.   Landscape buffer plant requirements shall be determined by application
of the landscape buffers matrices set forth in subparagraph 5 below.
   5.   Landscape buffers matrices. The numbers in table 1 (Landscape buffers
matrix - between zoning districts) and table 2 (Landscape buffers matrix -
street frontage) refer to the codes in table 3 (Landscape buffers matrix
codes).
Table 1. Landscape buffers matrix - between zoning districts
Subject zone or zoning group Adjacent zone or zoning group
                             AG RA ER NR GR MR RR C I
Table 1. Landscape buffers matrix - between zoning districts
Subject  Adjacent zone or zoning group
zone or
zoning   AG  RA ER NR GR MR RR C   I
group
AG       n/a 1  1  1  2  2  2  3   4
RA       1   1  1  1  2  2  2  3   4
ER       1   1  1  1  2  2  2  3   4
NR       1   1  1  1  2  2  2  3   4
                                   1 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
GR       2   2  2  2  1  1  1  1*  8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
                                   IMAGES/0-0-0-2300.jpg]
                                   1 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
MR       2   2  2  2  1  1  1  1*  8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
                                   IMAGES/0-0-0-2300.jpg]
                                   1 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
RR       2   2  2  2  1  1  1  1*  8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
                                   IMAGES/0-0-0-2300.jpg]
C (NC or                           2 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
VC)      3   3  3  3  2  2  2  n/a 8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
                                   IMAGES/0-0-0-2300.jpg]
I (LI or 4   4  4  4  4  4  4  3   n/a
HI)
 
* Use code 2 if adjacent parcel was developed prior to adoption of these
landscape buffer requirements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2300.jpg]Use code 3 if adjacent parcel was developed prior to
adoption of these landscape buffer requirements.
Table 2.   Landscape buffers matrix - street frontage
Subject zone or zoning group Street frontage
                             Front Side or Rear
Table 2.   Landscape buffers matrix - street frontage
Subject zone or zoning group Street frontage
                             Front Side or Rear
AG                           5     3
RA                           5     3
ER                           5     3
NR                           5     3
GR                           5     3
MR                           5     3
RR                           5     3
C (NC or VC)                 5     3
I (LI or HI)                 4     4
 
 
Table 3. Landscape buffers matrix codes
Code Depth of buffer Plant count
1    6' minimum      1.5 per 100 sq. ft.
2    10' minimum     1.5 per 100 sq. ft.
3    15' minimum     2.0 per 100 sq. ft.
4    25' minimum     1.5 per 100 sq. ft.
5    10' minimum     1.0 per 100 sq. ft.
 
   a.   For every three shrubs planted, one 15 gallon tree shall be planted.
Example: using code 1: a 1000 square foot landscape buffer area would need 15
plants: 12 one gallon shrubs and four 15 gallon trees. Earth berms of a minimum
size of two cubic yards (approximately 8'W x 4.5'L x 1.5'H) may be used in lieu
of three shrubs not to exceed 25% of shrubs.
   b.   Ground cover plants are required in addition to above plants. Ground
cover equal to 20% of the total number of trees and shrubs will be located in
the landscape buffer area.
G.   Additional landscape buffer options.
   1.   Landscape buffer agreements. With the approval of the planning manager,
property owners may enter into agreements to use abutting land to provide some
or all of a required landscape buffer.
   2.   Reduction of landscape buffer requirements. The landscape buffer
requirement may be reduced if a six foot high decorative masonry wall is
constructed and the wall requirement is noted on the approved subdivision plat
and landscape plan. If a wall is used as part of the landscape buffer
requirement, the calculations for plant materials shall be reduced by one-
third.
   3.   All landscape buffers are required to be landscaped. The landscape
buffers shall contain the following minimum planting materials; six - 15 gallon
trees, 15 - one gallon shrubs and ten -one gallon ground cover / accent plants
per 1500 square feet of area. Existing natural desert may be utilized to meet
or exceed these planting requirements. Where the number of existing natural
desert plants do not meet the minimum landscape buffer planting requirement of
this section, the natural desert plants shall be supplemented with additional
native plants transplanted from on-site or from nursery plants. The applicant
is encouraged to utilize on-site native plants within the landscape buffers
where possible.
   4.   Natural drainage ways and existing natural vegetation. Natural drainage
ways and existing natural vegetation may be used for screening if approved, in
writing by the planning manager, provided such uses are consistent with the
regulations contained in
chapter 17-15 (floodplain and erosion hazard management code). Natural drainage
ways and existing vegetation used for this purpose shall be a minimum of 20
feet wide.
H.   General.
   1.   All trees and plants shall meet Arizona nursery association minimum
guidelines as to caliper and height and the town's official regulatory plant
list.
   2.   Low-water plants found on the town's regulatory plant list shall be
used.
   3.   All landscaped areas shall be irrigated using an underground drip
irrigation system. All landscaping shall be irrigated from a secondary, non-
potable water source where available.
   4.   Trees within landscaped areas should be sited and spaced to avoid
conflicts with overhead light fixtures.
   5.   Landscape plans shall be coordinated with above-and below-ground
utilities to avoid irresolvable conflicts at the time of installation.
Ordinance 2022.006 amended Section 17-11-7 F.3-5
17-11-8 Landscaping standards for off street parking areas
All off-street parking areas are required to comply with the following
regulations:
A.   Minimum requirements. A minimum of 15% of the gross parking area (includes
all paved access and parking areas) shall be devoted to amenity landscaping as
follows:
   1.   All landscape areas within ten feet of the perimeter of the gross paved
parking area may be included in the 15% gross parking area calculation.
   2.   Any off-street parking area for five or more vehicles shall include a
ten foot minimum width landscape buffer between the parking area and the public
right-of-way. This area shall include screening as required by section
17-9-2.
   3.   At a minimum, every group of ten parking spaces shall be separated with
a landscape planter island measuring a minimum five feet in width (from inside
of curb to inside of curb) by the length of the parking stall, containing a
minimum of one canopy tree and two groundcover plants per planter island.
   4.   Landscape islands shall be a minimum of 6 feet in order to protect
plant materials from car overhangs and pedestrian traffic.
   5.   Plant materials shall be chosen so that within five years of
installation, planting materials shall achieve a 40% shading of the asphalt
areas.
   6.   Landscaping materials shall not obstruct sight distances or vehicle
turning movements.
   7.   The use of decorative paving materials to indicate pedestrian crossings
and paths within the parking area is encouraged.
   8.   For every 150 square feet of landscaped area, a minimum of one tree,
five shrubs and groundcover plants as required.
   9.   Landscaped areas in parking lots are encouraged to utilize any
combination of decorative paving, inert groundcover, berms and additional plant
materials.
   10.   Planters, walls and fences adjacent to the parking areas shall have a
protective six inch curb to shield against damage to plants and irrigation
heads.
      a.   Curb cuts may be strategically incorporated to encourage stormwater
to drain to depressed planting areas.
      b.   Appropriate paving should be used where pedestrians are likely to
cross landscaped areas.
   11.   Protective concrete curbs and standard concrete wheel stops are
required where walls and fences abut driveways and parking stalls.
   12.   Plant materials selected for use at the perimeter of landscape islands
shall be limited to ground covers or other low-growing species that are capable
of withstanding regular foot traffic.
Ordinance 2022.006 amended Section 17-11-8 A.2
17-11-9 Roadway landscape standards
The primary purpose of this section is to promote the safety of those people
using Marana roadways, vehicular and bicycle traffic as well as maintenance
workers and pedestrians. Sight visibility and plant material selection and
location are important factors. This section also is intended to promote the
harvesting of water within the landscape area.
A.   Hardscape shall be designed to deter materials from washing onto sidewalks
and the roadway. The toe of slopes with decomposed granite shall be located 12"
minimum from walls and curb, and shall end in reverse curves.
B.   Boulders shall have a maximum 18" exposed above grade.
C.   Bullnoses or any median three feet or less in width shall not be planted.
D.   All sight visibility triangles shall be indicated on plans. No mature
plants over 18" or tree canopies growing lower than six feet shall be allowed
in these zones.
E.   Shrubs shall be placed so that when the mature size is reached, the edge
of the shrub is one foot from the curb.
F.   Tree trunks shall be located a minimum of seven feet from median curb and
nine feet from right-of-way curb.
G.   Planting of tree materials which shall overhang into roadway at maturity
is discouraged. Overhanging branches are a hazard to bicyclists and have the
potential of being injured or destroyed by high profile automobiles.
17-11-10 Maintenance
A.   Continuous maintenance provisions shall be provided on the landscape plan.
Maintenance shall include a plan, which accommodates the following:
   1.   The irrigation system should be designed to assure consistent water
coverage of newly planted areas, regular watering of non-native species and
specific watering schedule per plant type or xeriscape zone.
   2.   Pruning methods shall allow maximum shading while preventing
obstruction into walkways, curb areas, drives, and line of sight triangles.
Tree clearance for pedestrian and automobile passage shall be a minimum of
seven feet once the tree has reached maturity. Pruning shall be consistent with
the natural growth pattern or characteristic form of the plant. Opaque hedges
are permitted.
   3.   Ornamental landscaping shall require regular fertilizing, aerating and
mulching schedules to encourage plant growth and water conservation.
   4.   General landscape maintenance such as the clearing of debris, litter
and weeds shall be included on a regular maintenance schedule.
   5.   Any plant material in areas of required landscaping that does not
survive shall be replaced with an equivalent size and species within 30 days on
an ongoing basis. Failure to replace dead plant material within the specified
time period shall constitute a zoning violation.
   6.   Irrigation shall be routinely tested and shall be repaired and replaced
as necessary to prevent excess spray or water to planted areas, curbs and
pavement, clogged emitters at each plant, and flooding of low lying areas.
Improper irrigation system maintenance which results in pooling or runoff of
excess water shall result in a warning. Failure to resolve the problem within
30 days shall constitute a zoning violation.
   7.   Architectural and built structures, sculpture or decorative features,
and exterior furnishings (benches, trash receptacles, etc.) shall be maintained
to prevent injury, maintain access, and prevent defacement.
Ordinance 2022.006 amended Section 17-11-10 A.5-6
17-11-11 Compliance
A.   Failure to comply with the requirements of the approved native plant
program shall cause immediate suspension of all inspection activity. Inspection
(s) shall not resume until a sum of money is paid to the town for the purpose
of replacing and maintaining protected native plant materials as required in
the approved native plant program.
B.   The planning commission shall determine the sum of money to be paid to the
town from the following schedule:
   1.   Protected native trees - $300 per caliper inch (measured one foot above
ground level).
   2.   Protected native cacti - $200 per foot.
   3.   Maximum per plant - $10,000.
   4.   Determination of the sum of money to be paid to the town pursuant to
this section shall be based upon the type, size, density, distribution, and
condition of plant materials that existed on the property prior to the
violation, or upon inspection of the remains of destroyed plant materials or
other physical evidence as may be available.
C.   The sum of money required by this subsection shall be used to replace
removed or damaged plant materials whose retention was required by this
ordinance and to maintain replacement plant materials for a period of three
years. Additionally, 15% of the total amount payable shall be kept by the town
as payment for the enforcement of these regulations and administration of the
agreement specified below.
D.   Prior to issuance of any permits for development of the property on which
the violation occurred, the property owner shall enter into an agreement with a
landscape installation and maintenance service and the town to ensure
replacement and three years maintenance of the replacement plant materials, to
provide disbursement of the sum of money for the purposes of replacement and to
pay administrative costs. The sum of money paid to the town in excess of the
amounts specified in the agreement shall be refunded.
E.   An on-site visit will be conducted by staff at the time of final
installation to approve compliance with the native plant program and permit and
the approved landscape plan prior to authorizing a certificate of occupancy.
The zoning inspector may recommend correction of non-compliance items that will
need to be corrected. Re-evaluation shall be made within an agreed upon time
frame. Prior to receiving a certificate of approval or occupancy, all non-
compliance items shall be completed to specification in this chapter. The
property owner, agent or other authorized personnel will be notified in writing
of the non-compliance items by planning department staff.
F.   The planning department staff will periodically spot-inspect all native
plant salvage projects and all landscape installations for compliance with the
approved native plant program and permit and the approved landscape plans and
on-going maintenance as required in this chapter.
17-11-12 Plan approval prior to permitting
The native plant preservation plan shall be submitted to the planning
department prior to or concurrently with any plan(s) and applicable fees
required for development approval, including a grubbing/ grading plan,
landscape plan, site plan, development plan, or preliminary plat. No permits
shall be issued prior to submittal and approval of the native plant program.
17-11-13 Assurances
A.   Native plant assurances. The town may require that implementation and
compliance with an approved native plant preservation plan be guaranteed by
assurances, such as performance bonds, a letter of credit from a financial
institution, or a third party trust acceptable to the town, as determined by
town policy and regulation.
B.   Landscape maintenance assurances. An approved final plat shall require
covenants or assurances which:
   1.   Ensure the continued maintenance of required landscaping, buffering and
associated irrigation systems;
   2.   Assign responsibility of maintenance to the property owner, lessee,
heirs, assigns, agent, a homeowner's association or other liable entity; and
   3.   Ensure that any plant materials included in an approved landscape plan
that do not survive after installation are replaced with plant materials of the
same or like species of equal size within 30 days of the plant's demise.
Ordinance 2022.006 amended Section 17-11-13 A.-B.
CHAPTER 17-12.
PROTECTION OF CULTURAL RESOURCES
Chapter 17-12 was inserted into the town code by Ordinance 2021.010
Sections:
17-12-1   Purposes
17-12-2   Definitions
17-12-3   Applicability
17-12-4   Professional qualifications
17-12-5   Archaeological review
17-12-6   Development of cultural resources
17-12-7   Appeals
17-12-1 Purposes
The purposes of this section are to:
A.   Establish guidelines and specifications for the documentation and
protection of archaeological and other cultural resources;
B.   Encourage sensitive development within the town;
C.   Preserve and protect cultural resources within the town;
D.   Ensure compliance with all state historic preservation laws and
regulations, and federal laws and regulations when required; and
E.   Advance education and appreciation of our cultural heritage.
17-12-2 Definitions
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms and phrases listed below shall have
the following meanings:
   1.   Archaeological resource: Sites, districts, and objects representing
material remains of past human activity and life, which are preserved in their
original setting and of historic or pre-historic significance.
   2.   Cultural resource: Any archaeological and historic site, building,
structure, object, district, or landmark having historical, architectural,
archaeological, cultural, or scientific importance.
   3.   Development: The performance of any building or land disturbing
operation. The making of any material change in the use or appearance of any
structure or land.
17-12-3 Applicability
A.   This chapter shall apply to all development and ground disturbance within
the town, except for the development of a private single-family residence on a
single family lot.
B.   Subsections
17-12-6 B and C, on discoveries during construction, still apply to any
development project exempt from completing an archaeology survey and report.
17-12-4 Professional qualifications
All documents and activities relevant to the management, preservation, and
recovery of archaeological and historic resources will be prepared or
undertaken by a qualified archaeologist permitted by the Arizona state museum
(ASM) working under the appropriate ASM survey and recovery permits. A list of
ASM permitted consultants is available at the ASM website: https://
statemuseum.arizona.edu/crm.
17-12-5 Archaeological review
A.   All proposed development projects within the town shall be reviewed for
their potential impact on archaeological resources and all impacts addressed
prior to the issuance of any permits. The process will typically follow the
steps outlined here:
   1.   Records check.
      a.   A qualified archaeologist working for the developer will need to
check site records with ASM to determine if the project area contains
previously recorded cultural resources.
      b.   The archaeologist will make recommendations for further action based
on the information provided in the report.
      c.   Town staff will review the recommendation and determine if further
action is required.
   2.   Survey and assessment.
      a.   If it is deemed necessary by the town, the developer will have a
qualified archaeologist conduct an on the ground survey of the project area and
all other project related areas.
      b.   The archaeologist will then submit a report to the town that
includes all findings and recommendations for further actions.
      c.   Town staff will review the submitted report and determine if further
action is required.
   3.   Testing.
      a.   If the survey report recommends further investigation of the site,
the developer will have a qualified archaeologist develop a testing plan.
      b.   Results of testing must be submitted and approved prior to ground
disturbing activities.
      c.   After a testing plan has been approved and all work completed by the
archaeologist, a final report will be submitted to the town indicating results
of testing and recommendations for further work or clearance.
   4.   Mitigation.
      a.   If mitigation is required, then the developer will have a qualified
archaeologist develop a mitigation plan. Mitigation options may include, but
are not limited to, site avoidance, monitoring during construction, and full
data recovery.
      b.   Town staff will review the submitted plan and either concur with the
plan, or request revisions.
      c.   After the mitigation plan has been approved and all work completed
by the archaeologist, a final report will be submitted to the town indicating
what mitigation measures were taken and that all archaeological requirements
for the project have been addressed.
   5.   Federalized projects. If a project has an element that requires a
federal permit, the above steps will still be required, but the lead federal
agency will review all reports and provide cultural clearance for the project.
The town will be the lead on sites within the project area that are not under
jurisdiction of the lead federal agency.
17-12-6 Development of cultural resources
A.   If work is being performed without first having obtained cultural
resources clearance, all work shall cease. The town may seek an injunction and
any other remedy at law or equity to enforce the stop order.
B.   When a previously unidentified archaeological site is discovered in the
course of construction, the property owner immediately shall notify the town.
The town will then assess the findings and determine what type of
archaeological work the developer will need to have done.
C.   If human remains, including human skeletal remains, cremations, and/or
ceremonial objects and funerary objects are found during discovery, scientific
excavation or construction, ground disturbing activities shall cease in the
immediate vicinity of the discovery. State law (A.R.S. § 41-844 and A.R.S. §
41-865) requires that ASM be notified of the discovery of these remains.
17-12-7 Appeals
All appeals of staff determinations shall be made in writing, and submitted to
the town prior to the start of construction.
CHAPTER 17-13.
STANDARDS FOR GRADING AND RELATED SITE WORK
Chapter 17-13 was inserted into the town code by Ordinance 2021.010
Sections:
17-13-1   Purpose and interpretation
17-13-2   Applicability and exemptions
17-13-3   Definitions
17-13-4   General grading and related site work performance standards
17-13-5   Submittal and procedures: general
17-13-6   Submittal and procedures: minor grading type 1
17-13-7   Submittals and procedures: major grading type 2
17-13-8   Submittals and procedures: major utility permits
17-13-9   Submittals and procedures: public infrastructure permits
17-13-10   Inspection and performance defaults
17-13-11   Enforcement
17-13-12   Waivers and interpretation review
17-13-1 Purpose and interpretation
A.   Purpose.
   1.   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety,
general welfare, and aesthetics by regulating grading and related site work
(including initial clearing, brushing or grubbing, subsequent excavating or
filling, and related site work) on private and public land, including land
owned by the town.
   2.   It establishes standards designed to:
      a.   Regulate the development of potentially hazardous terrain;
      b.   Conserve the general visual character of sites and settings;
      c.   Enhance the value of new development; and
      d.   Conserve the value of existing affected properties.
   3.   The guidelines and standards of this chapter have been prepared in the
context of town specific desert environment. They are intended to complement
the applicable provisions of development code and other town ordinances.
   4.   Granting of a permit for grading and related site work shall not
relieve the applicant of responsibilities to other jurisdictions.
B.   Interpretation.
   1.   This section shall be used as a guide whenever a conflict arises in the
interpretation or enforcement of this chapter. The design, implementation, and
mitigation of grading and related site work regulated by this chapter shall be
reviewed by the town staff prior to the issuance of any permit to ensure
compliance with the guidelines of this chapter and the specific standards and
requirements of this chapter.
   2.   The design and implementation of all grading and related site work
shall:
      a.   Minimize scars and other adverse visual impacts resulting from cut
and fill;
      b.   Blend with the natural contours of the land;
      c.   Conserve the natural scenic beauty and vegetation of the site, and;
      d.   Restrict the area and volumes to the minimum necessary to implement
the planned development.
   3.   In all projects, measures shall be taken to:
      a.   Ensure that graded hillside, slopes, or other areas subject to
erosion are stabilized;
      b.   Reduce the erosion effects of stormwater discharge, preserve the
floodway-carrying capacity of natural or constructed waterways by limiting soil
loss, and protect drainageways from siltation;
      c.   Minimize dust pollution and surface water drainage from graded areas
during grading and development; and
      d.   Ensure that development activity is designated and implemented to
minimize adverse impacts and include appropriate restorative measures.
17-13-2 Applicability and exemptions
A.   Scope.
   1.   All development projects shall require either a minor grading type 1 or
a major grading type 2 permit, except as exempted in subsection D of this
section.
   2.   All development projects that construct major utility infrastructure
such as water lines, sewer lines, electrical lines, natural gas lines, and
telecommunication facilities shall require a major utility permit.
   3.   All development projects that construct new infrastructure to be
dedicated to and maintained by the Town shall require a public infrastructure
permit.
   4.   Town development projects shall abide by the requirements of this
chapter. The council may grant a special exception at a public hearing to a
requirement of this chapter for a town development project.
B.   Type 1 permit applicability. A type 1 permit is required for:
   1.   Residential development on a single parcel or lot within a custom lot
subdivision.
   2.   Non-residential development on less than one acre, or which does not
require a subdivision plat or development plan.
   3.   The clearing, brushing, or grubbing of a site.
   4.   Temporary off-site stockpiling of more than 100 cubic yards of fill.
   5.   Grading which requires a permanent cut or fill slope greater than five
feet in height or steeper than a 3:1 slope.
   6.   New pavement of 5,000 to 14,000 square feet.
   7.   The paving of an access easement.
C.   Type 2 permit applicability. A type 2 permit is required for:
   1.   Mass grading of a residential development which requires a subdivision
plat or development plan.
   2.   Non-residential development on one or more acres, or which requires a
subdivision plat or development plan.
   3.   New pavement of more than 14,000 square feet.
   4.   Blasting activities.
   5.   Dry well installations.
   6.   Super pad grading operations.
D.   Exemptions. The following activities are exempted from this chapter.
   1.   Temporary off-site stockpiling of less than 100 cubic yards of fill.
   2.   Resurfacing or maintenance of an existing paved surface, or the
application of a dust palliative on an unpaved road.
   3.   New pavement of less than 5,000 square feet.
   4.   Single-home sewage disposal system.
   5.   Excavation below finished grade for a basement, foundation, wall or
swimming pool authorized by a building permit.
   6.   Cemetery graves.
   7.   Refuse disposal site controlled by other regulations.
   8.   Exploratory excavation under the direction of a soil engineer or
engineering geologist, provided all excavation is properly backfilled in
accordance with town standards.
   9.   Qualified archaeological exploration of a registered archaeological
site.
   10.   Removal of no more than 25% of the individual plants for storage and
replanting on the same property. This provision shall not exempt clearing,
brushing, or grubbing.
   11.   Underground utility crossings under a paved roadway surface or a
continuously-maintained unpaved roadway surface and which provide no
disturbance of the surface. A right-of-way use permit is required for all work
performed within a town right-of-way.
   12.   Grading for the maintenance of an existing private access, road or
driveway, provided that it either existed prior to adoption of, or was
established in conformance with, this chapter. Proof of such may be required by
the town.
   13.   Grading for a utility easement or appurtenant utility access.
   14.   Grading for normal agricultural practices on or within existing areas
of agricultural use.
17-13-3 Definitions
A.   General usage: The definition and usage of terms in this chapter are as
contained within this code, except that the definition and usage of terms
describing drainage are as contained within the Marana floodplain management
ordinance.
B.   Definitions: For purposes of this chapter only, the following words and
terms shall mean:
   1.   Access road: A road within one mile of the grading site, designed on
the approved grading plan, and used, during grading, for the transport of
grading equipment, hauling of fill and other equivalent vehicular traffic to
and from the grading site.
   2.   Approval: Written notice by town staff approving the design, progress
or completion of work.
   3.   Approved plan: The most current grading plan which bears the authorized
signature of approval of town staff.
   4.   Approved testing agency: A facility which is equipped to perform and
certify the tests required by this chapter and whose testing operations are
controlled and monitored by a registered civil engineer.
   5.   Borrow: Earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in
grading a site.
   6.   Brushing: The selective removal of vegetation.
   7.   Clearing: The substantial removal of vegetation.
   8.   Custom lot subdivision: A subdivision that only builds the streets and
other major utility infrastructure and does not design or grade the homesites.
   9.   Development project: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, and excavating.
   10.   Envelope, building:
      a.   A dwelling unit and all attached roofed structures, including
carports or patio ramadas;
      b.   For non-residential development, the building envelope shall be the
main building and all attached roofed structures.
   11.   Envelope, development: The total area encompassed by a continuous line
drawn a minimum distance of five feet outside any and all work shown on the
approved plan and any other surfaces which will be disturbed (as access roads).
There shall be no more than one envelope per permit unless such envelopes are
separated by an undisturbed distance of at least 100 feet.
   12.   Erosion: The wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the
movement of wind, water or ice.
   13.   Excavation: The artificial (e.g. mechanical, manual, blasting, etc.)
removal of earth materials.
   14.   Final inspection: Field inspection conducted by the town prior to
project acceptance or release of assurances (if required).
   15.   Grade: The vertical location of the ground surface.
   16.   Grade, existing: The actual, current ground surface as of the date of
adoption of the ordinance adopting this chapter.
   17.   Grade, finished: The final grade conforming to the approved grading
plan.
   18.   Grade, rough: The stage at which grading substantially conforms to the
approved grading plan.
   19.   Grading: The initial clearing, brushing, or grubbing, and subsequent
excavating or filling, of a site.
   20.   Grading permit: An official document issued by town staff authorizing
the grading and related site work activity specified by the permit conditions.
   21.   Grubbing: The removal of trees and other large plants by their roots.
   22.   Inspector: A person authorized by the town to perform inspection on
grading or related site work.
   23.   Mass grading: Subdivision development characterized by grading all
roads and lot pads at the same time based on a set of cohesive plans.
   24.   Permit conditions: The specifications and requirements of the approved
grading plan, grading statement, soils report, or other documents necessary for
permit approval.
   25.   Related site-work: Work other than general, or mass grading which
involves:
      a.   Below-the-surface operations (such as trenching for utilities or
landscaping);
      b.   Placing of pavement and its substructure;
      c.   Curbs, gutters, and sidewalk;
      d.   Grading of drainage channels; and
      e.   Constructing minor slope protection facilities and retaining walls.
   26.   Retaining wall: A wall designed to withstand lateral and hydrostatic
pressures and built to keep earth from sliding, and which is two feet or
greater in height from the lowest point of earth at the foundation to the top
of the wall.
   27.   Re-vegetation: Placement of living plant material on sites or cut and
fill slopes where the natural vegetation has been removed.
   28.   Site: Any lot or parcel of land, or contiguous combination of lots and
parcels under the same ownership, or unified control, where grading or related
site work is to be performed.
   29.   Slope: An inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is
expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.
   30.   Soil: Naturally occurring deposits overlying bedrock.
   31.   Stabilized slope: A slope treated with re-vegetation or other
mitigation measures approved by the town that contribute to resistance to
erosion of siltation or to structural strength of the slope.
   32.   Super pad: A mass grading operation which brings the site nominally
within the range of the final design grades. This activity requires its own
detailed grading plan. The super pad grading design must be able to exist as a
final product with no adverse impact to surrounding properties should the
ultimate grading not take place.
   33.   Temporary off-site stock-piling: The storing of a quantity of material
for not more than 180 days. A revised period may be accepted by the town
engineer, at his discretion when the permit is issued, and shall determine the
expiration date.
17-13-4 General grading and related site work performance standards
A.   Scope. The performance standards of this section are general grading and
related site work performance requirements.
B.   Natural undisturbed open space (NUOS). No vehicles shall traverse and no
earth moving activities shall be conducted within areas designated by plat, or
grading plan, as natural undisturbed open space (NUOS).
C.   Site re-vegetation and stabilization. All graded areas that have not been
re-vegetated, stabilized, or constructed upon at expiration of the permit shall
be re-vegetated or stabilized within 60 days of the expiration date of the
original permit, unless an extension is issued at the discretion of the town.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2492.png]
 
D.   Slopes. All exposed cut or fill slopes shall be re-vegetated or stabilized
in accordance with the approved grading plan and the "site revegetation and
stabilization" graphic that accompanies this paragraph.
E.   Terracing. Terracing to control surface drainage and debris on cut or fill
slopes may be required.
F.   Fill. Fill shall be compacted and soil-tested in accordance with all
applicable standards.
G.   Setbacks. The following minimum setbacks shall be increased by town staff
if considered necessary for safety or stability, or to prevent possible damage
from water, soil or debris:
   1.   Terraces. The width of a terrace shall be a minimum of six feet.
   2.   Buildings. Buildings shall be set back from the toe and crest of a
slopes in accordance with this chapter, the town building code, or the approved
soils reports, whichever is greatest.
   3.   Rights-of-way. The required setback of a slope toe, or retaining wall
face, adjacent to a public right-of-way shall be ten feet, and may be reduced
with the approval of town staff. Slope easements within the right-of-way may be
considered at the town's discretion.
H.   Drainage control systems.
   1.   Permanent control systems.
      a.   Surface drainage.
         i.   Cut and fill slopes shall be provided with approved surface
drainage for stability and erosion protection of affected properties.
         ii.   Approved surface drainage interceptors shall be provided at the
top of cut and fill slopes where there is surface runoff and erosion potential.
      b.   Subsurface drainage. Subsurface drainage for stability and
protection of affected properties from ground water seepage may be required by
town staff.
   2.   Interim systems. Approved interim drainage control systems shall be
provided.
I.   Restrictions of access.
   1.   If required by the town, points-of-entry to the site during
construction shall be only as designated on the approved grading plan.
   2.   If required by the town, access roads to the site during construction
shall be only as designated on the approved grading plan.
J.   Additional requirements.
   1.   During construction, and until re-vegetation or stabilization has taken
place, dust shall be minimized through application of approved dust controls as
may be required by town staff.
   2.   Public rights-of-way, sidewalks, and other improvements shall be
maintained during construction in a neat and clean condition, free of loose
soil, construction debris, and trash.
   3.   Debris, fill, or equipment shall not be stored within a public right-
of-way without the written approval of the town.
   4.   All excess earth work and debris shall be removed from the site and
disposed of in an approved manner.
K.   Grading within the Tortolita Fan area. To minimize erosion and
sedimentation in the run off from the Tortolita mountains, native vegetation
shall not be removed from that part of the town east of I-10 except where the
town engineer has approved the methods to control erosion, sedimentation, flow
and related factors and their implementation is assured by a mutual consent
agreement between the town and the applicant signed and guaranteed by cash or a
bond acceptable to the town attorney in an amount set by the town Manager to
guarantee performance of the provisions of the mutual consent agreement.
17-13-5 Submittal and procedures: general
A.   Application.
   1.   All applications shall follow the requirements defined in the town's
applications, checklists, and process guides and all required materials and
plans shall be submitted for review to the town.
   2.   The permit application shall be completed and signed by the owner or
authorized representative.
   3.   Fees are payable to the town in accordance with the comprehensive fee
schedule adopted by the town council and amended from time to time.
B.   Assurances. Assurances are required to insure completion of improvements
for major grading type 2 permits, major utility permits, and public
infrastructure permits.
C.   Permit issuance and expiration.
   1.   Issuance. Permits shall be issued by the town after approval of the
grading or improvement plans, including approvals as required by other
agencies, except as noted in section
17-13-7(F) below. A copy of the approved permit with plan shall be kept in an
easily accessible location on the site.
   2.   Expiration. A permit shall be null and void if the authorized work has
not been completed within one year of permit issuance.
D.   Permit extension and reapplication.
   1.   Extensions. Upon written request by the permit holder, the town may
approve up to two time extensions of a permit, for up to 180 days each.
   2.   Reapplication. Reapplication for a permit may be made in accordance
with this chapter.
E.   Changes to permit.
   1.   Hazardous conditions. If drainage problems, soil conditions, flood
hazards, or other potential hazards become known that were not considered when
the permit was issued, the town may require that engineering modifications be
submitted in a report and that the design be modified.
   2.   Nonhazardous conditions. If unanticipated nonhazardous conditions are
encountered during construction and are beyond the scope of the permit, the
permit holder may submit the necessary engineering modifications in a report to
be reviewed and approved by the town.
   3.   Utility conflicts. If utility conflicts are discovered that were not
known when the permit was issued, the town may require that engineering
modifications be submitted in a report and that the utility design be modified.
17-13-6 Submittal and procedures: minor grading type 1.
A.   Scope. An application for a minor grading type 1 permit requires a
completed permit application, grading plan, and grading statement. A survey
sealed by a registered land surveyor is not required.
B.   Grading plan requirements. The grading plan shall show all of the
following:
   1.   The existing and proposed finished grade of the area to be graded,
based on spot elevations or one-foot contour interval maps.
   2.   The extent of graded areas, shaded and labeled "graded area," and,
where structures are to be constructed:
      a.   The existing grade at the primary building corners and proposed
finished floor elevations; and
      b.   The proposed building heights.
   3.   The location of proposed mitigation measures, such as re-vegetation or
retaining walls.
   4.   The exterior boundaries of the site.
   5.   Access roads and points-of-entry to the construction site.
   6.   The grading envelope.
   7.   The location of riparian areas and wildlife corridors slated for
protection shall be clearly delineated and labeled as "off-limits" (see section
17-11-4 above).
C.   Documents preparation.
   1.   Documents shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter and other town standards and applicable checklists.
   2.   Information shall conform to the specific plan, rezoning conditions
(where applicable), and other applicable regulations, such as drainage and
geotechnical reports.
D.   Application review.
   1.   The grading plan shall be reviewed for consistency with applicable
regulations and standards.
   2.   If determined inadequate, the application shall be returned with
comments and the owner may resubmit, without additional fees.
   3.   The town shall require that plans and specifications be modified to
make them consistent with this code or other applicable regulations. A permit
may be issued with additional conditions.
17-13-7 Submittals and procedures: major grading type 2.
A.   Scope. An application for a major grading type 2 permit requires a
completed permit application, improvement plans, and all required reports and
requirements defined in the town's applications, checklists, and process
guides.
B.   Improvement plan requirements. Improvement plans must include all
requirements defined in the town's applications, checklists, and process
guides, and shall conform to all rezoning ordinances, conditions, and other
applicable regulations. All plans shall be sealed by the applicable registered
professional engineer licensed in the state of Arizona.
C.   Soils report. The applicant shall submit a soil report.
   1.   The report shall contain all geotechnical engineering information and
recommendations applicable to the project.
   2.   The civil engineer responsible for preparing the grading plan shall
incorporate all report recommendations into the plan and reference the report
on the improvement plan.
   3.   Approved report recommendations shall become conditions of the permit.
   4.   The geotechnical or civil engineer shall stamp and seal the report
prior to submittal and the date of the seal must be within one year of the
submittal, except that:
      a.   The town may accept a soils report signed and sealed more than one
year prior to the submittal date, if it includes a letter from the geotechnical
engineer addressing any changes that have occurred since the report was
originally sealed, as well as a statement that the recommendations in the
report are still valid for the project.
      b.   The town may accept a soils report signed and sealed more than ten
years prior to the submittal date, if it includes the information required in
subparagraph a above, as well as at least one additional boring to confirm the
recommendations of the original report.
D.   Drainage report. The applicant shall submit a drainage report. The
drainage report will be prepared in technical conformance with provisions of
this chapter and the standards and other applicable requirements of the town.
E.   At-risk grading.
   1.   An at-risk grading permit may be issued in special circumstances at the
discretion of the town while the grading plan is being reviewed, provided:
      a.   The project has design plans that meet one of the following
thresholds:
         i.   First review comments have been completed on a grading plan and
the project has an approved preliminary plat or development plan, or
         ii.   First review comments have been completed on a development plan
package.
      b.   A detailed estimate of the earthwork quantities has been prepared;
      c.   A restoration and reseeding bond, which includes an estimated amount
to regrade and reseed the site to its original condition (plus 15% for
administrative costs), has been provided;
      d.   All applicable fees have been paid;
      e.   The town finds that the grading is in the best interest of the town;
      f.   The grading does not include paving, drainage, utilities, or any
structures.
Ordinance 2024.011 adopted revisions proposed by Resolution 2024-031, which
added subparagraphs a and b to paragraph C.4.
17-13-8 Submittals and procedures: major utility permits.
A.   Scope. An application for a major utility permit requires a completed
permit application, improvement plans, and all required reports and
requirements defined in the town's applications, checklists, and process
guides.
B.   Improvement plan requirements. Improvement plans must include all
requirements defined in the town's applications, checklists, and process
guides, and shall conform to all rezoning ordinances, conditions, and other
applicable regulations. All plans shall be sealed by the applicable registered
professional engineer licensed in the state of Arizona. All plans shall be
approved by their respective end owner and any applicable reviewing agency.
C.   At-risk work. There shall be no at-risk installation of utilities.
17-13-9 Submittals and procedures: public infrastructure permits
A.   Scope. An application for a public infrastructure permit requires a
completed permit application, improvement plans, and all required reports and
requirements defined in the town's applications, checklists, and process
guides.
B.   Improvement plan requirements. Improvement plans must include all
requirements defined in the town's applications, checklists, and process
guides, and shall conform to all rezoning ordinances, conditions, and other
applicable regulations. All plans shall be sealed by the applicable registered
professional engineer licensed in the state of Arizona.
C.   Soils report. The applicant shall submit a soils report.
   1.   The report shall contain all geotechnical engineering information and
recommendations applicable to the project.
   2.   The civil engineer responsible for preparing the grading plan shall
incorporate all report recommendations into the plan and reference the report
on the improvement plan.
   3.   Approved report recommendations shall become conditions of the permit.
   4.   The geotechnical or civil engineer shall stamp and seal the report
prior to submittal.
   5.   The soils report used for the grading permit may contain the relevant
information for the public infrastructure permit.
D.   Drainage report. The applicant shall submit a drainage report. The
drainage report will be prepared in technical conformance with provisions of
this chapter and the standards and other applicable requirements of the town.
The drainage report used for the grading permit may contain the relevant
information for the public infrastructure permit.
E.   At-risk work. There shall be no at-risk construction of public
infrastructure.
17-13-10 Inspection and performance defaults
A.   Inspection certification option.
   1.   Upon approval by the town, the owner may retain a civil engineer-of-
record (EOR), registered to practice in the state of Arizona, to:
      a.   Perform the required construction inspection.
      b.   Certify, upon completion, that the construction has been performed
and completed in accordance with the permit conditions, the approved plans and
specifications, and with applicable town standards.
   2.   The owner and the EOR shall execute a written private improvement
agreement, on a form to be supplied by the town, clearly enumerating the
responsibilities of all parties to the process.
   3.   The EOR shall make periodic reports to the town as construction
progresses and shall maintain records for filing with the town at completion.
   4.   The town may periodically inspect the work and will monitor the
progress. The town will conduct a final inspection upon receiving notice of
completion and will release all parties from the permit only after all
provisions of the permit and the agreement have been complied with.
B.   Final inspection. All required construction work shall be completed in
accordance with the permit prior to final inspection by the town and issuance
of a certificate of final approval by the EOR.
C.   Close-out and town acceptance. Upon receipt from the EOR of the close-out
documents required under the terms of the private improvement agreement, and
approval by town staff, town staff will complete the final inspections of all
improvements. After the close-out package is accepted by town staff and the
improvements have passed the required inspections, the town engineer shall
accept any public improvements and include them in the town's maintenance
program after completion of the warranty period.
Ordinance 2024.011 adopted revisions proposed by Resolution 2024-031 which
amended 17-13-10.C.
17-13-11 Enforcement
A.   Permit enforcement.
   1.   The enforcement of this chapter and conditions of the permit shall be
in accordance with this section.
   2.   When town staff determines a non-compliance with the conditions of the
permit, or work performed without a permit, the town shall issue a stop-work
order and hold in abeyance, by written notice, the town review of other
submittals related to the development project and the issuance of town permits
for any aspect of the development project until remedial actions have received
the written approval of the town staff.
B.   Stop-work order.
   1.   Whenever the town determines that grading does not comply with this
chapter or the permit conditions, or that the soil or other conditions are not
as stated on the permit, the town may order the work stopped by written notice
served on any person engaged in doing or causing such work to be done, or
written notice posted on the site.
   2.   Any such person shall immediately stop such work until authorized by
the town to proceed with the work.
C.   Failure to obtain permit.
   1.   Unless exempted by this chapter, failure to obtain a permit prior to
commencement of grading shall be a violation of this code, subject to a fee as
set forth in the comprehensive fee schedule adopted by the town council and
amended from time to time.
   2.   The town engineer may issue an exception permit if the town engineer
finds that an emergency existed which made it impossible first to obtain a
permit.
17-13-12 Waivers and interpretation review
A.   Waivers.
   1.   Scope. A waiver from a provision of this chapter may be granted by the
town engineer when the strict application of the provision would require work
by the permit holder detrimental to the purposes of this chapter and cause an
unnecessary hardship to the property owner.
   2.   Standards. A waiver shall not be granted unless:
      a.   The waiver is the minimum necessary to afford relief;
      b.   The waiver will not be materially detrimental to the rights of
owners and residents of other affected properties; and
      c.   The waiver is in harmony with the intent, the purposes, and the
provisions of this chapter from which the waiver is requested.
   3.   Conditions. Conditions may be imposed on a waiver that will:
      a.   Secure the intent, the purposes, and the provisions of this chapter
from which the waiver is granted; and
      b.   Provide adequately for the protection of surrounding property owners
and residents.
   4.   Application. The request for a waiver shall be made on a form provided
by the town staff and shall be heard within 30 days. Fees shall be paid in
accordance with the comprehensive fee schedule adopted by the town council and
amended from time to time.
   5.   Notice and review. Notice of the application and the hearing shall be
mailed to all property owners within 300 feet of the site and shall be posted
at the town's official notice positions. The town manager shall hold a hearing
on the waiver request and render a decision within five working days
thereafter.
   6.   Appeal. Within 15 days of receipt of a notice of decision from the
town, the applicant may file an appeal for a hearing by the council.
B.   Interpretation review.
   1.   Scope. Upon request by an affected person who believes there has been a
misinterpretation, the town manager shall review an interpretation of a
provision of this chapter made by the town engineer.
   2.   The request for review shall cite:
      a.   The disputed interpretation made by the town engineer; and
      b.   The words alleged to have been misinterpreted.
   3.   Application. The request shall be made in writing and shall be heard
within 30 days. Fees shall be paid in accordance with the comprehensive fee
schedule adopted by the town council and amended from time to time.
   4.   Notice and review. Notice of the application and the hearing shall be
mailed to all property owners within 300 feet of the site and shall be posted
at the town's official notice positions. The town manager shall hold a hearing
on the request and render a decision within five working days thereafter.
   5.   Appeal. A decision of the town manager may be appealed to the council
within 15 days of the decision.
CHAPTER 17-14.
HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT
Chapter 17-14 was inserted into the town code by Ordinance 2021.010
Sections:
17-14-1   Purpose
17-14-2   Designation and amendment of protected peaks and ridges
17-14-3   Review and compliance
17-14-4   Development requirements
17-14-5   Average cross slope calculations
17-14-1 Purpose
The mountains and foothills in and around the town are a valuable scenic
resource which should be preserved. Dominant peaks and ridges should be
protected and the intensity of development regulated according to the natural
characteristics of hillside terrain such as slope, vegetation, landform, soil
stability and drainage pattern.
17-14-2 Designation and amendment of protected peaks and ridges
A.   Initiation of protection for peaks and ridges. The designation of
protected areas for certain peaks and ridges shall be initiated by the council
or the planning commission or as part of a comprehensive plan update or as a
condition of rezoning of the property.
B.   Criteria for consideration. Peaks and ridges that meet one or more of the
following criteria may be considered for designation as protected areas under
this chapter:
   1.   The peak point or ridge line lies within one mile of a public preserve.
   2.   The peak or ridge is a dominant feature in the surrounding landscape or
constitutes a significant linking element of a dominant geographic feature.
   3.   The peak or ridge is an extension of a mountain, major hill or ridge,
or other significant terrain feature, from a designated public preserve.
   4.   The peak or ridge is visible from a scenic route or a road leading to a
designated trailhead.
   5.   The peak or ridge is visible to the community at large.
C.   Annexation. A peak or ridge designated by the county as a protected peak
or ridge prior to annexation by the town shall be designated by the town as a
protected peak or ridge in the ordinance establishing original town zoning for
the property.
D.   Procedure. A town-initiated protected peak or ridge designation or any
amendment to an existing protected peak or ridge designation shall be
considered and adopted in the same manner as a rezoning of the affected
property.
E.   Minor modification. The council or planning commission may modify the 300
foot setback from a protected peak or ridge upon finding that the request meets
all of the following conditions:
   1.   The proposed development is for a single family residence.
   2.   The only area to be graded within the protected peak and ridge setback
area is for a building pad and access to the building.
   3.   The highest point of the structure is not higher than 20 feet below the
elevation of the peak or the nearest ridge.
17-14-3 Review and compliance
Any subdivision of or development on any lot or parcel containing designated
protected peak or ridge areas, as described in section
17-14-2 above, or containing slopes of 15% or greater, must be reviewed for
compliance with this chapter. Until approval of a plat, plan, or permit is
granted, no grubbing, grading excavation or construction shall occur.
17-14-4 Development requirements
A.   Development standards. The following standards apply to lots and parcels
containing designated protected peak or ridge areas or containing slopes of 15%
or greater:
   1.   Any lot or parcel shall meet the following slope, size, and density
requirements:
Average natural cross slope (%) Minimum area (acres) Maximum density (dwelling
                                                     units/acre)
Average natural cross slope (%) Minimum area (acres) Maximum density (dwelling
                                                     units/acre)
Less than 15                    As permitted by the zoning district
15-15.9                         1.00                 1.00
16-16.9                         1.00                 1.00
17-17.9                         1.25                 .80
18-18.9                         1.37                 .73
19-19.9                         1.50                 .67
20-20.9                         2.00                 .50
21-21.9                         2.25                 .44
22-22.9                         2.50                 .40
23-23.9                         3.50                 .29
24-24.9                         4.50                 .22
25-25.9                         6.00                 .17
26-26.9                         7.00                 .14
27-27.9                         8.60                 .12
28-28.9                         10.40                .09
29-29.9                         12.80                .08
30-30.9                         16.00                .06
31-31.9                         23.50                .04
32-32.9                         31.00                .03
33 and greater                  36.00                .027
 
   2.   All development shall be set back at least 300 feet from each
designated protected peak or ridge.
   3.   Building heights are limited to 24 feet.
   4.   All exposed exterior walls and roofs of structures shall be of earth
tone colors to blend in with the predominant natural colors found on the lot or
parcel.
   5.   All glass surfaces shall be designed not to reflect sunlight beyond the
lot or parcel boundaries.
   6.   All utilities and services shall be underground.
   7.   Roads and drives leading to lots shall be located to minimize scarring,
be in low visibility view areas and maximize the retention of natural
vegetation.
B.   Documentation. The following documentation shall be required for the
subdivision of or development on any lot or parcel containing designated
protected peak or ridge areas or containing slopes of 15% or greater:
   1.   A slope analysis certified by a registered civil engineer, for review
and verification by the town engineer.
   2.   A grading plan prepared by a registered civil engineer complying with
the standards for a grading plan for a type 2 grading permit, for review by the
town engineer.
   3.   The developer or property owner's certification to the town engineer
that the development complies with all requirements of this chapter during the
period of construction.
C.   Surveying and staking. The lot or parcel shall be surveyed, staked, and
inspected by a registered civil engineer, to determine and assure compliance
with this chapter and the conditions of subdivision or development approval.
17-14-5 Average cross slope calculations
A.   Average cross slope of a lot or parcel will be determined by using the
following equation:
IxLx0.0023
A
B.   For purposes of the equation set forth in paragraph A above, the following
values are assigned:
   1.   I = Contour interval (maximum 10') in feet
   2.   L = Combined length in feet of all contour lines measured on the lot or
parcel
   3.   0.0023 = Conversion of square feet into acres x 100
   4.   A = Lot or parcel area in acres
C.   The average cross slope shall be rounded off to the nearest whole number.
When .5 or higher is computed, the number shall be rounded off to the next
highest whole number.
D.   The average cross slope of a lot or parcel proposed for residential
purposes only may be reduced by establishing a natural area on the lot or
parcel and revising the average cross slope calculation to delete the natural
area from the equation.
E.   Natural areas set aside in any division of land shall not be included in
the average cross slope calculation, neither in the combined length of contour
(L) nor in the lot or parcel area (A). The total acreage of the lot or parcel
may be used to calculate the number of dwelling units based on allowable
density, provided that all other applicable provisions of this section are met.
F.   The average cross slope is used for determining slope density requirements
for residential development only.
Ordinance 2022.006 added Section 17-14-5
CHAPTER 17-15.
FLOODPLAIN AND EROSION HAZARD MANAGEMENT CODE
Chapter 17-15 was inserted into the town code by Ordinance 2015.021
Sections:
17-15-1   General information
17-15-2   Abbreviations and definitions
17-15-3   General provisions
17-15-4   Statutory exemptions
17-15-5   Unlawful acts
17-15-6   Declaration of public nuisance
17-15-7   Abatement of violations
17-15-8   Severability
17-15-9   Administration
17-15-10   Provisions for flood hazard reduction
17-15-11   Floodplain variance procedure
17-15-12   Appendix 1 – Table of regulatory peak discharges
17-15-1 General information
A.   Statutory authorization. In A.R.S. § 48-3610, the Arizona legislature
enabled the town to adopt regulations in conformance with A.R.S. § 48-3603
designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its
citizenry.
B.   Findings of fact.
   1.   The flood hazard areas of the town are subject to periodic inundation
which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   2.   Flood losses may be exacerbated by the cumulative effects of
obstructions in special flood hazard areas, which increase flood depths and
velocities and, when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other areas. Uses
that are inadequately flood proofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood
damage, also contribute to the flood loss.
C.   Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
   1.   To protect human life and health;
   2.   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   3.   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   4.   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   5.   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
special flood hazard areas;
   6.   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize blight areas
caused by flooding;
   7.   To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a
special flood hazard area;
   8.   To ensure that those who occupy the special flood hazard areas assume
responsibility for their actions; and
   9.   To participate in and maintain eligibility for flood insurance and
disaster relief.
D.   Methods of reducing flood losses. To accomplish its purposes, this chapter
includes methods and provisions for:
   1.   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
   2.   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   3.   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
   4.   Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   5.   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other
areas.
Ordinance 2022.006 amended Section 17-15-1 B. and C.
17-15-2 Abbreviations and definitions
A.   Abbreviations. The following common abbreviations are used throughout this
chapter:
   1.   ADWR: Arizona department of water resources
   2.   BFE: Base flood elevation
   3.   CFS: Cubic feet per second
   4.   CLOMR: Conditional letter of map revision
   5.   EHS(L): Erosion hazard setback or erosion hazard setback limit
   6.   FEMA: Federal emergency management agency
   7.   FFE: Finished floor elevation
   8.   FIS: Flood insurance study
   9.   FIRM: Flood insurance rate map
   10.   LOMA: Letter of map amendment
   11.   LOMR: Letter of map revision
   12.   LOMR-F: Letter of map revision based on fill
   13.   NGVD: National geodetic vertical datum of 1929
   14.   NAVD: North American vertical datum of 1988
   15.   NFIP: National flood insurance program
   16.   RFE: Regulatory flood elevation
   17.   SFHA: Special flood hazard area
B.   Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in
this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   1.   Accessory Structure. A structure on the same parcel of property as a
principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure. For floodplain management purposes, the term includes only
accessory structures used for parking and storage that are less than 600 square
feet.
   2.   All-weather access. Access considered traversable by normal passenger
vehicles, defined as a permanent, durable material with adequate protection
against scour and erosion and having a depth of water no more than 12 inches
above the roadway surface during a base flood.
   3.   Appeal. A request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a floodplain
variance.
   4.   Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO or AH zone on a community’s
FIRM with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average
depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist,
where the path of flooding is unpredictable or where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   5.   Base flood. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
   6.   Base flood elevation (BFE). The computed elevation to which floodwater
is anticipated to rise during the base flood.
   7.   Basement. Any area of a building having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   8.   Building. See “structure.”
   9.   Conditions and restrictions. Standard requirements which are placed on
a parcel of land, the development permit applicant and the parcel owner by the
floodplain administrator as a condition of the applicant’s or owner’s use of
the floodplain.
   10.   Community. Any state, area or political subdivision thereof, or any
Indian tribe or authorized tribal organization, or authorized native
organization, which has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management
regulations for the areas within its jurisdiction.
   11.   Critical facilities. Facilities that are considered critical in their
need to remain serviceable during a major flood event or that their inundation
by flood waters poses a high risk to the health, safety or welfare of the
community.
   12.   Detention. A drainage system which delays the downstream progress of
flood waters in a controlled manner, generally through the combined use of a
temporary storage area and a metered outlet device which causes a lengthening
of the duration of flow and thereby reduces downstream flood peaks.
   13.   Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, and
storage of materials and equipment located within the special flood hazard
area.
   14.   Elevation certificate. An administrative tool of the NFIP that is used
to provide elevation information necessary to ensure compliance with community
floodplain management ordinance, to determine the proper insurance premium
rate. and to support a request for a LOMA or LOMR-F.
   15.   Encroachment. The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill,
excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain,
which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   16.   Erosion. The process of the gradual or avulsive wearing away of land
masses due to the flow of water.
   17.   Erosion hazard setback (EHS). A prescribed horizontal distance
measured from the primary channel bank of an incised channel or from the design
storm’s water surface limits for a non-incised channel for the purpose of
providing a measure of safety against lateral erosion.
   18.   Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, construction of streets and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete slabs) is completed before July
9, 1984, the date of the town's first floodplain management ordinance.
   19.   Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   20.   Five hundred year flood (500-year flood). The flood having a 0.2%
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
   21.   Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      a.   the overflow of flood waters;
      b.   the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source; and/or
      c.   the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or
other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or
currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by
an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a
severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event
which results in flooding as defined in this definition.
   22.   Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The official map on which FEMA has
delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
   23.   Flood insurance study (FIS). The official report provided by FEMA that
includes flood profiles, FIRM, and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
   24.   Flood zones (FEMA defined):
      a.   Zone X. Area determined to be outside the 0.2% annual chance
floodplain.
      b.   Zone X-500. Area free from a base flood due to a manmade protective
structure or an area with base flood elevations or sheet flow elevations less
than one foot. This area is also known as shaded zone X.
      c.   Zone A. SFHA with no base flood elevations determined.
      d.   Zone AE. SFHA with base flood elevations determined by the flood
insurance study for Pima county.
      e.   Zone AH. SFHA with flood depths of one to three feet (usually areas
of ponding); base flood elevations determined by the flood insurance study for
Pima county.
      f.   Zone AO. SFHA with flood depths of one to three feet (usually sheet
flow on sloping terrain); average depths determined. For areas of alluvial fan
flooding, velocities also determined. The FIRMs show the depth in one foot
increments and velocities in one foot per second increments.
      g.   Zone AE floodway. That portion of a regulated watercourse’s SFHA
which must remain clear of any development. See also definition for floodway.
   25.   Floodplain or flood-prone area. Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source. This includes FEMA special flood hazard
areas, areas platted on accepted town plans as being flood prone or locally
regulated areas that may be inundated by water during a base flood.
   26.   Floodplain administrator. The individual appointed to administer and
enforce the floodplain management regulations. Unless otherwise stated, the
town engineer is the floodplain administrator.
   27.   Floodplain board. The council, at such times as they are engaged in
the enforcement of this chapter, which is empowered to adopt and implement
regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of the
citizens of the town.
   28.   Floodplain management. The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and
enhancing where possible natural resources in the floodplain, including but not
limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain
management regulations.
   29.   Floodplain management regulations. This chapter and other chapters
(zoning. grading. stormwater, etc.), subdivision regulations, subdivision
street standards, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances, and other application of police power which control development in
flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state, or local regulations in
any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing
flood loss and damage.
   30.   Floodplain variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this
chapter which permits construction or other uses of property in a manner that
would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.
   31.   Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes or adjustments to non-residential structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures and their contents by means other than
elevating.
   32.   Flood-related erosion. The collapse or subsidence of land along the
shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied
by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash
flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding.
   33.   Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height. Also referred to as “regulatory floodway.”
   34.   Floodway fringe. That area of the floodplain on either side of the
“regulatory floodway” where encroachment may occur.
   35.   Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The
term includes only docking or port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   36.   Governing body. The council of the town of Marana, Arizona.
   37.   Hardship. Related to section
17-15-11 (floodplain variance procedure) of this chapter, means the exceptional
hardship which would result from a failure to grant the requested floodplain
variance. The floodplain board requires that the floodplain variance be
exceptional, unusual and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or
financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic
considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences or the disapproval of
one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship.
All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a
floodplain variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the
property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than
originally intended.
   38.   Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure.
   39.   Historic structure. Any structure that is:
      a.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a
listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined
by the secretary of the interior (secretary) as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the national register;
      b.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district
or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
      c.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
secretary; or
      d.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         i.   by an approved state program as determined by the secretary; or
         ii.   directly by the secretary in states without approved programs.
   40.   Levee. A man-made structure designed and constructed in accordance
with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of
water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
   41.   Locally regulated floodplain. Floodplains in the town associated with
washes and/or sheet flow areas having a base flood discharge of 50 cfs or more.
   42.   Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
basement (see “basement” definition). An unfinished or flood resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   43.   Manufactured home. See definition in section
17-1-6(A)(119).
   44.   Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale or
rent.
   45.   Market value. Market value is determined by estimating the cost to
replace the structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the
amount of depreciation that has accrued since the structure was constructed.
The cost of replacement of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost
factor determined by reference to a building cost estimating guide recognized
by the building construction industry. The amount of depreciation shall be
determined by taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the
structure and functional obsolescence as approved by the floodplain
administrator, but shall not include economic or other forms of external
obsolescence. Use of replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors
different from those contained in recognized building cost estimating guides
may be considered only if such factors are included in a report prepared by an
independent professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation of
the differences.
   46.   Mean sea level. For purposes of the national flood insurance program,
the NGVD or NAVD, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s FIRM
are referenced.
   47.   New construction. For the purposes of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is
later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, “new construction” means structures for which
the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
   48.   New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.
   49.   Obstruction. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel,
refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or
projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the
direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its
propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.
   50.   One-hundred year flood (100-year flood). A common name for the flood
having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
(See “base flood” definition)
   51.   Recreational vehicle. A vehicle that is:
      a.   Built on a single chassis;
      b.   400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection;
      c.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
      d.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   52.   Regulatory flood elevation. An elevation one foot above the Base Flood
elevation for a watercourse for which the base flood elevation has been
determined or as determined by the criteria developed by the director of ADWR
for all other watercourses.
   53.   Regulatory floodplain. An area associated with a watercourse,
including its channel, or any other floodplain or floodprone area that would be
inundated by the Base Flood, including all Base Floods where the 100-year peak
discharge is 50 cfs or greater.
   54.   Regulatory floodway. (See “floodway” definition)
   55.   Repetitive loss structure. A structure covered by a contract for flood
insurance issued pursuant to the FIA that has incurred flood-related damage on
two occasions during any ten year period ending on the date of the event for
which a second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the flood damage,
on average, equaled or exceeded 25% of the market value of the structure at the
time of each such flood event. In addition to the current claim, the NFIP must
have paid the previous qualifying claim.
   56.   Retention. A drainage system which stops the downstream progress of
flood waters by employing methods of containment and storage and uses
infiltration, evaporation or re-use to dispose of stored waters, thereby
eliminating basin contributions to the downstream flood peaks or volumes.
   57.   Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
   58.   Sheet flow area. (See “area of shallow flooding” definition)
   59.   Special flood hazard area (SFHA). An area defined by FEMA within a
community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given
year (base flood). These areas are designated as Zone A, AO, AH and AE on the
FIRMs, and other areas determined by the criteria adopted by the director of
ADWR.
   60.   Start of construction. Includes substantial improvement, and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other
structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
   61.   Structure. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, which is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home. “Structure” for insurance coverage purposes means a walled and roofed
building, other than a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground and affixed to a permanent site, as well as a manufactured home on a
permanent foundation. For the latter purpose, the term includes a building
while in the course of construction, alteration or repair, but does not include
building materials or supplies intended for use in such a construction,
alteration or repair, unless such materials or supplies are within an enclosed
building on the premises.
   62.   Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred. Substantial damage also means flood-related damage sustained
by a structure on two separate occasions during a rolling ten-year period for
which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average,
equals or exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
   63.   Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial
damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
      a.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or,
      b.   Any alteration of a “historic structure”, provided that the
alteration would not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure”.
   64.   Variance. See "Floodplain variance."
   65.   Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or
other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in
violation until that documentation is provided.
   66.   Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the NGVD, NAVD, or
other datum of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains
of riverine and ponding areas. See also base flood elevation.
   67.   Watercourse. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or
other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur (e.g. the regulatory floodplain).
Ordinance 2022.006 amended Section 17-15-2.
Ordinance 2024.011 adopted revisions proposed by Resolution 2024-031 which
amended 17-15-2, paragraph A.16, and paragraphs B.1. and B. 43.
17-15-3 General provisions
A.   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
corporate limits of the town. In addition, this chapter shall also apply to the
following areas:
   1.   FEMA zone X-500, also known as shaded zone X, as it pertains to the
tortolita mountain alluvial fan.
   2.   Local floodplains associated with washes and/or sheet flow having a
base flood discharge of 50 cfs or more.
   3.   Areas within the erosion hazard setback of a watercourse.
   4.   All floodplains/flood-prone areas and erosion hazard setbacks
identified on previously and subsequently recorded subdivision plats.
   5.   All floodplains/flood-prone areas and erosion hazard setbacks
identified on previously and subsequently drainage studies commissioned by the
town engineer.
B.   Basis for establishing special flood hazard areas.
   1.   The regulated areas of this chapter as outlined in subsection A of this
section are derived from a variety of sources, whose hydrologic and hydraulic
data and maps of delineation are kept on file by the town at 11555 West Civic
Center Drive, Marana, AZ 85653, Marana municipal complex, public works
department. This information includes or will include:
      a.   The special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA in a scientific
and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Pima
County Arizona and incorporated areas, revised June 16, 2011,” with
accompanying FIRMs dated February 8, 1999 and all subsequent amendments and/or
revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
chapter. The FIS, FIRMs and amendments and corrections to the maps are all kept
on file.
      b.   The FIS and FIRMs may be supplemented by studies for other areas
that allow implementation of this chapter. The floodplain board, within the
limits of the town, shall require developers to delineate, within areas where
development is ongoing or imminent, floodplains consistent with the criteria
developed by FEMA, the director of water resources and the town.
      c.   Due to the episodic nature of natural flood events and the resulting
changes to hydrologic and hydraulic conditions along watercourses within the
town, base flood peak discharges, flow volumes, and associated regulatory
floodplain and erosion hazard areas are subject to continuous revision. At a
minimum, base flood values and base flood elevations shall meet or exceed the
current values established by FEMA and reflect historic flood information and
general, current watershed conditions. Current regulatory floodplain and
erosion hazard area maps will be maintained by the floodplain administrator for
the Santa Cruz river and all watersheds which generate regulatory flood peak
discharges exceeding 5,000 cfs for the base flood. These watersheds are listed
in appendix 1 of this chapter.
      d.   The floodplain administrator may accept hydrologic and hydraulic
studies prepared by an Arizona registered professional civil engineer as a
delineation of regulatory floodplain and erosion hazard setback areas.
      e.   In all cases the most recently accepted information shall be used
for floodplain management.
C.   Compliance. All development of land, construction of residential,
commercial or industrial structures, or future development on lands to which
this chapter applies is subject to the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations.
D.   Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement,
covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
E.   Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all
provisions shall be:
   1.   Considered as minimum requirements;
   2.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   3.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes.
F.   Disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this
chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on
rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or
uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the town, its officers
or employees, the state of Arizona, NFIA or FEMA, for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made under this chapter.
Ordinance 2022.006 amended Section 17-15-3 A., B., E.
17-15-4 Statutory exemptions
A.   In accordance with A.R.S. § 48-3609(I), unless expressly provided
otherwise, this and any regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter do not
affect:
   1.   Existing legal uses of property or the right to continuation of such
legal use. However, if a nonconforming use of land or a building or structure
is discontinued for 12 months, or destroyed to the extent of 50% of its value
as determined by a competent appraiser, any further use shall comply with this
article and regulations of the town;
   2.   Reasonable repair or alteration of property for the purposes for which
the property was legally used on July 9, 1974, or any regulations affecting
such property takes effect, except that any alteration, addition or repair to a
nonconforming building or structure which would result in increasing its flood
damage potential by 50% or more shall be either floodproofed or elevated to or
above the regulatory flood elevation;
   3.   Reasonable repair of structures constructed with the written
authorization required by A.R.S. § 48-3613; and
   4.   Facilities constructed or installed pursuant to a certificate of
environmental compatibility issued pursuant to A.R.S. title 40, chapter 2,
article 6.2.
B.   Before the following types of construction authorized by A.R.S. § 48-3613
(B) begin, the responsible person must submit plans for the construction to the
floodplain board for review and comment pursuant to A.R.S. § 48-3613(C):
   1.   The construction of bridges, culverts, dikes and other structures
necessary to the construction of public highways, roads and streets
intersecting or crossing a watercourse;
   2.   The construction of storage dams for watering livestock or wildlife,
structures on banks of a watercourse to prevent erosion of or damage to
adjoining land if the structure will not divert, retard or obstruct the natural
channel of the watercourse or dams for the conservation of floodwaters as
permitted by A.R.S. title 45, chapter 6;
   3.   Construction of tailing dams and waste disposal areas for use in
connection with mining and metallurgical operations. This paragraph does not
exempt those sand and gravel operations that will divert, retard or obstruct
the flow of waters in any watercourse from complying with and acquiring
authorization from the floodplain board pursuant to regulations adopted by the
floodplain board under this chapter;
   4.   Other construction upon determination by the floodplain board that
written authorization is unnecessary;
   5.   Any flood control district, county, city, town or other political
subdivision from exercising powers granted to it under A.R.S. title 48, chapter
21, article 1;
   6.   The construction of streams, waterways, lakes and other auxiliary
facilities in conjunction with development of public parks and recreation
facilities by a public agency or political subdivision; and
   7.   The construction and erection of poles, towers, foundations, support
structures, guy wires and other infrastructure related to power transmission as
constructed by any utility whether a public service corporation or a political
subdivision. Buildings, stations, and other similar structures however must
comply with standards set forth in this code for non-residential structures.
C.   In accordance with A.R.S. § 48-3613(D), in addition to other penalties or
remedies otherwise provided by law, this state, a political subdivision or a
person who may be damaged or has been damaged as a result of the unauthorized
diversion, retardation or obstruction of a watercourse has the right to
commence, maintain and prosecute any appropriate action or pursue any remedy to
enjoin, abate or otherwise prevent any person from violating or continuing to
violate this section or regulations adopted pursuant to A.R.S. § 48-3613. If a
person is found to be in violation of this section, the court shall require the
violator to either comply with this section if authorized by the floodplain
board or remove the obstruction and restore the watercourse to its original
state. The court may also award such monetary damages as are appropriate to the
injured parties resulting from the violation including reasonable costs and
attorney fees.
Ordinance 2022.006 amended Section 17-15-4
17-15-5 Unlawful acts
A.   It is unlawful for a person to engage in any development or to divert,
retard or obstruct the flow of waters in a watercourse if it creates a hazard
to life or property without securing the written authorization required by
A.R.S. § 48-3613. Where the watercourse is a delineated floodplain, it is
unlawful to engage in any development affecting the flow of waters without
securing written authorization required by A.R.S. § 48-3613.
B.   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
class 2 misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
17-15-6 Declaration of public nuisance
All development located or maintained within any special flood hazard area
after August 8, 1973, in violation of this chapter, and without written
authorization from the floodplain board, is a public nuisance per se and may be
abated, prevented or restrained by action of the town.
Ordinance 2022.006 amended Section 17-15-6
17-15-7 Abatement of violations
A.   Within 30 days of discovery of a violation of this chapter, the floodplain
administrator shall submit a report to the floodplain board which shall include
all information available to the floodplain administrator which is pertinent to
the violation. Within 30 days of receipt of this report, the floodplain board
shall do one of the following:
   1.   Take any necessary action to effect the abatement of such violation.
   2.   Issue a floodplain variance to this chapter in accordance with the
provisions of section
17-15-11.
   3.   Order the owner of the property upon which the violation exists to
provide whatever additional information may be required for their
determination. Such information must be provided to the floodplain
administrator within 30 days of such order and the floodplain administrator
shall submit an amended report to the floodplain board within 20 days. At the
next regularly scheduled public meeting, the floodplain board shall either
order the abatement of said violation or they shall grant a floodplain variance
in accordance with the provisions of section
17-15-11.
   4.   For FEMA regulated special flood hazard areas, submit to FEMA a
declaration for denial of insurance, stating that the property is in violation
of a cited state or local law, regulation or ordinance, pursuant to section
1316 of the national flood insurance act of 1968 as amended.
B.   The town may withhold the issuance of permits, including building permits,
native plant permits and grading permits, for the development or improvement on
the parcel or any contiguous parcel of land under the same ownership.
Ordinance 2022.006 amended Section 17-15-7 A.4
17-15-8 Severability
This chapter and its various parts are hereby declared to be severable. Should
any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole,
or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid.
17-15-9 Administration
A.   Designation of the floodplain administrator. The town engineer or his/her
designee is hereby appointed to administer, implement and enforce this chapter
by granting or denying floodplain use permits in accordance with its
provisions.
B.   Responsibilities of floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator
shall:
   1.   Review all development permits to determine that:
      a.   The permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
      b.   All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;
      c.   The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and
      d.   The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying
capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a
floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, “adversely
affect” means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than one tenth of a foot at any
point located off of the property which is to be occupied by the anticipated
development.
   2.   Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation data has not
been provided in accordance with paragraph
17-15-3 B, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer section
17-15-10. Any such information shall be consistent with the requirements of
FEMA and the director of the Arizona department of water resources and shall be
submitted to the floodplain board for adoption.
   3.   Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available the
following:
      a.   The certified regulatory flood elevation required in subsection
17-15-10 B. 3. a;
      b.   The zone AO certification required in subsection
17-15-10 B. 3. b;
      c.   The floodproofing certification required in subsection
17-15-10 B. 3. e;
      d.   The certified regulatory flood elevation required in subsection
17-15-10 B.3.d;
      e.   The certified opening elevation required in section
17-15-10 B. 3. f; and
      f.   The certified regulatory flood elevation required in subsection
17-15-10 F.2 a.
   4.   Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated:
      a.   Notify adjacent communities and ADWR prior to such alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA
through appropriate notification means; and
      b.   Require that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse be maintained.
   5.   Advise any appropriate adjacent jurisdictions having responsibility for
floodplain management in writing and provide a copy of a development plan of
all applications for floodplain use permits or floodplain variances to develop
land in a floodplain or floodway within one mile of the corporate limits of the
town.
   6.   Advise any public entity with responsibility for floodplain management
in writing and provide a copy of any development plan of any major development
proposed within a floodplain or floodway, which could affect floodplains,
floodways or watercourses within the entity’s area of jurisdiction. Written
notice and a copy of the plan of development shall be sent to the entity no
later than three working days after the town receives a complete application.
   7.   Make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the special flood hazard areas (for example, where there appears
to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The
person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in section
17-15-11.
   8.   Take actions on violations of this chapter as required in section
17-15-7.
   9.   Notify FEMA and ADWR of acquisition by means of annexation,
incorporation or otherwise, of additional areas of jurisdiction.
C.   Within 120 days after completion of construction of any flood control
protective works which changes the rate of flow during the base flood or the
configuration of the floodplain upstream or downstream from or adjacent to the
project, the person or agency responsible for installation of the project shall
provide to the governing bodies of all jurisdictions affected by the project a
new delineation of all floodplains affected by the project. The new delineation
shall be done according to the criteria adopted by the director of water
resources.
D.   A community’s base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting
from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable,
but not later than six months after the date such information becomes
available, the floodplain administrator shall notify FEMA of the changes by
submitting technical or scientific data in accordance with volume 44 code of
federal regulations, section 65.3. Such a submission is necessary so that upon
confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk
premium rates and floodplain management requirements will be based upon current
data.
E.   Establishment of floodplain use permit.
   1.   A floodplain use permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins, including placement of manufactured homes, upon any land to
which this chapter applies as defined in subsection
17-15-3 A.
   2.   Application for a floodplain use permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the floodplain administrator and shall include, but not be limited
to, all of the following information:
      a.   Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevation of the area in question with contour lines at minimum
one foot intervals
      b.   Datum used for plan and structures with conversion factor between
NGVD and NAVD
      c.   Existing or proposed structures
      d.   Fill
      e.   Storage of materials
      f.   Drainage facilities
      g.   Proposed elevation in relation to specified datum of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all structures. In zone AO, elevation of existing
highest adjacent natural grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all
structures
      h.   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-
residential structure will be flood-proofed
      i   Certification by an Arizona registered professional civil engineer or
architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
the floodproofing criteria in subsection
17-15-10 B. 3. e.
      j.   Base flood elevation data for all subdivisions and for any other
development that includes more than 50 lots or more than five acres
      k.   Information requested by the floodplain administrator as found on
the site plan checklist used for the purpose of floodplain management
      l.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development
      m.   Items required or permitted as part of state standard SS6-05
(development of single family homes in floodplain).
   3.   Permit applications shall be reviewed to determine whether the proposed
site alterations and improvements will be reasonably safe from flooding and
lateral erosion and will not otherwise aggravate existing conditions. If a
proposed development is found to be in the path of flooding, lateral erosion or
would aggravate existing conditions, improvements shall be relocated or
adequate protective measures shall be taken to avoid aggravating the existing
conditions.
   4.   Applicants for floodplain use permits shall pay a fee in accordance
with the adopted town fee ordinance schedule.
   5.   Conditions and restrictions shall apply to all floodplain use permits
as administered by the floodplain administrator.
   6.   No permit shall be issued for any development which is not in
conformance with this chapter or any other provision of law relating to such
development. A floodplain use permit may be denied if the proposed development
constitutes a danger or hazard to life or property. In making such a
determination, the floodplain administrator may consider the following factors,
which are not all-inclusive:
      a.   The danger to life, person, or property due to increased flood
heights, velocities, or redirection of flow cause by the development;
      b.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others;
      c.   The proposed water supply or sanitation systems of any development
and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and
unsanitary conditions if they should become flooded or eroded;
      d.   The susceptibility of the proposed development and/or its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners;
      e.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use on
the same property which are in areas not subject to flooding or erosion;
      f.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing regulatory
floodplain uses and with floodplain management programs anticipated in the
foreseeable future;
      g.   The relationship of the proposed use to any comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for the area;
      h.   All-weather access to the property;
      i.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters expected at the site under both existing and
proposed conditions;
      j.   Documentation that all necessary permits have been obtained from
state and federal agencies; and
      k.   Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this
chapter.
Ordinance 2022.006 amended Section 17-15-9 B. - D. 
Ordinance 2024.011 adopted revisions proposed by Resolution 2024-031 to 17-15-
9 subparagraphs E.2. and E. 2. j.
17-15-10 Provisions for flood hazard reduction
A.   General. The following subsections of section
17-15-10 contain the standards of construction for lands to which this chapter
applies per subsection
17-15-3 A and are further restricted or supplemented by the requirements that
follow. In all cases, impact to adjacent, upstream or downstream properties
shall be taken into account.
   1.   The water surface elevation may not be increased by more than one tenth
of one foot at any point located off of the property which is to be occupied by
the anticipated development.
   2.   The velocity of the watercourse may not be increased by ten percent or
by more than 1.0 foot per second, whichever is less.
B.   Standards of construction in floodprone areas
   1.   Anchoring
      a.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
      b.   All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of
subsection
17-15-10 F. 2. b.
   2.   Construction materials and methods
      a.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
      b.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
      c.   All new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new
development shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding;
      d.   Within FEMA zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes are required to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures;
      e.   Structures designed or utilized for human habitation, whether full
or part time, shall only be permitted where the product of the flow depth d, in
feet, times the square of the flow velocity v, in feet per second, of the
surrounding floodwaters of the base flood does not exceed the numerical value
of 18 (dv2 = 18) for a period greater than 30 minutes in duration as determined
by an Arizona registered professional civil engineer and accepted by the
floodplain administrator and the surrounding floodwaters of the Base Flood do
not exceed three feet in depth; and
      f.   All structures designed or utilized for human habitation or
commercial enterprise, whether full or part time, located within a floodplain
or erosion hazard setback area shall provide protection for scour and lateral
erosion based upon a scour/erosion analysis sealed by an Arizona registered
professional civil engineer and accepted by the floodplain administrator. In
all cases scour protection shall be designed to be a minimum of three feet
below the lowest point of the adjacent channel or thalweg.
   3.   Elevation and flood-proofing
      a.   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at or above
the regulatory flood elevation.
      b.   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure in zone AO shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
at least one foot higher than the depth number shown on the FIRM measured from
the highest adjacent natural grade or one foot higher than the BFE from a town
approved drainage study, whichever is greater.
      c.   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure in zone A with no base flood elevations shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated at least four feet higher than the highest
existing adjacent grade unless an engineering analysis is performed by an
Arizona registered professional civil engineer to determine the base flood
elevations, at which the requirement will then be a minimum of one foot above
the base flood elevation.
      d.   New construction and substantial improvement of any critical
structure in a shaded zone X-500 shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated at least 18 inches higher than the highest existing adjacent
grade.
      e.   Non-residential construction shall either be elevated in conformance
with the preceding requirements or shall, together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities:
         i.   be flood-proofed so that below the regulatory flood level the
structure is watertight with walls substantially Impermeable to the passage of
water;
         ii.   have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
         iii.   be certified by an Arizona registered professional civil
engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such
certifications shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.
      f.   All new construction and substantial improvements with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are useable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by
an Arizona registered professional civil engineer or architect to meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
         i.   a minimum of two openings on different sides of each enclosed
area that have a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;
         ii.   the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above finished grade; and
         iii.   openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
      g.   Manufactured homes shall meet the above applicable standards and
also the standards in subsection
17-15-10 F.
      h.   If fill is used to elevate any structure, the fill shall extend at
such elevation for a distance of at least fifteen feet beyond the outside limit
of the structure unless a study/analysis prepared by an Arizona registered
professional civil engineer demonstrates that a lesser distance is acceptable.
      i.   Upon the completion of the structure and prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy the elevation of the lowest floor including basement
shall be certified by an Arizona registered professional civil engineer or
surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.
C.   Standards for storage of materials and equipment
   1.   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding,
buoyant, flammable, explosive or could be injurious to human, animal or plant
life is prohibited.
   2.   Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to
major damage by floods and if firmly anchored to prevent flotation, elevated at
or above regulatory flood elevation, or if readily removable from the area
within the time available after flood warning.
   3.   Storage of materials and equipment is further restricted in the
floodway per subsection
17-15-10 J.
D.   Standards for water supply, waste disposal, and other utilities
   1.   All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system and discharge from systems into flood waters.
   2.   On-site waste disposal systems shall not be located in a floodplain or
erosion hazard setback area if a more suitable area exists on the parcel.
   3.   Waste disposal systems shall not be installed wholly or partially in a
regulatory floodway. Crossings are allowed if buried at least two feet below
the calculated scour depth as determined in a study/analysis prepared by an
Arizona registered professional civil engineer.
   4.   Utilities shall be buried at least two feet below the calculated scour
depth as determined in a study/analysis prepared by an Arizona registered
professional civil engineer.
E.   Standards for subdivisions and commercial developments
   1.   Land which is subject to periodic flooding, which cannot be properly
drained, or other land which, in the opinion of the town engineer, is
unsuitable for any use shall not be subdivided, except that the town may
approve subdivision of such land upon receipt of evidence that the construction
of specific improvements can be expected to render the land suitable. Necessary
flood control improvements must be included in the subdivision assurances as
described in section
17-5-4.
   2.   All preliminary subdivision plats and development plans shall delineate
the FEMA SFHA, floodway if applicable, locally regulated floodplain, erosion
hazard setback areas, and Base Flood elevations. The pre- and post-development
conditions shall be shown.
   3.   All final subdivision plats shall provide the elevation of each
proposed structure and pad affected by or adjacent to flood hazards. If the
site is filled above the base flood, the final lowest floor and pad elevation
shall be certified by an Arizona registered professional civil engineer or
surveyor and provided to the Floodplain Administrator. All final subdivision
plats shall delineate the FEMA SFHA, floodway if applicable, locally regulated
floodplain and erosion hazard setbacks in a surveyable manner and sealed by an
Arizona registered land surveyor.
   4.   All improvement plans relating to grading, paving, sewer or drainage
shall delineate the FEMA SFHA, locally regulated floodplain, erosion hazard
setback areas and base flood elevations. The pre- and post-development
conditions are to be shown.
   5.   All subdivision and commercial development proposals shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
   6.   All subdivision and commercial development proposals shall have public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
   7.   All subdivisions and commercial developments shall provide adequate
drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   8.   All subdivisions with a minimum lot size of 16,000 square feet or less
shall be platted such that FEMA SFHA, locally regulated floodplains, and
erosion hazard setback areas are not located on individual lots. Such areas
shall be contained within common areas.
   9.   All subdivisions with a minimum lot size greater than 16,000 square
feet shall show buildable pad areas for each lot in which a FEMA SFHA, locally
regulated floodplain or erosion hazard setback appears on individual lots. Pad
elevations, encroachments, and/or erosion hazard setback protective measures
shall be designed by an Arizona registered professional civil engineer as part
of the project.
   10.   When a modification or removal of a FEMA SFHA is sought for a
development, the following requirements apply:
      a.   A hydraulic analysis and engineering plans for the modifications
must be accepted by the floodplain administrator. New delineations of the
floodplain conditions shall be prepared in conformance with the requirements of
FEMA for LOMRs, the state director of water resources, and the town.
      b.   A CLOMR must be submitted to and accepted by FEMA prior to the
recording of a final plat for subdivisions.
      c.   A CLOMR must be submitted to and accepted by FEMA prior to
construction of physical improvements.
      d.   A CLOMR must be submitted to and accepted by FEMA prior to issuance
of building permits for subdivision lots. Certificates of occupancy shall not
be issued on subdivision lots to be affected by a LOMR until the LOMR has
become effective.
      e.   A CLOMR must be submitted to and accepted by FEMA prior to issuance
of building permits for commercial/industrial buildings. Certificates of
occupancy shall not be issued for commercial/industrial buildings to be
affected by a LOMR until the LOMR has become effective.
      f.   Any flood control infrastructure necessary to achieve a LOMR must
also have a flood control and maintenance easement dedicated to the Town that
allows for inspection of said infrastructure and at the Town’s sole discretion
the right to repair the infrastructure. The development shall be responsible
for maintenance of the infrastructure. Failure to maintain flood control
infrastructure on the part of the development shall be a violation of this
code.
   11.   All subdivisions and commercial/industrial developments shall provide
all weather access in accordance with subsection
17-15-10 M.
   12.   In lieu of the provisions of section 17-15-10, paragraph (E),
subparagraphs (2), (3), (4), and (8), when submitting a plat for a subdivision
for which a CLOMR has already been accepted by FEMA, the plat may include the
following note to meet the requirements: THE PROPERTY SUBJECT TO THIS FINAL
PLAT INCLUDES A SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) ASSOCIATED WITH THE PLATTED
BOUNDARY, A CLOMR, CASE NUMBER                                   HAS BEEN
ACCEPTED BY FEMA AND A LOMR HAS BEEN SUBMITTED TO FEMA. IF THE SUBMITTED LOMR
IS NOT ACCEPTED BY FEMA AND DOES NOT BECOME EFFECTIVE, THEN THE PROPERTY OWNER
SHALL SUBMIT AN AMENDED FINAL PLAT THAT INCLUDES THE INFORMATION REQUIRED IN
MARANA TOWN CODE SECTION 17-15-10, PARAGRAPH (E), SUBPARAGRAPHS (2), (3), (4),
AND (8) PRIOR TO ANY DEVELOPMENT WITHIN THE PLATTED BOUNDARY.
F.   Standards for manufactured homes and manufactured home parks or
subdivisions.
   1.   Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks or subdivisions must
meet other applicable requirements of section
17-15-10 that have not been supplemented or revised by this subsection.
   2.   All manufactured homes and substantially improved manufactured homes
located within lands to which this chapter applies per subsection
17-15-3 A shall be required to comply with the following:
      a.   Be elevated so that the bottom of the lowest structural frame member
or the lowest point of any attached appliances, whichever is lower, is at or
above the regulatory flood elevation; and
      b.   Be securely anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement by one of the following methods:
         i.   Provision of an anchoring system designed to withstand horizontal
forces of 25 pounds per square foot and uplift forces of 15 pounds per square
foot; or
         ii.   Provision of over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors,
specifically:
            a)   Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four
corners of the manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at
intermediate locations, except that manufactured homes less than 50 feet long
require only one additional tie per side; and
            b)   Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the home with
five additional ties per side at intermediate points, except that manufactured
homes less than 50 feet long require only four additional ties per side; and
            c)   All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of
carrying a force of 4,800 pounds.
   3.   All manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within lands to
which this chapter applies per section
17-15-3 A shall be required to comply with the following:
      a.   All manufactured homes shall be placed:
         i.   on pads or lots elevated on compacted fill so that the bottom of
the structural frame and any attached electrical appliances is at or above the
regulatory flood elevation; or
         ii.   on stem walls or pilings so that the bottom of the structural
frame and any attached electrical appliances is at or above the regulatory
flood elevation.
      b.   Lots shall be large enough to permit steps.
      c.   Pilings or stem wall shall be placed in stable soil.
      d.   Pilings shall be no more than ten feet apart.
   4.   Certification that the installation of a manufactured home meets all of
the requirements of this section is required. Such certification shall be
provided by the person installing the manufactured home, the owner, the
developer of a manufactured home park or subdivision, or an agency regulating
manufactured home placement, whichever is deemed appropriate by the floodplain
administrator. Certification of lowest structural frame member elevation shall
be in accordance with section
17-15-10 B. 3. i.
G.   Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on
site shall either:
   1.   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, and be fully licensed
and ready for highway use. (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if
it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached
additions); or
   2.   Meet the permit requirements of subsection
17-15-9 E of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
manufactured homes in subsection
17-15-10 F.
H.   Standards for critical facilities. Critical facilities shall be regulated
to withstand the 500-year event. Critical facilities shall be required to meet
the following requirements:
   1.   Structures or facilities that produce, use or store more than 100,000
gallons of highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive
materials shall be located outside of the 500-year FEMA floodplain (shaded zone
X) and locally regulated floodplain calculated at the 500 year interval.
   2.   Public and private utility facilities that are vital to maintaining or
restoring normal services to flooded areas before, during and after a flood
shall be located outside of the FEMA special flood hazard area and the locally
regulated floodplain. Such facilities shall be designed to avoid the 500-year
floodplain or certify the safety of the development per subsection
17-15-10 H. 4.
   3.   Police stations, fire stations, hospitals, nursing homes, assisted
living homes, public vehicle and equipment storage facilities, emergency
operations centers and schools designated to be used as temporary shelters
shall be located outside the FEMA special flood hazard area and the locally
regulated floodplain. Such facilities shall be designed to avoid the 500-year
floodplain or certify the safety of the development per subsection
17-15-10 H. 4.
   4.   The developers of critical facilities referenced in subsections 2 and 3
above shall certify the safety of the development by providing the following
information to the satisfaction of the floodplain administrator:
   5.   Freeboard requirements shall be such that the finished floor elevation
shall be elevated one foot above the 500-year water surface elevation.
   6.   Developer shall delineate any 500-year floodplains and the respective
erosion hazard setback areas within 200 feet of the parcel or development.
   7.   The 500-year water surface elevations shall be delineated by the
developer on the preliminary/final plats, development plans and improvement
plans.
   8.   Toe downs and bank protection shall be designed to withstand the 500-
year flood.
I.   Standards for excavations, including sand and gravel operations.
   1.   Excavations, including sand and gravel operations may be permitted
provided the following minimum conditions are met in addition to any other
requirements per the town code. Additional conditions apply for operations
occurring within a regulatory floodway as required in subsection
17-15-10 J.
   2.   Extraction of sand, gravel and other materials is allowed provided that
excavations are not so located or of such depth, or width, or length or
combination of depth-width-length as to present a hazard to structures
(including but not limited to roads, bridges, culverts, and utilities), to the
banks of watercourses, to other property, or which adversely affects
groundwater recharge.
   3.   No stockpiling is permitted within special flood hazard areas of
materials or tailings that may obstruct, divert, or retard the flow of
floodwaters except as reviewed and accepted by the floodplain administrator on
an individual floodplain use permit basis.
   4.   Due to the rapidly changing hydraulic characteristics of watercourses
in the town, and the effects excavations have on these characteristics,
floodplain use permits for excavations shall only be issued for a limited time
period not to exceed one year, subject to annual renewal and review by the
floodplain administrator. Renewals will only be granted after receipt and
acceptance of a report by the operator showing that the sand and gravel
excavations remain in compliance with the conditions of the previous floodplain
use permit, current floodplain conditions and all current related floodplain
management regulations.
   5.   In addition to those conditions provided for elsewhere, floodplain use
permits for excavations may impose site specific conditions based upon
hydraulics and sediment transport regarding the area and location in which
excavations are allowed, the maximum amount of material to be excavated, and
other reasonable restraints on the methods of operating in relationship to the
floodplain conditions.
   6.   The floodplain administrator may require hydrologic, hydraulic and
geomorphic analyses addressing the existing conditions as well as the impacts
under the proposed method of operation.
J.   Floodway requirements
   1.   Located within special flood hazard areas established in subsection
17-15-3 B are areas designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential
projectiles and erosion potential. Encroachments are prohibited in the
floodway, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other
development. The following subsections clarify how the floodway may be
developed.
   2.   The following open space uses are permitted within the floodway to the
extent that they are not prohibited by any provision of this Title or any other
ordinance, law or regulation, and provided they do not require fill,
excavation, or the storage of materials or equipment:
      a.   Agricultural uses, including general farming, pasture, grazing,
outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, sod farming,
and wild crop harvesting.
      b.   Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, airport landing
strips, and parking areas.
      c.   Private and public recreational uses, including golf courses, tennis
courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launch ramps,
swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish
hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting
and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails.
      d.   Accessory residential uses, including lawn gardens, parking areas
and play areas.
      e.   Excavations, including sand and gravel operations may occur in the
floodway under the following conditions in addition to those required in
subsection
17-15-10 I:
      f.   There shall be no stockpiling of materials or tailings within the
floodway.
      g.   Excavations may be allowed only in those reaches of watercourses
which have, at a minimum, a balanced sediment system; that is, the sediment
coming into the reach is equal to or greater than the sediment leaving the
reach and the long term sediment balance for the entire river system indicates
that the stream channel will aggrade.
      h.   Flood control structures designed to protect life or property from
the dangers or hazards of floodwaters are permitted provided all other
provisions of this chapter are met.
      i.   No use shall be allowed which:
         i.   Acting alone or in combination with existing or future uses
creates danger or hazard to life or property. In determining whether a use
creates a danger or hazard to property, the floodplain administrator may
require a certification by an Arizona registered professional civil engineer
that the proposed use will not result in any increase in the floodway
elevations during the occurrence of the base flood nor will the proposed use
divert, retard or obstruct the flow of flood waters.
         ii.   Increases the regulatory floodway elevation.
         iii.   Adversely effects groundwater recharge.
         iv.   Increases erosion potential upstream and/or downstream.
         v.   Places a waste disposal system wholly or partially in a floodway.
K.   Erosion hazard setback requirements
   1.   Close proximity to watercourses poses a hazard to development due to
lateral erosion. Per subsection
17-15-3 A, the erosion hazard setback area of a watercourse is a land covered
by this chapter.
   2.   Along natural watercourses where unusual geology, sinuosity or similar
physical conditions exist, the erosion hazard setback shall be established on a
case-by-case basis by the floodplain administrator, unless an engineering study
is done to establish the limits by an Arizona registered professional civil
engineer and accepted by the floodplain administrator.
   3.   Along incised natural watercourses where no unusual geology, sinuosity
or similar conditions exist, a standard setback measured from the top of the
primary channel bank shall be provided at the time of development. The setback
may be reduced by an engineering analysis performed by an Arizona registered
professional civil engineer and accepted by the floodplain administrator in
accordance with subsection
17-15-10 K. 4.
   4.   Along non-incised natural watercourses (i.e. sheet flow areas) where no
unusual geology, sinuosity or similar conditions exist, a standard setback
measured from the base flood limits shall be provided at the time of
development. The setback may be reduced by an engineering analysis performed by
an Arizona registered professional civil engineer and accepted by the
floodplain administrator in accordance with subsection
17-15-10 K. 4.
   5.   Standard erosion hazard setbacks may be reduced by an engineering study
performed by an Arizona registered professional civil engineer and accepted by
the floodplain administrator. The reduced setbacks shall not fall below minimum
allowable erosion hazard setbacks unless the study also includes an analysis
performed by an Arizona registered professional geological engineer. The
following table shows the standard and minimum allowable setbacks when no
physical construction is made to prevent erosion hazard:
 
Base flood flow rate (cfs) Standard erosion hazard Minimum allowable erosion
                           setback (feet)          hazard setback (feet)
<500                       25                      15
500 to 1,999               50                      25
2,000 to 4,999             75                      45
5,000 to 9,999             100                     70
10,000 and greater         250                     175
Santa Cruz River           500                     350
L.   Detention and retention requirements
   1.   Any development with a net residential density of three or more units
per acre after subtracting out common areas, or any residential development
larger than one acre that has a density of six units per developed acre, as
well as all proposed commercial and industrial developments shall provide some
method of peak and/or volumetric runoff reduction. The amount of reduction
required shall be as set forth in the latest edition of the Pima county
regional flood control district design standards for stormwater detention and
retention. The peak runoff reduction shall be provided through detention of
storm water and storm water harvesting for irrigation where possible.
   2.   Balanced and critical drainage basins are watersheds that have been
identified by the chief engineer of the Pima county flood control district on a
1987 map as unsuitable for increased development because of the high
probability of increased flooding with development and the potential for
flooding of existing improvements or property. The floodplain administrator
shall maintain this map of critical and balanced basins within the
jurisdictional limits of the town. Drainage basins that have not previously
been identified as unsuitable for additional urban development shall be
considered balanced basins, but upon study by the floodplain administrator, may
be classified as critical basins. Critical and balanced basins may be developed
further only upon the incorporation of adequate detention systems or flood
control facilities, as reviewed and accepted by the floodplain administrator.
These detention systems or flood control facilities shall be incorporated into
any and all future basin-development proposals, regardless of size or land-use
density.
   3.   Structural flood control measures may be proposed in conjunction with,
or in place of detention/retention systems if it can be clearly demonstrated
that such measures will not alter the water and sediment equilibrium of the
affected watercourse, and will mitigate environmental impacts. Structural flood
control measures, such as channelization to a logical conclusion downstream of
the proposed development and/or improvements to existing offsite flood control
systems within the applicable drainage or stream reach, shall be completed in
accordance with plans reviewed and accepted by the floodplain administrator.
   4.   Localized areas lacking sufficient improved or natural receiving waters
into which runoff may be discharged may be required to follow alternative
drainage solutions including complete retention practices as directed by the
town engineer.
   5.   A fee may be collected by the town in lieu of detention/retention
system when it can be clearly demonstrated that the detention at the site does
not provide offsite flood relief due to the parcel size, location within the
drainage basin, or other factors. The fees collected will be used to construct
public flood control improvements that will mitigate the potential damage of
flood waters originating from the property contributing the fees. In balanced
and critical drainage basins, and where development is less than three units
per acre, use of a fee system will be encouraged in lieu of a detention system
to preserve the natural drainage patterns. The fee shall be equivalent to the
cost of a detention system that would otherwise be constructed for the
development to mitigate increased storm water runoff created by the proposed
development.
M.   Access requirements
   1.   Development shall provide all-weather access in accordance with the
following requirements:
      a.   Developments that fall under the requirements of subdivisions of ten
or fewer lots shall provide all-weather access from each lot to the subdivision
entrance. All-weather access shall be constructed from the subdivision entrance
to the nearest paved public roadway. This requirement may be waived if the
following criteria is met:
         i.   Subdivision is characterized as a residential subdivision
         ii.   Subdivision is of a rural character, with minimum lot sizes of
36,000 square feet
         iii.   If, in the determination of the floodplain administrator, it is
not reasonably feasible to construct such access to the subdivision entrance
         iv.   Subsection
17-15-10 M. 2 provisions are utilized.
      b.   All subdivisions that do not fall under the preceding requirements
shall provide all-weather access from each lot to a paved public right of way.
A subdivision with more than one access to a paved public roadway need only
have one all-weather access.
      c.   All commercial developments shall provide all-weather access from a
paved public roadway to all public portions of their site. Nonpublic portions
of a commercial development that are not all-weather access shall be gated and
signs posted in accordance with subsection
17-15-10 M. 2.
      d.   Private residential construction not part of a recorded subdivision
shall construct an all-weather access from the property boundary to a paved
public roadway. If in the determination of the floodplain administrator it is
not reasonably feasible to construct such access to the property, then
subsection
17-15-10 M. 2 provisions may be utilized.
   2.   The floodplain administrator may allow certain exemptions to all-
weather access as stated in the preceding section. A condition of allowing this
exemption is that the owner shall execute and record a covenant running with
the land enforceable by the town which contains the following:
      a.   An acknowledgement that the vehicular access may be impassable to
conventional motor vehicles and emergency vehicles in times of flooding,
      b.   A hold harmless provision, holding the town, its agents, the
floodplain management board harmless from and against all injuries and damages
resulting from the traversing or attempting to traverse the vehicle access
during times of flooding, and
      c.   The covenant, successors and assigns shall erect and maintain a sign
(s) in a location(s) and size(s) acceptable to the town stating “DO NOT ENTER
WHEN FLOODED”
Ordinance 2021-010 amended paragraphs E and L
Ordinance 2022.006 amended Section 17-15-10 B., D.
Ordinance 2022.017 amended Section 17-15-10 E.
Ordinance 2024.011 adopted revisions proposed by Resolution 2024-031 which
amended Section 17-15-10, subparagraphs B.3.d., C.2., F.2.a. and F.4, and added
subparagraph E.12.
17-15-11 Floodplain variance procedure
A.   Nature of floodplain variances
   1.   Floodplain variances pertain to a piece of property and are not
personal in nature. A floodplain variance may be granted for a parcel of
property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the
requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the
applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be
unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The
characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its
inhabitants or the property owners.
   2.   Floodplain variances from the flood elevation or from other
requirements in this chapter shall be granted only in rare situations. The
long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met
if floodplain variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the floodplain
variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain
multiple provisions that must be met before a floodplain variance can be
properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in
which alternatives other than a floodplain variance are more appropriate.
B.   Appeal board
   1.   The floodplain board of the town of Marana shall hear and decide
appeals and requests for floodplain variances from the requirements of this
chapter.
   2.   The floodplain board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the
floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
   3.   In considering applications, the floodplain board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
      a.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      b.   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      c.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      d.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
      e.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      f.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use,
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
      g.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      h.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      i.   The safety of access to the property and all of its habitable
structures in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
      h.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and,
      k.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, water system and streets and bridges.
   4.   Upon consideration of the factors of subsection 3 and the purposes of
this chapter, the floodplain board may attach such conditions to the granting
of floodplain variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this
chapter.
   5.   Any applicant to whom a floodplain variance is granted shall be given
written notice over the signature of a community official that:
      a.   The issuance of a floodplain variance to construct a structure below
the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance
coverage;
      b.   Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life
and property; and
      c.   The land upon which the floodplain variance is granted shall be
ineligible for exchange of state land pursuant to the flood relocation and land
exchange program provided for by A.R.S. § 37-610. A copy of the notice shall be
recorded in the office of the Pima County Recorder and shall be recorded in a
manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.
   6.   The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all floodplain
variance actions, including justification for their issuance.
C.   Conditions for floodplain variances
   1.   Floodplain variances may be issued for the repair, rehabilitation,
restoration, or floodproofing of structures listed in the national register of
historic places or the state inventory of historic places, upon a determination
that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a historic structure and the floodplain variance is
the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
   2.   Floodplain variances may be issued for accessory structures used solely
for limited storage that have a size of less than 150 square feet, provided
that the following requirements are met:
      a.   Structure is anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral
movement;
      b.   The portions of the structure located below the BFE are constructed
of flood resistant materials;
      c.   The structure is designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit
of flood waters;
      d.   Any mechanical, utility or electrical equipment is elevated or
flood-proofed above the BFE; and
      e.   The structure does not violate any floodway requirements.
   3.   Floodplain variances may be issued for agricultural structures whose
use is exclusively in connection with the production, harvesting, storage,
drying, or raising of agricultural commodities, including the raising of
livestock, such as pole and pre-fabricated metal structures, grain bins and
corn cribs provided that the following requirements are met:
      a.   The structure is designed in a manner that results in minimal damage
from flooding;
      b.   The contents stored in the structure will create no additional
threat to the public;
      c.   The structure is designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit
of flood waters;
      d.   Any mechanical, utility or electrical equipment is elevated or
flood-proofed above the BFE; and
      e.   The structure does not violate any floodway requirements.
   4.   Floodplain variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway
if any increase in flood levels during the Base Flood discharge would result.
   5.   Floodplain variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
floodplain variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.
   6.   Floodplain variances shall only be issued upon:
      a.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
      b.   A determination that failure to grant the floodplain variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
      c.   A showing that the use cannot perform its intended purpose unless it
is located or carried out in close proximity to water. This includes only
facilities defined in section
17-15-2 of this chapter in the definition of “functionally dependent use”; and,
      d.   A determination that the granting of a floodplain variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
Appendix 1 – Table of regulatory peak discharges
Note: List is not all inclusive; remaining watersheds area also subjected to
Marana floodplain and erosion hazard management code restrictions. Listed
discharges are subject to review and revision due to urbanization and
improvements. Check with the town engineer before their use.
Watercourse Regulatory Design
Watercourse                              Regulatory Design
Blanco Wash @ Los Robles Wash            17,000     22,000
Brawley Wash @ Los Robles Wash           35,000     40,000
Hardy Wash @ Camino De Oeste Road        4,536
Little Brawley Wash @ 32d7’25”       13,440
Los Robles Wash @ Blanco Wash            37,000     42,000
Picture Rock Wash @ Picture Rocks Road   3,479
Canada Del Oro Wash @ Thornydale         28,000     33,000
Rillito River @ I-10                     32,000     38,000
Santa Cruz River @ Cortaro Road          70,000     80,000
Tortolita Fan: Canada Agua Canyon @ I-10 5,255
Tortolita Fan: Cochie Canyon @ I-10      5,779
Tortolita Fan: Cottonwood Canyon @ I-10  5,439
Derrio Canyon @ I-10                     5,229
Eastern Limit of Fan @ I-10              4,084
Guild Canyon @ I-10                      4,561
Ruelas Canyon @ I-10                     4,604
Prospect Canyon @ I-10                   4,340
Wild Burro @ I-10                        5,831
 
Unless otherwise noted, design discharges shall be 20% greater than regulatory
discharges.
Ordinance 2022.006 amended Section 17-15-11 B., C.
CHAPTER 17-16.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Chapter 17-16 was inserted into the town code by Ordinance 2015.021
Sections:
17-16-1   General provisions
17-16-2   Prohibitions and controls to reduce the discharge of pollutants in
stormwater
17-16-3   Compliance monitoring
17-16-1 General provisions
A.   Purpose. These regulations establish minimum stormwater management
requirements for the management of pollutants that are or may be discharged to
the municipal storm sewer system. The purpose is to improve the quality of
stormwater discharges and to enable the Town to comply with all applicable
state and federal laws.
B.   Definitions. Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following
terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings set forth
in this paragraph. Where noted, the definitions shall correspond with the
applicable section of the Arizona revised statutes as amended.
   1.   ADEQ: Arizona department of environmental quality, regulatory entity of
the state of Arizona responsible for administering various federal and state
environmental laws and programs, including most water quality programs, air
quality, and waste programs.
   2.   AZPDES permit: Arizona pollutant discharge elimination system - any
permit issued by the Arizona department of environmental quality delegated
pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to
waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual,
group, or general area-wide basis in compliance with the clean water act (CWA).
   3.   BMPs, best management practices: Schedules of activities, prohibitions
of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent
or reduce the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States. BMPs also
include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control
plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage
from raw material storage.
   4.   CGP: Construction general permit
   5.   Common plan of development: A contiguous area where multiple separate
and distinct construction activities may be taking place at different times on
different schedules under one common plan; broadly defined as any announcement
or piece of documentation (including a sign, public notice or hearing, sales
pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, computer
design, etc.) or physical demarcation (including boundary signs, lot stakes,
surveyor marking, etc.) indicating construction activities may occur on a
specific plot.
   6.   Contractor: Synonymous with the term “builder” and means any person,
firm, partnership, corporation, association or other organization, or a
combination of any of them, who, for compensation, undertakes to or offers to
undertake to, purports to have the capacity to undertake to, submits a bid or
responds to a request for qualification or a request for proposals for
construction services to, does himself or by or through others, or directly or
indirectly supervises others to:
      a.   Construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move,
wreck or demolish any building, highway, road, railroad, excavation or other
structure, project, development or improvement, or to do any part thereof,
including the erection of scaffolding or any other structure or work in
connection with the construction.
      b.   Connect such structure or improvements to utility service lines and
metering devices and the sewer line.
      c.   Provide mechanical or structural service for any such structure or
improvements. A.R.S. § 32-1101 (3).
   7.   CWA, clean water act: The federal water pollution control act, as
amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et. seq.
   8.   Developer: Any person, group or entity proposing or constructing a
development as defined by the land development code.
   9.   Discharge: Any pollutant that leaves the site.
   10.   EPA: The United States environmental protection agency charged with
primary enforcement of the clean water act (CWA).
   11.   Final stabilization: means that either:
      a.   All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed and
either of the two following criteria are met:
         i.   A uniform (e.g., evenly distributed, without large bare areas)
perennial vegetative cover with a density of 70% of the native background
vegetative cover for the area has been established on all unpaved areas and
areas not covered by permanent structures, or
         ii.   Equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as riprap,
gabions, or geotextiles) have been employed.
      b.   When background native vegetation will cover less than 100% of the
ground (e.g., arid areas, beaches), the 70% coverage criteria is adjusted as
follows: if the native vegetation covers 50% of the ground, 70% of 50% (.70 x
.50 = .35) would require 35% total cover for final stabilization. On a beach
with no natural vegetation, no stabilization is required.
      c.   For individual lots in residential construction final stabilization
means that either:
         i.   The homebuilder has completed final stabilization as specified
above, or
         ii.   The homebuilder has established temporary stabilization
including perimeter controls for an individual lot prior to occupation of the
home by the homeowner and informing the homeowner of the need for, and benefits
of, final stabilization, or
         iii.   For construction projects on land used for agricultural
purposes (e.g., pipelines across crop or range land), final stabilization may
be accomplished by returning the disturbed land to its preconstruction
agricultural use. Areas disturbed that were not previously used for
agricultural activities, such as buffer strips immediately adjacent to “water
of the United States,” and areas which are not being returned to their
preconstruction agricultural use must meet the final stabilization criteria
above.
   12.   Illicit discharge: Any discharge to a storm drain system that is not
composed entirely of stormwater except discharges pursuant to a AZPDES permit,
discharges resulting from emergency firefighting activities, and discharges
further exempted in subsection
17-16-2 B of this chapter.
   13.   Monitoring: Periodic or continuous surveillance or testing to
determine the level of compliance with statutory requirements and/or pollutant
levels in various media or in humans, plants, and animals.
   14.   MS4, municipal separate storm sewer system: Includes, but is not
limited to, those facilities located within the town and owned or operated by a
public entity by which stormwater may be collected and conveyed to waters of
the United States, including any roads with drainage systems, public streets,
inlets, curbs, gutters, piped storm drains and retention or detention basins.
   15.   NOI: Notice of intent
   16.   NOT: Notice of termination
   17.   Owner or operator: The owner or operator of any facility or activity
subject to regulation under this code.
   18.   Person: Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns.
   19.   Point source: Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance,
including but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well,
discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding
operation, vessel or other floating craft from which pollutants are or may be
discharged to an MS4. Point source does not include return flows from irrigated
agriculture.
   20.   Pollute: To alter the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological
quality of, or the contamination of, any water of the state or water of the
United States.
   21.   Pollution: Contaminants introduced into the natural environment that
cause adverse change, including but not limited to, mechanical fluids, toxic
wastes, toxic pollutants, dredged spoil, solid waste, household chemicals,
pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers and other agricultural chemicals,
incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions and munitions
casings, petroleum products, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive
materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, yard waste, rock, sand, cellar
dirt and mining, industrial, municipal and agricultural wastes or any other
liquid, solid, gaseous, or hazardous substances.
   22.   Release: Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying,
discharging, injecting, placing, leaching, dumping, or disposing into or on any
land in a manner that can cause pollution.
   23.   Stormwater: Stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff
and drainage.
   24.   SWPPP, stormwater pollution prevention plan: A plan that shows and
describes the best management practices that will be used to control the
discharge of pollutants from a site.
   25.   Waters of the United States: Means the same as defined in 33 CFR Part
328, as may be amended.
C.   Applicability. This chapter shall apply to all activities which may
potentially affect the municipal separate storm sewer system, any private storm
sewer system or any water of the United States within the town. Additionally,
permanent and temporary stormwater management controls, practices and
facilities, constructed as part of any activities listed in this section, which
are located within the town limits, are also subject to this chapter.
D.   Delegation of authority for administration and enforcement. The town
engineer of the town is delegated the authority to exercise the powers and
perform the duties set forth in this chapter and to administer and enforce
provisions of this chapter. The town engineer may designate other employees to
exercise such powers and perform such duties, as he or she deems appropriate.
E.   Regulatory consistency. This chapter shall be construed to assure
consistency with the requirements of the federal clean water act (CWA) and acts
amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, applicable state or federal
implementing regulations, and the municipal AZPDES permit and any amendments,
revisions, or reissuance thereof. No permit or approval issued pursuant to this
chapter shall relieve a person of the responsibility to secure permits and
approvals required for activities regulated by any other applicable rule, code,
act, permit, or ordinance. The town shall not certify or defend that the
applicant has met the requirements of the federal CWA.
F.   Severability. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this
chapter or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or
circumstance shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other
provisions or application of this chapter which can be given effect without the
invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions of this
chapter are hereby declared to be severable.
Ordinance 2021-010 amended paragraphs A., B., C., E. and deleted F.,
redesignating G. as F.
Ordinance 2022.006 amended Section 17-16-1 B.
17-16-2 Prohibitions and controls to reduce the discharge of pollutants in
stormwater
A.   General Requirements
   1.   Any person engaged in activities which will or may result in pollutants
entering a storm sewer system shall undertake appropriate measures to reduce
the potential to discharge such pollutants.
   2.   No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be
thrown, deposited, placed, left or maintained, any pollutant that may enter the
MS4, except where such pollutant is being temporarily stored in properly
contained waste receptacles or is part of a well-defined compost system or
pursuant to another recycling system.
   3.   No person shall cause or permit the discharge into any street, alley,
sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit or other drainage
structures, business place, or upon any public or private plot of land in the
town any pollutant originating from a dumpster, solid waste bin, or similar
container.
B.   Prohibition of non-stormwater discharge to the municipal storm sewer
system; exemptions
   1.   Unless expressly authorized or exempted by this chapter, no person
shall cause or allow the discharge to a public right-of-way or municipal storm
sewer system of any substance that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
   2.   Unless expressly authorized or exempted by this chapter, no person
shall use, store, spill, dump, or dispose of materials in a manner that those
materials could cause or contribute to the addition of pollutants to
stormwater.
   3.   Exemptions. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibitions
set forth in subsections 1 and 2 of this subsection:
      a.   Dechlorinated waters from water line flushing;
      b.   Landscape irrigation;
      c.   Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;
      d.   Uncontaminated, non-turbid groundwater or spring water;
      e.   Individual residential car washing;
      f.   Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
      g.   Discharges related to installation and maintenance of potable water
supply systems, including disinfection and flushing activities, discharges
resulting from pressure releases or overflows and discharges from wells
approved and ADEQ for drinking water use;
      h.   Foundation or footing drains where flows are not contaminated with
process materials, such as solvents;
      i.   Uncontaminated air condition or compressor condensate;
      j.   Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spilled materials have been removed)
and where detergents are not used;
      k.   Water from fire-fighting system testing and maintenance, including
hydrant flushing;
      l.   Water, reclaimed water, or process wastewaters that are used for
dust control, provided that not reclaimed water or process waters are
discharged off site or applied during rain events;
      m.   Water used for compacting soil, provided reclaimed water or other
wastewaters are not used;
      n.   Routine external building wash down where detergents are not used;
      o.   Water used for drilling and coring for evaluation of foundation
materials where flows are not contaminated with additives;
      p.   Discharges from emergency firefighting activities;
      q.   Diverted stream flows;
      r.   Water from crawl space pumps; and
      s.   Discharges from riparian habitats and wetlands.
   4.   No person shall discharge to the municipal storm sewer system any
exempted discharge under subsection 3 if the town engineer or assigned designee
identifies and provides written notice to the person that the discharge has the
potential to be a source of pollutants to receiving waters, waterways, or
groundwater.
   5.   No person shall discharge to the municipal storm sewer system where
such discharge would result in or contribute to a violation of the AZPDES
stormwater permit issued to the town, either separately considered or when
combined with other discharges. Liability for any such discharge shall be the
responsibility of the person causing or responsible for the discharge and will
be addressed as outlined in the enforcement response plan (ERP).
C.   Operating facilities or activities
   1.   All persons owning or operating premises or engaged in activities who
are required by federal or state law to submit to EPA and/or ADEQ a notice of
intent (NOI) to comply with an AZPDES stormwater permit shall provide a copy of
the authorization certificate to the town upon request. Facilities required to
apply for a stormwater permit are identified in 40 CFR 122.23(B) (14).
   2.   All persons engaged in activities which will or may reasonably be
expected to result in pollutants entering the municipal storm sewer system
shall submit a SWPPP for review and acceptance by the town, shall provide
protection from accidental discharge of pollutants to the municipal storm sewer
system, shall comply with the spill notification requirements of this chapter,
and shall undertake best management (BMPs) to minimize such pollutants. Such
measures shall include any additional requirements imposed by federal, state,
county, or local authorities.
   3.   In the case that a specific best management practice is required by the
town to prevent a pollutant from entering the municipal storm sewer system, the
person receiving the notice of such a requirement may petition the town to
reconsider the application of the BMP to the premises or activity. The written
petition must be received within ten calendar days setting forth any reasons
and proposed alternatives. The town will act within 14 calendar days of the
petition.
   4.   No person shall establish, use, maintain, or continue any connection to
the municipal storm sewer system which is causing a violation of this section.
This shall apply to any connection that was made in the past, regardless of
whether it was made under permit or other authorization, or whether it was
permissible under the law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection as of the effective date of this chapter.
   5.   If, during the course of activity, a deficiency in the accepted SWPPP
is identified. the owner/operator must modify the SWPPP to include additional
or modified BMPs designed to correct problems identified. Requirements for
corrections to the SWPPP are outlined in the town's enforcement response plan.
   6.   Operations or activities that have been granted a waiver from
developing a SWPPP by ADEQ may still need to submit a SWPPP to the town for
review and acceptance.
   7.   Basins with a retention component may be used as temporary sediment
basins during construction provided the following conditions are met:
      a.   Prior to acceptance, the basin shall be retested for percolation;
and
      b.   Additional measures must be put in place to collect sediment prior
to entry into the basin, i.e. the basin must be part of a cascading sediment
trapping system.
D.   Maintenance of stormwater facilities
   1.   Property owners or operators shall warrant post-construction stormwater
runoff control facilities including but not limited to, retention basins, dry
wells, and other measures (as described in 40 CFR 122.34 (B)(5)(III) during the
warranty period.
   2.   Stormwater facilities shall be maintained by the owner or other
responsible party and shall be repaired and/or replaced by such person when
such facilities are no longer functioning as designed.
   3.   Disposal of waste from maintenance of facilities shall be conducted in
accordance with applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations.
   4.   Records of installation and maintenance and repair of facilities
referenced in subsection 1 of this section shall be retained by the owner or
other responsible party for a period of five years and shall be made available
to the public works department upon request.
   5.   Any failure to maintain facilities or correct problems with facilities
after receiving due notice from the town may result in criminal or civil
penalties and the town may perform corrective or maintenance work which shall
be at the owner’s expense.
E.   Cleanup and notification requirements
   1.   In the event of a spill or release in reportable quantities as defined
in 40 CFR 302, 40 CFR 110 and 40 CFR 117, the owner, operator, or the person
who has control of the source or location of any spill or release, which may
result in a discharge that is not in compliance with this chapter, shall
immediately take all reasonable safety precautions including, if appropriate,
calling 911. Within five calendar days, a written notification will be
submitted to the town engineer indicating the type, volume, and cause of the
discharge along with details of the corrective actions taken to clean up the
spill.
   2.   Compliance with the requirement in subsection
17-16-2 E. 1 shall not relieve the discharger from the reporting requirements
of 40 CFR 110, 40 CFR 117, and 40 CFR 302.
Ordinance 2021.010 amended Section 17-16-2
Ordinance 2022.006 amended Section 17-16-2
17-16-3 Compliance monitoring
A.   Inspections
   1.   Authority to inspect. Upon presentation of credentials and at all
reasonable or necessary hours, all authorized employees of the town shall have
access to all premises and to all records pertaining to those premises for
purposes of ensuring compliance with this chapter. Inspection, interviewing,
copying, sampling, photographing, and other activities conducted on the
premises shall be limited to those which are reasonably needed by the town in
determining compliance with the requirements of this chapter. All persons shall
allow such activities under safe and non-hazardous conditions with a minimum of
delay. Inspections of active construction sites will follow the guidelines and
schedules of the AZPDES Phase II MS4 permit issued to the town.
   2.   Monitoring activities. The town may order any person engaged in any
activity or owning or operating on any premises which is causing or
contributing to discharges of pollutants to the municipal storm sewer system in
violation of this chapter or that is posing a risk to public health, safety,
and welfare to undertake such monitoring activities and analyses and furnish
such reports as the town reasonably may specify. The costs of such activities,
analyses, and reports shall be borne in the recipient of the order.
   3.   Access refusal. If an authorized employee of the town has been refused
access to any premises, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe
that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to
inspect, interview, copy, photograph or sample as part of an inspection and
sampling procedure of the town designed to determine compliance with the
requirements of this chapter or any related laws or regulations, or to protect
the environment and the public health, safety, and welfare of the community,
then the town may seek issuance of a search warrant from the town municipal
court.
B.   Enforcement and penalties.
   1.   When inspections by town staff reveal deficiencies in the
implementation of the SWPPP, a written inspection report will be provided to
the owner and operator within 30 days of the inspection.
   2.   Charges or penalties levied pursuant to this chapter shall be collected
and utilized for public education and outreach in compliance with the town's
MS4 permit.
   3.   Operator and/or owner of record. The operator performing activities
and/or owner of record of the property upon which a violation of this chapter
occurs shall be presumed to be a person having lawful control over the activity
or premises unless it is demonstrated and documented that another person has
knowingly and in good faith accepted responsibility for the activity at issue.
If more than one person is identified as the owner, such persons shall be
presumed to be jointly and severally in lawful possession and control of the
activity or premises.
   4.   Notice to correct. The town may issue a written notice to correct to
any person who has violated or is in violation of this chapter. Failure to
comply with any act required in the notice to correct may result in a notice of
violation and/or stop work order.
   5.   Notice of violation. The town may issue a written notice of violation
to any person who has violated or is in violation of this chapter. Failure to
comply with any act required in the notice of violation shall be a separate
violation for each day beyond the third calendar day following the notice of
violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the town to
take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action,
without first issuing a notice of violation. In appropriate situations the town
may notify the person orally either in person or by telephone prior to written
notification.
   6.   Consent orders. The town may enter into consent orders, assurances of
voluntary compliance, negotiated settlement agreements, or other similar
documents establishing an agreement with any person responsible for
noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the
person to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the
document, including an identification and description of the best management
practices and measures to utilize in implementing the order. Such documents
shall have the same force and effect as any other orders issued under this
chapter and shall be judicially enforceable.
   7.   Stop work order. For projects under construction in the town, if the
town finds that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision
of this chapter or any related laws or regulations, or that the person’s past
violations are likely to recur, the town may issue a stop work order to the
person directing them to cease and desist all such violations and direct the
person to immediately comply with all requirements; and take such appropriate
remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing
or threatened violation. Issuance of a stop work order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the person. A
person’s failure to comply with an order issued pursuant to this chapter shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
   8.   Civil penalties. A person who violates any requirement of this chapter
shall be civilly liable to the town for a sum not to exceed $2,500 per day for
each violation.
   9.   Criminal penalties. A person who willfully or negligently violates any
provision of this chapter, or any related laws or regulations shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $2,500 per day for each violation and/or by
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months.
   10.   Criminal prosecution. Some intentional violations may constitute
criminal violations of federal, state, and town law, and that under such
circumstances, the town may seek the assistance of the EPA, the state, or the
town prosecutor to commence civil and/or criminal action against any person who
violates any requirement of this chapter.
   11.   The town may withhold the issuance of permits including but not
limited to building permits, native plant permits and grading permits, for the
development or improvement on the parcel or any contiguous parcel of land under
the ownership of a person or persons in violation of any requirement of this
chapter.
   12.   Liability for costs. The town may assess liability for costs to any
person in violation of this chapter for all actual costs incurred by the town
in surveillance, sampling and testing, abatement, and remediation associated
with a discharge. Additionally, the town may assess liability for costs to any
person whose discharge resulted in a violation of the town’s AZPDES stormwater
permit.
C.   Enforcement response plan adopted.
The Marana stormwater management enforcement response plan (ERP) attached as
exhibit A to ordinance no. 2022.006 and approved and adopted by that ordinance,
as it may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference as if
fully set out herein.
Ordinance 2021.010 amended Section 17-16-3
Ordinance 2022.006 amended Section 17-16-3
CHAPTER 17-17.
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ORDINANCE
Chapter 17-17 was inserted into the town code by Ordinance 2014.011
Sections:
17-17-1   Title
17-17-2   Legislative intent and purpose
17-17-3   Definitions
17-17-4   Applicability
17-17-5   Authority for development impact fees
17-17-6   Administration of development impact fees
17-17-7   Land use assumptions
17-17-8   Infrastructure improvements plan
17-17-9   Adoption and modification procedures
17-17-10   Timing for the renewal and updating of the infrastructure
improvements plan and the land use assumptions
17-17-11   Collection of development impact fees
17-17-12   Development impact fee credits and credit agreements
17-17-13   Development agreements
17-17-14   Appeals
17-17-15   Refunds of development impact fees
17-17-16   Oversight of development impact fee program
17-17-1 Title
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Marana development impact
fee ordinance.”
17-17-2 Legislative intent and purpose
A.   This chapter is adopted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety
and general welfare of the residents of the town by:
   1.   Requiring new development to pay its proportionate share of the costs
incurred by the town that are associated with providing necessary public
services to new development.
   2.   Setting forth standards and procedures for creating and assessing
development impact fees consistent with the requirements of A.R.S. § 9-463.05,
including requirements pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05, subsection K that, on or
before August 1, 2014, the town replace its development impact fees that were
adopted prior to January 1, 2012 with development impact fees adopted pursuant
to the requirements of A.R.S. § 9-463.05 as amended by the state legislature in
SB 1525, fiftieth legislature, first regular session.
   3.   Providing for the temporary continuation of certain development impact
fees adopted prior to January 1, 2012 until otherwise replaced pursuant to this
chapter.
   4.   Setting forth procedures for administering the development impact fee
program, including mandatory offsets, credits, and refunds of development
impact fees. All development impact fee assessments, offsets, credits, or
refunds shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
B.   This chapter shall not affect the town’s zoning authority or its authority
to adopt or amend its general plan, provided that planning and zoning
activities by the town may require amendments to development impact fees as
provided in section
17-17-7 below.
17-17-3 Definitions
When used in this chapter, the terms listed below shall have the following
meanings unless the context requires otherwise. Singular terms shall include
their plural.
   1.   Age restricted multi-family residential land use subcategory:
Development where more than a single residential unit occurs on a single lot in
a community that restricts residents to 55-years or older with no one in the
household under age 18. See ITE land use category 252.
   2.   Age restricted single family residential land use subcategory: Detached
and attached residential structures characteristic of a primary residence, even
if the residence is subsequently rented, in a community that restricts
residents to 55-years or older with no one in the household under age 18. See
ITE land use category 251.
   3.   Applicant: A person who applies to the town for a building permit.
   4.   Appurtenance: Any fixed machinery or equipment, structure or other
fixture, including integrated hardware, software or other components,
associated with a capital facility that are necessary or convenient to the
operation, use, or maintenance of a capital facility, but excluding replacement
of the same after initial installation.
   5.   Aquatic center: A facility primarily designed to host non-recreational
competitive functions generally occurring within water, including, but not
limited to, water polo games, swimming meets, and diving events. The facility
may be indoors, outdoors, or any combination thereof, and includes all
necessary supporting amenities, including but not limited to, locker rooms,
offices, snack bars, bleacher seating, and shade structures.
   6.   Building permit: Any permit issued by the town that authorizes vertical
construction, increases square footage, authorizes changes to land use, or
provides for the addition of a residential or non-residential point of demand
to a water or wastewater system.
   7.   Capital facility: An asset having a useful life of three or more years
that is a component of one or more categories of necessary public service
provided by the town. A capital facility may include any associated purchase of
real property, architectural and engineering services leading to the design and
construction of buildings and facilities, improvements to existing facilities,
improvements to or expansions of existing facilities, and associated financing
and professional services. “Infrastructure” shall have the same meaning as
“capital facilities.”
   8.   Category of necessary public service: A category of necessary public
services for which the town is authorized to assess development impact fees, as
further defined in subsection
17-17-8A.1 below.
   9.   Category of development: A specific land use category against which a
development impact fee is calculated and assessed. The town assesses
development impact fees against residential, retail, high traffic retail,
industrial, general office, medical facilities, institutional, and recreational
land use categories, each of which is defined in this list of definitions.
   10.   Congregate care land use subcategory: Group housing with a central
eating facility, smaller rooms, and care for its tenants. This includes nursing
homes, group homes, prisons, and similar uses as determined by the town
engineer. See ITE land use categories 253, 254, 255, 571, and 620.
   11.   Credit: A reduction in an assessed development impact fee resulting
from developer contributions to, payments for, construction of, or dedications
for capital facilities included in an infrastructure improvements plan pursuant
to section
17-17-12 below (or as otherwise permitted by this chapter).
   12.   Credit agreement: A written agreement between the town and a developer
or landowner that allocates credits to the development pursuant to section
17-17-12 below. A credit agreement may be included as part of a development
agreement pursuant to section
17-17-13 below.
   13.   Credit allocation: A term used to describe when credits are
distributed to a particular development or parcel of land after execution of a
credit agreement, but are not yet issued.
   14.   Credit issuance: A term used to describe when the amount of an
assessed development impact fee attributable to a particular development or
parcel of land is reduced by applying a credit allocation.
   15.   Developer: An individual, group of individuals, partnership,
corporation, limited liability company, association, municipal corporation,
state agency, or other person or entity undertaking land development activity,
and their respective successors and assigns.
   16.   Development agreement: An agreement prepared in accordance with the
requirements of section
17-17-13 below, A.R.S. § 9-500.05, and any applicable requirements of the town
code.
   17.   Direct benefit: A benefit to an EDU resulting from a capital facility
that: (a) addresses the need for a necessary public service created in whole or
in part by the EDU; and that (b) meets either of the following criteria: (i)
the capital facility is located in the immediate area of the EDU and is needed
in the immediate area of the EDU to maintain the level of service; or (ii) the
capital facility substitutes for, or eliminates the need for a capital facility
that would have otherwise have been needed in the immediate area of the EDU to
maintain the town’s level of service.
   18.   Dwelling unit: A house, apartment, mobile home or trailer, group of
rooms, or single room occupied as separate living quarters or, if vacant,
intended for occupancy as separate living quarters.
   19.   Equipment: Machinery, tools, materials, and other supplies, not
including vehicles, that a capital facility needs to provide the level of
service specified by the infrastructure improvement plan, but excluding
replacement of the same after initial development of the capital facility.
   20.   Equivalent demand unit (EDU): A unit of development within a
particular category of development, defined in terms of a standardized measure
of the demand that a unit of development in that category of development
generates for necessary public services in relation to the demand generated by
a detached single-family dwelling unit. For all categories of necessary public
services, the EDU factor for a detached single-family dwelling unit is one,
while the EDU factor for a unit of development within another category of
development is represented as a ratio of the demand for each category of
necessary public services typically generated by that unit as compared to the
demand for such services typically generated by a detached single-family
dwelling unit. An EDU shall be a “service unit” for purposes of A.R.S. § 9-
463.05 (T) (10).
   21.   Excluded library facility: Library facilities for which development
impact fees may not be charged pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05, including that
portion of any library facility that exceeds 10,000 square feet, and equipment,
vehicles or appurtenances associated with library operations.
   22.   Excluded park facility: Park and recreational facilities for which
development impact fees may not be charged pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05,
including amusement parks, aquariums, aquatic centers, auditoriums, arenas,
arts and cultural facilities, bandstand and orchestra facilities, bathhouses,
boathouses, clubhouses, community centers greater than three thousand square
feet in floor area, environmental education centers, equestrian facilities,
golf course facilities, greenhouses, lakes, museums, theme parks, water
reclamation or riparian areas, wetlands, or zoo facilities.
   23.   Fee report: A written report developed pursuant to section
17-17-12 below that identifies the methodology for calculating the amount of
each development impact fee, explains the relationship between the development
impact fee to be assessed and the plan-based cost per EDU calculated in the
infrastructure improvements plan, and which meets other requirements set forth
in A.R.S. § 9-463.05.
   24.   Financing or debt: Any debt, bond, note, loan, interfund loan, fund
transfer, or other debt service obligation used to finance the development or
expansion of a capital facility.
   25.   General office land use category: Office uses, office parks, corporate
headquarters, governmental offices, business parks, research and development
parks, and similar uses as determined by the town engineer. Doctor, dentist,
veterinary offices, clinics, and urgent care facilities fall under this
category instead of medical facilities. See ITE land use categories 700-799.
   26.   General plan: The most recently adopted Marana general plan.
   27.   Gross impact fee: The total development impact fee to be assessed
against a subject development on a per unit basis, prior to subtraction of any
credits.
   28.   High traffic retail land use category: Fast food restaurants, service
stations, convenience stores, high-turnover restaurants, and similar uses as
determined by the town engineer. See ITE land use categories 900-999.
   29.   Hotel/motel land use subcategory: Temporary lodging facilities such as
hotels, motels, time shares/fractional shares, recreational vehicle parks, and
similar uses as determined by the town engineer. See ITE land use categories
310 and 320.
   30.   Industrial land use category: Light and heavy industry, industrial
parks, manufacturing, warehousing, mini-storage, utilities, and similar uses as
determined by the town engineer. See ITE land use categories 100-199.
   31.   Infrastructure improvements plan: A document or series of documents
that meet the requirements set forth in A.R.S. § 9-463.05, including those
adopted pursuant to section
17-17-9 below to cover any category or combination of categories of necessary
public services.
   32.   Institutional land use category: Churches, schools, colleges,
universities, cemeteries, libraries, fraternal lodges, day care centers, and
similar uses as determined by the town engineer. See ITE Land Use Categories
500-599.
   33.   Interim fee schedule: The Marana development impact fee schedule as
established prior to January 1, 2012 in accordance with then-applicable law,
and which shall expire not later than August 1, 2014.
   34.   ITE land use categories: Land use categories found in the Institute of
Transportation Engineers’ Trip Generation Manual (9th Edition, 2012).
   35.   Land use assumptions: Projections of changes in land uses, densities,
intensities and population for a service area over a period of at least ten
years as specified in section
17-17-7 below.
   36.   Level of service: A quantitative and/or qualitative measure of a
necessary public service that is to be provided by the town to development in a
particular service area, defined in terms of the relationship between service
capacity and service demand, accessibility, response times, comfort or
convenience of use, or other similar measures or combinations of measures.
Level of service may be measured differently for different categories of
necessary public services, as identified in the applicable infrastructure
improvements plan.
   37.   Medical facilities land use category: Hospitals, micro-hospitals,
standalone emergency rooms, and similar uses as determined by the town
engineer. See ITE land use categories 600-699.
   38.   Multifamily residential land use subcategory: Predominantly rental
multi-unit development such as apartments, student housing, mobile home parks,
and similar uses as determined by the town engineer. See also ITE land use
category 220.
   39.   Necessary public services: Has the meaning prescribed in A.R.S. § 9-
463.05 (T) (5).
   40.   Offset: An amount which is subtracted from the overall costs of
providing necessary public services to account for those capital components of
infrastructure or associated debt that have been or will be paid for by a
development through taxes, fees (except for development impact fees), and other
revenue sources, as determined by the town pursuant to section
17-17-8 below.
   41.   Parks and recreational facilities: A category of necessary public
services including but not limited to parks, swimming pools and related
facilities and equipment located on real property not larger than 30 acres in
area, as well as park facilities larger than 30 acres where such facilities
provide a direct benefit. Parks and recreational facilities do not include
excluded park facilities, although parks and recreational facilities may
contain, provide access to, or otherwise support an excluded park facility.
   42.   Plan-based cost per EDU: The total future capital costs listed in the
infrastructure improvements plan for a category of necessary public services
divided by the total new equivalent demand units projected in a particular
service area for that category of necessary public services over the same time
period.
   43.   Qualified professional: A professional engineer, surveyor, financial
analyst, or planner providing services within the scope of his or her license,
education or experience.
   44.   Recreational land use category: Parks, camp grounds, golf courses,
bowling alleys, movie theaters, racetracks, skating rinks, tennis courts,
health/fitness clubs, community recreational centers, and similar uses as
determined by the town engineer. See ITE land use categories 400-499.
   45.   Residential land use category: Includes all uses in the single family
residential, multifamily, hotel/motel, congregate care, age restricted single
family residential, and age restricted multifamily residential land use
subcategories.
   46.   Retail land use category: Land uses providing retail sales, discount
sales, and similar uses as determined by the town engineer. See ITE land use
categories 800-899.
   47.   Service area: Any specified area within the boundaries of the town
within which: (a) the town will provide a category of necessary public services
to development at a planned level of service; and (b) within which (i) a
substantial nexus exists between the capital facilities to be provided and the
development to be served, or (ii) in the case of a park facility larger than 30
acres, a direct benefit exists between the park facilities and the development
to be served, each as prescribed in the infrastructure improvements plan. Some
or all of the capital facilities providing service to a service area may be
physically located outside of that service area provided that the required
substantial nexus or direct benefit is demonstrated to exist.
   48.   Single family residential land use subcategory: Detached and attached
residential structures characteristic of a primary residence, even if the
residence is subsequently rented. Mobile homes and manufactured homes on
individual parcels, and duplexes, triplexes, condominiums, and townhomes are
assessed at the single family residential land use rate. See also ITE land use
category 210.
   49.   Street facilities: A category of necessary public services including
arterial or collector streets or roads that have been designated on an
officially adopted plan of the town, traffic signals and rights-of-way and
improvements thereon.
   50.   Storm drainage: A category of necessary public services including but
not limited to storm sewers constructed in sizes needed to provide for
stormwater management for areas beyond major street projects and stormwater
detention/retention basins, tanks, pump stations and channels necessary to
provide for proper stormwater management, including any appurtenances for those
facilities.
   51.   Subject development: A land area linked by a unified plan of
development, which must be contiguous unless the land area is part of a
development agreement executed in accordance with section
17-17-13 below.
   52.   Substantial nexus: A substantial nexus exists where the demand for
necessary public services that will be generated by an EDU can be reasonably
quantified in terms of the burden it will impose on the available capacity of
existing capital facilities, the need it will create for new or expanded
capital facilities, and/or the benefit to the development from those capital
facilities.
   53.   Swimming pool: A public facility primarily designed and/or utilized
for recreational non-competitive functions generally occurring within water,
including, but not limited to, swimming classes, open public swimming sessions,
and recreational league swimming/diving events. The facility may be indoors,
outdoors, or any combination thereof, and includes all necessary supporting
amenities.
   54.   Useful life: The period of time in which an asset can reasonably be
expected to be used under normal conditions, whether or not the asset will
continue to be owned and operated by the town over the entirety of such period.
   55.   Vehicle: Any device, structure, or conveyance utilized for
transportation in the course of providing a particular category of necessary
public services at a specified level of service, excluding helicopters and
other aircraft.
   56.   Wastewater: A category of necessary public services including but not
limited to sewers, lift stations, reclamation plants, wastewater treatment
plants, and all other facilities for the collection, interception,
transportation, treatment and disposal of wastewater, and any appurtenances for
those facilities.
   57.   Water: A category of necessary public services including but not
limited to those facilities necessary to provide for water services to
development, including the acquisition, supply, transportation, treatment,
purification and distribution of water, and any appurtenances to those
facilities.
Paragraph 25 was amended by Ordinance 2017.029 to add clinics and urgent care
facilities
Paragraph 37 was amended by Ordinance 2017.029 to add micro-hospitals and
standalone emergency rooms and to delete urgent care facilities, clinics, and
veterinary hospitals and clinics
17-17-4 Applicability
A,   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, this chapter shall apply to
all new development within any service area, except for the development of any
town facility.
B.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all of the territory within
the corporate limits of the town and within the town’s water and wastewater
service areas.
C.   The town manager or the town manager’s designee is authorized to make
determinations regarding the application, administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter.
17-17-5 Authority for development impact fees
A.   Fee report and implementation. The town may assess and collect a
development impact fee for costs of necessary public services, including all
professional services required for the preparation or revision of an
infrastructure improvements plan, fee report, development impact fee, and
required reports or audits conducted pursuant to this chapter. Development
impact fees shall be subject to the following requirements:
   1.   The town shall develop and adopt a fee report that analyzes and defines
the development impact fees to be charged in each service area for each capital
facility category, based on the infrastructure improvements plan and the plan-
based cost per EDU calculated pursuant to section
17-17-8 A. 13 below.
   2.   Development impact fees shall be assessed against all new commercial,
residential, and industrial developments, provided that the town may assess
different amounts of development impact fees against specific categories of
development based on the actual burdens and costs that are associated with
providing necessary public services to that category of development. No
development impact fee shall exceed the plan-based cost per EDU for any
category of development.
   3.   No development impact fees shall be charged, or credits issued, for any
capital facility that does not fall within one of the categories of necessary
public services for which development impact fees may be assessed as identified
in section
17-17-8 A. 1 below.
   4.   Costs for necessary public services made necessary by new development
shall be based on the same level of service provided to existing development in
the same service area. Development impact fees may not be used to provide a
higher level of service to existing development or to meet stricter safety,
efficiency, environmental, or other regulatory standards to the extent that
these are applied to existing capital facilities that are serving existing
development.
   5.   Development impact fees may not be used to pay the town’s
administrative, maintenance, or other operating costs.
   6.   Projected interest charges and financing costs can only be included in
development impact fees to the extent they represent principal and/or interest
on the portion of any financing or debt used to finance the construction or
expansion of a capital facility identified in the infrastructure improvements
plan.
   7.   Except for any fees included on interim fee schedules, all development
impact fees charged by the town must be included in a “fee schedule” prepared
pursuant to this chapter and included in the fee report.
   8.   All development impact fees shall meet the requirements of A.R.S. § 9-
463.05.
B.   Costs per EDU. The fee report shall summarize the costs of capital
facilities necessary to serve new development on a per EDU basis as defined and
calculated in the infrastructure improvements plan, including all required
offsets, and shall recommend a development impact fee structure for adoption by
the town. The actual impact fees to be assessed shall be disclosed and adopted
in the form of impact fee schedules.
C.   Carry-over of previously-established development impact fees and
grandfathered facilities. Notwithstanding the requirements of this chapter,
certain development impact fees adopted by the town prior to the effective date
of this chapter shall continue in effect as follows:
   1.   The lower Santa Cruz levee fee adopted by Marana ordinance number 99.02
shall remain in effect until the full $1,875,000 indebtedness covered by the
fee is paid.
   2.   The Marana south transportation development impact fee adopted by
Marana ordinance number 2001.02 and modified by Marana ordinance number 2006.12
shall remain in effect until the full Twin Peaks/I-10 Interchange indebtedness
is paid.
   3.   Defined terms in any previously established fee schedule shall be
interpreted according to the ordinance in effect at the time of their adoption.
17-17-6 Administration of development impact fees
A.   Separate accounts. Development impact fees collected pursuant to this
chapter shall be placed in separate, interest-bearing accounts for each capital
facility category within each service area.
B.   Limitations on use of fees. Development impact fees and any interest on
them collected pursuant to this chapter shall be spent to provide capital
facilities associated with the same category of necessary public services in
the same service area for which they were collected, including costs of
financing or debt used by the town to finance those capital facilities and
other costs authorized by this chapter that are included in the infrastructure
improvements plan.
C.   Time limit. Development impact fees collected after July 31, 2014 shall be
used within ten years of the date upon which they were collected for all
categories of necessary public services except for water and wastewater
facilities. For water facilities or wastewater facilities collected after July
31, 2014, development impact fees shall be used within 15 years of the date
upon which they were collected.
17-17-7 Land use assumptions
A.   Consistency. The infrastructure improvements plan shall be consistent with
the town’s current land use assumptions for each service area and each category
of necessary public services as adopted by the town pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-
463.05.
B.   Reviewing the land use assumptions. Prior to the adoption or amendment of
an infrastructure improvements plan, the town shall review and evaluate the
land use assumptions on which the infrastructure improvements plan is to be
based to ensure that the land use assumptions within each service area conform
with the general plan.
C.   Evaluating necessary changes. If the land use assumptions upon which an
infrastructure improvements plan is based have not been updated within the last
five years, the town shall evaluate the land use assumptions to determine
whether changes are necessary. If, after general evaluation, the town
determines that the land use assumptions are still valid, the town shall issue
the report required in section
17-17-10 below.
D.   Required modifications to land use assumptions. If the town determines
that changes to the land use assumptions are necessary in order to adopt or
amend an infrastructure improvements plan, it shall make such changes as
necessary to the land use assumptions prior to or in conjunction with the
review and approval of the infrastructure improvements plan pursuant to section
17-17-10 below.
17-17-8 Infrastructure improvements plan
A.   Infrastructure improvements plan contents. The infrastructure improvements
plan shall be developed by qualified professionals and may be based upon or
incorporated within the town’s capital improvements plan. The infrastructure
improvements plan shall:
   1.   Specify the categories of necessary public services for which the town
will impose a development impact fee, which may include any or all of the
following:
      a.   Water
      b.   Wastewater
      c.   Stormwater, drainage, and flood control
      d.   Street facilities
      e.   Parks
      f.   Police
   2.   Define and provide a map of one or more service areas within which the
town will provide each category of necessary public services for which
development impact fees will be charged. Each service area must be defined in a
manner that demonstrates a substantial nexus between the capital facilities to
be provided in the service area and the EDUs to be served by those capital
facilities. For parks larger than 30 acres, each service area must be defined
in a manner that demonstrates a direct benefit between the capital facilities
and the EDUs to be served by those capital facilities. The town may cover more
than one category of capital facilities in the same service area provided that
there is an independent substantial nexus or direct benefit, as applicable,
between each category of necessary public services and the EDUs to be served.
   3.   Identify and describe the land use assumptions upon which the
infrastructure improvements plan is based in each service area.
   4.   Analyze and identify the existing level of service provided by the town
to existing EDUs for each category of necessary public services in each service
area.
   5.   Identify the level of service to be provided by the town for each
category of necessary public services in each service area based on the
relevant land use assumptions and any established town standards or policies
related to required levels of service. If the town provides the same category
of necessary public services in more than one service area, the infrastructure
improvements plan shall include a comparison of the levels of service to be
provided in each service area.
   6.   For each category of necessary public services, analyze and identify
the existing capacity of the capital facilities in each service area, the
utilization of those capital facilities by existing EDUs, and the available
excess capacity of those capital facilities to serve new EDUs including any
existing or planned commitments or agreements for the usage of such capacity.
The infrastructure improvements plan shall additionally identify any changes or
upgrades to existing capital facilities that will be needed to achieve or
maintain the planned level of service to existing EDUs, or to meet new safety,
efficiency, environmental, or other regulatory requirements for services
provided to existing EDUs.
   7.   Estimate the total number of existing and future EDUs within each
service area based on the town’s land use assumptions and projected new EDUs in
each service area.
   8.   Based on the analysis in subparagraphs
17-17-8A.3 through 6 above, provide a summary table or tables describing the
level of service for each category of necessary public services by relating the
required capital facilities to EDUs in each service area, and identifying the
applicable EDU factor associated with each category of development.
   9.   For each category of necessary public services, analyze and identify
the projected utilization of any available excess capacity in existing capital
facilities, and all new or expanded capital facilities that will be required to
provide and maintain the planned level of service in each service area as a
result of the new projected EDUs in that service area, for a period not to
exceed ten years. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the town from
additionally including in its infrastructure improvements plan projected
utilization of, or needs for, capital facilities for a period longer than ten
years, provided that the costs of such capital facilities are excluded from the
calculation of the plan-based cost per EDU.
   10.   For each category of necessary public services, estimate the total
cost of any available excess capacity and/or new or expanded capital facilities
that will be required to serve new EDUs, including costs of land acquisition,
improvements, engineering and architectural services, studies leading to
design, design, construction, financing, and administrative costs, as well as
projected costs of inflation. Such total costs shall not include costs for
ongoing operation and maintenance of capital facilities, nor for replacement of
capital facilities to the extent that such replacement is necessary to serve
existing EDUs. If the infrastructure improvements plan includes changes or
upgrades to existing capital facilities that will be needed to achieve or
maintain the planned level of service to existing EDUs, or to meet new
regulatory requirements for services provided to existing EDUs, such costs
shall be identified and distinguished in the infrastructure improvements plan.
   11.   Forecast the revenues from taxes, fees, assessments or other sources
that will be available to fund the new or expanded capital facilities
identified in the infrastructure improvements plan, which shall include
estimated state-shared revenue, highway users revenue, federal revenue, ad
valorem property taxes, construction contracting or similar excise taxes and
the capital recovery portion of utility fees attributable to development based
on the approved land use assumptions. The infrastructure improvements plan
shall additionally estimate the time required to finance, construct and
implement the new or expanded capital facilities.
   12.   Calculate required offsets as follows:
      a.   From the forecasted revenues in subparagraph
17-17-8 A. 11, identify those sources of revenue that: (i) are attributable to
new development, and (ii) will contribute to paying for the capital costs of
necessary public services.
      b.   For each source and amount of revenue identified pursuant to
subparagraph
17-17-8 A. 12. a, calculate the relative contribution of each category of
development to paying for the capital costs of necessary public services in
each service area.
      c.   Based on the relative contributions identified pursuant to
subparagraph
17-17-8 A. 12. b, for each category of necessary public services, calculate the
total offset to be provided to each category of development in each service
area.
      d.   For each category of necessary public services, convert the total
offset to be provided to each category of development in each service area into
an offset amount per EDU by dividing the total offset for each category of
development by the number of EDUs associated with that category of development.
      e.   Beginning August 1, 2014, for purposes of calculating the required
offset, if the town imposes a construction, contracting, or similar excise tax
rate in excess of the percentage amount of the transaction privilege tax rate
that is imposed on the majority of other transaction privilege tax
classifications in the town, the entire excess portion of the construction,
contracting, or similar excise tax shall be treated as a contribution to the
capital costs of necessary public services provided to new development unless
the excess portion is already utilized for such purpose pursuant to this
section.
      f.   In determining the amount of required offset for land included in a
community facilities district established under A.R.S. title 48, chapter 4,
article 6, the town shall take into account any capital facilities provided by
the district that are included in the infrastructure improvements plan and the
capital costs paid by the district for such capital facilities, and shall
offset impact fees assessed within the community facilities district
proportionally.
   13.   Calculate the plan-based cost per EDU by:
      a.   Dividing the total projected costs to provide capital facilities to
new EDUs for each category of necessary public services in each service area as
determined pursuant to subsection
17-17-8 A. 8 above into the number of new EDUs projected for that service area
over a period not to exceed ten years, considering the specific EDU factors
associated with those EDUs for each category of necessary public services.
      b.   Subtracting the required offset per EDU calculated pursuant to
subsection
17-17-8 A. 12 above.
B.   Multiple plans. An infrastructure improvements plan adopted pursuant to
this section may address one or more of the town’s categories of necessary
public services in any or all of the town’s service areas. Each capital
facility shall be subject to no more than one infrastructure improvements plan
at any given time.
C.   Reserved capacity. The town may reserve capacity in an infrastructure
improvements plan to serve one or more planned future developments, including
capacity reserved through a development agreement pursuant to section
17-17-13 below. All reservations of existing capacity must be disclosed in the
infrastructure improvements plan at the time it is adopted.
17-17-9 Adoption and modification procedures
A.   Adopting or amending the infrastructure improvements plan. The
infrastructure improvements plan shall be adopted or amended subject to the
following procedures:
   1.   Major amendments to the infrastructure improvements plan. Except as
provided in subparagraph
17-17-9 A. 2 below, the adoption or amendment of an infrastructure improvement
plan shall occur at one or more public hearings according to the following
schedule, and may occur concurrently with the adoption of an update of the
town’s land use assumptions as provided in section
17-17-7 above:
      a.   Sixty days before the first public hearing regarding a new or
updated infrastructure improvements plan, the town shall provide public notice
of the hearing and post the infrastructure improvements plan and the underlying
land use assumptions on its website; the town shall additionally make available
to the public the documents used to prepare the infrastructure improvements
plan and underlying land use assumptions and the amount of any proposed changes
to the plan-based cost per EDU.
      b.   The town shall conduct a public hearing on the infrastructure
improvements plan and underlying land use assumptions at least 30 days, but no
more than 60 days, before approving or disapproving the infrastructure
improvements plan.
   2.   Minor amendments to the infrastructure improvements plan.
Notwithstanding the other requirements of this section, the town may update the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan and/or its underlying Land Use Assumptions
without a public hearing if all of the following apply:
      a.   The changes in the infrastructure improvements plan and/or the
underlying land use assumptions will not add any new category of necessary
public services to any service area.
      b.   The changes in the infrastructure improvements plan and/or the
underlying land use assumptions will not increase the level of service to be
provided in any service area.
      c.   Based on an analysis of the fee report and the town’s adopted
development impact fee schedules, the changes in the infrastructure
improvements plan and/or the underlying land use assumptions would not,
individually or cumulatively with other amendments undertaken pursuant to this
subsection, have caused a development impact fee in any service area to have
been increased by more than 5% above the development impact fee that is
provided in the current development impact fee schedule.
      d.   At least 30 days prior to the date that the amendment pursuant to
this section is adopted, the town shall post the proposed amendments on the
town website.
B.   Amendments to the fee report. Any adoption or amendment of a fee report
and fee schedule shall occur at one or more public hearings according to the
following schedule:
   1.   The first public hearing on the fee report must be held at least 30
days after the adoption or approval of and infrastructure improvements plan as
provided in subsection
17-17-9 A above. The town must give at least 30 days’ notice prior to the
hearing, provided that this notice may be given on the same day as the approval
or disapproval of the infrastructure improvements plan.
   2.   The town shall make the infrastructure improvements plan and underlying
land use assumptions available to the public on the town’s website 30 days
prior to the public hearing described in subparagraph
17-17-9 B. 1 above.
   3.   The fee report may be adopted by the town no sooner than 30 days, and
no later than 60 days, after the hearing described in subparagraph
17-17-9 B. 1 above.
   4.   The development fee schedules in the fee report adopted pursuant to
this subsection shall become effective 75 days after adoption of the fee report
by the town.
17-17-10 Timing for the renewal and updating of the infrastructure improvements
plan and the land use assumptions
A.   Renewing the infrastructure improvements plan. Except as provided in
subparagraph
17-17-10 B below, not later than every five years the town shall update the
applicable infrastructure improvements plan and fee report related to each
category of necessary public services pursuant to section
17-17-9 above. Such five-year period shall be calculated from the date of the
adoption of the infrastructure improvements plan or the date of the adoption of
the fee report, whichever occurs later.
B.   Determination of no changes. Notwithstanding subparagraph
17-17-10 A above, if the town determines that no changes to an infrastructure
improvements plan, underlying land use assumptions, or fee report are needed,
the town may elect to continue the existing infrastructure improvements plan
and fee report without amendment by providing notice as follows:
   1.   Notice of the determination shall be published at least 180 days prior
to the end of the five-year period described in subparagraph
17-17-10 A above.
   2.   The notice shall identify the infrastructure improvements plan and fee
report that shall continue in force without amendment.
   3.   The notice shall provide a map and description of the service area
covered by the infrastructure improvements plan and fee report.
   4.   The notice shall identify an address to which any resident of the town
may submit, within 60 days, a written request that the town update the
infrastructure improvements plan, underlying land use assumptions, and/or fee
report and the reasons and basis for the request.
C.   Response to comments. The town shall consider and respond within 30 days
to any timely requests submitted pursuant to subparagraph
17-17-10 B. 4 above.
17-17-11 Collection of development impact fees
A.   Collection. Development impact fees shall be calculated and collected
prior to issuance of permission to commence development; specifically:
   1.   Unless otherwise specified pursuant to a development agreement adopted
pursuant to section
17-17-13 below, development impact fees shall be paid prior to issuance of a
building permit according to the current development impact fee schedule for
the applicable service area as adopted pursuant to this chapter, or according
to any other development impact fee schedule as authorized in this chapter.
   2.   If a building permit is not required for the development, but water or
wastewater connections are required, any and all development impact fees due
shall be paid at the time the water service connection is purchased. If only a
wastewater connection is required, the development impact fees shall be paid
prior to approval of a connection to the sewer system. Wastewater development
impact fees shall be assessed if a development connects to the public sewer, or
as determined by the town utilities director, is capable of discharging sewage
to a town public sewer.
   3.   If the development is located in a service area with a stormwater,
drainage, and flood control development impact fee, and neither a building
permit, water, or sewer service connection is required, the storm drainage
development impact fee due shall be paid at the time a civil or site permit is
issued for the development.
   4.   No building permit, water or sewer connection, or certificate of
occupancy shall be issued if a development impact fee is not paid as directed
in the previous paragraphs.
   5.   If the building permit is for a change in the type of building use, an
increase in square footage, a change to land use, or an addition to a
residential or non-residential point of demand to the water or wastewater
system, the development impact fee shall be assessed on the additional service
units resulting from the expansion or change, and following the development
impact fee schedule applicable to any new use type.
   6.   For issued permits that expire or are voided, and the development
impact fees paid for such development have not been refunded, the permittee
shall pay the difference between any development impact fees paid at the time
the permit was issued and those in the fee schedule at the time the permit is
reissued or renewed.
B.   Exceptions. Development impact fees shall not be owed under either of the
following conditions:
   1.   Development impact fees have been paid for the development and the
permit that triggered the collection of the development impact fees has not
expired or been voided.
   2.   The approval that triggers the collection of development impact fees
involves modifications to existing residential or non-residential development
that do not: (a) add new EDUs, (b) increase the impact of existing EDUs on
existing or future capital facilities, or (c) change the land-use type of the
existing development to a different category of development for which a higher
development impact fee would have been due. To the extent that any modification
does not meet the requirements of this paragraph, the development impact fee
due shall be the difference between the development impact fee that was or
would have been due on the existing development and the development impact fee
that is due on the development as modified.
C.   Temporary exemptions from development impact fee schedules. New
developments in the town shall be temporarily exempt from increases in
development impact fees that result from the adoption of new or modified
development impact fee schedules as follows:
   1.   Residential uses (other than multifamily). On or after the day that the
first building permit is issued for a residential development (other than
multifamily), the town shall, at the permittee’s request, provide the permittee
with an applicable development impact fee schedule that shall be in force for a
period of 24 months beginning on the day that the first building permit is
issued, and which shall expire at the end of the first business day of the 25th
month after the first building permit is issued. During the effective period of
the applicable development impact fee schedule, any building permit issued for
the same residential development shall not be subject to any new or modified
development impact fee schedule.
   2.   All other uses. On or after the town’s approval of a development plan
or subdivision plat for a retail, high traffic retail, industrial, general
office, medical facilities, institutional, recreational, or multifamily
development, the town shall provide an applicable development impact fee
schedule that shall be in force for a period of 24 months beginning on the day
the development plan or subdivision plat was approved, and which shall expire
at the end of the first business day of the 25th month after the development
plan or subdivision plat was approved. During the effective period of the
applicable development impact fee schedule, any building permit issued for the
same development shall not be subject to any new or modified development impact
fee schedule.
   3.   Changes to development plans and subdivision plats. During the 24-month
period referred to in subsection
17-17-11 C. 1 or 2 above, if changes are made to a development’s final
development plan or subdivision plat that will increase the number of service
units, the town may assess any new or modified development impact fees against
the additional service units. If the town reduces the amount of an applicable
development impact fee during the 24-month period referred to in subsection
17-17-11 C. 1 or 2 above, the town shall assess the lower development impact
fee.
D.   Option to pursue special fee determination. Where a development is of a
type that does not closely fit within a particular category of development
appearing on an adopted development impact fee schedule, or where a development
has unique characteristics such that the actual burdens and costs associated
with providing necessary public services to that development will differ
substantially from that associated with other developments in a specified
category of development, the town may require the applicant to provide the town
engineer with an alternative development impact fee analysis. Based on a
projection of the actual burdens and costs that will be associated with the
development, the alternative development impact fee analysis may propose a
unique fee for the development based on the application of an appropriate EDU
factor to the applicable plan-based cost per EDU, or may propose that the
development be covered under the development impact fee schedule governing a
different and more analogous category of development. The town engineer shall
review the alternative impact fee analysis and shall make a determination as to
the development impact fee to be charged. The decision shall be appealable
pursuant to section
17-17-14 below. The town engineer may require the applicant to pay an
administrative fee to cover the actual costs of reviewing the special fee
determination application.
17-17-12 Development impact fee credits and credit agreements
A.   Eligibility of capital facility. All development impact fee credits must
meet the following requirements:
   1.   One of the following is true:
      a.   The capital facility, or the financial contribution toward a capital
facility that will be provided by the developer and for which a credit will be
issued, must be identified in an adopted Infrastructure improvements plan and
fee report as a capital facility for which a development impact fee was
assessed; or
      b.   The applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the town that,
given the class and type of improvement, the subject capital facility should
have been included in the infrastructure improvements plan in lieu of a
different capital facility that was included in the infrastructure improvements
plan and for which a development impact fee was assessed. If the subject
capital facility is determined to be eligible for a credit in this manner, the
town shall amend the infrastructure improvements plan to (i) include the
subject replacement facility and (ii) delete the capital facility that will be
replaced.
   2.   Credits shall not be available for any infrastructure provided by a
developer if the cost of the infrastructure will be repaid to the developer by
the town through another agreement or mechanism. To the extent that the
developer will be paid or reimbursed by the town for any contribution, payment,
construction, or dedication from any town funding source including an agreement
to reimburse the developer with future collected development impact fees
pursuant to section
17-17-13 below, any credits claimed by the developer shall be (a) deducted from
any amounts to be paid or reimbursed by the town or (b) reduced by the amount
of the payment or reimbursement.
B.   Eligibility of subject development. To be eligible for a credit, the
subject development must be located within the service area of the eligible
capital facility.
C.   Calculation of credits. Credits will be based on that portion of the costs
for an eligible capital facility identified in the adopted infrastructure
improvements plan for which a development fee was assessed pursuant to the fee
report. If the gross impact fee for a particular category of necessary public
service is adopted at an amount lower than the plan-based cost per EDU, the
amount of any credit shall be reduced in proportion to the difference between
the plan-based cost per EDU and the gross impact fee adopted. A credit shall
not exceed the actual costs the applicant incurred in providing the eligible
capital facility.
D.   Allocation of credits. Before credits can be issued to a subject
development (or portion of it), credits must be allocated to that development
as follows:
   1.   The developer and the town must execute a credit agreement including
all of the following:
      a.   The total amount of the credits resulting from provision of an
eligible capital facility.
      b.   The estimated number of EDUs to be served within the subject
development.
      c.   The method by which the credit values will be distributed within the
subject development.
   2.   It is the responsibility of the developer to request allocation of
development impact fee credits through an application for a credit agreement
(which may be part of a development agreement entered into pursuant to section
17-17-13 below).
   3.   If a building permit is issued or a water/sewer connection is
purchased, and a development impact fee is paid prior to execution of a credit
agreement for the subject development, no credits may be allocated
retroactively to that permit or connection. Credits may be allocated to any
remaining permits for the subject development in accordance with this chapter.
   4.   If the entity that provides an eligible capital facility sells or
relinquishes a development (or portion of it) that it owns or controls prior to
execution of a credit agreement or development agreement, credits resulting
from the eligible capital facility will only be allocated to the development if
the entity legally assigns such rights and responsibilities to its successor in
interest for the subject development.
   5.   If multiple entities jointly provide an eligible capital facility, both
entities must enter into a single credit agreement with the town, and any
request for the allocation of credit within the subject development must be
made jointly by the entities that provided the eligible capital facility.
   6.   Credits may only be reallocated from or within a subject development
with the town’s approval of an amendment to an executed credit agreement,
subject to the following conditions:
      a.   The entity that executed the original agreement with the town, or
its legal successor in interest and the entity that currently controls the
subject development are parties to the request for reallocation.
      b.   The reallocation proposal does not change the value of any credits
already issued for the subject development.
   7.   A credit agreement may authorize the allocation of credits to a non-
contiguous parcel only if all of the following conditions are met:
      a.   The entity that executed the original agreement with the town or its
legal successor in interest, the entity that currently controls the subject
development, and the entity that controls the non-contiguous parcel are parties
to the request for reallocation.
      b.   The reallocation proposal does not change the value of any credits
already issued for the subject development.
      c.   The non-contiguous parcel is in the same service area as that served
by the eligible capital facility.
      d.   The non-contiguous parcel receives a necessary public service from
the eligible capital facility.
      e.   The credit agreement specifically states the value of the credits to
be allocated to each parcel and/or EDU, or establishes a mechanism for future
determination of the value of the credits.
      f.   The credit agreement does not involve the transfer of credits to or
from any property subject to a development agreement.
E.   Credit agreement. Credits shall only be issued pursuant to a credit
agreement that conforms to the requirements set forth in paragraph
17-17-12 D above. The town manager or authorized designee is authorized by this
chapter to enter into a credit agreement with the controlling entity of a
subject development, subject to the following:
   1.   The developer requesting the credit agreement shall provide all
information requested by the town to allow it to determine the value of the
credit to be applied.
   2.   An application for a credit agreement shall be submitted to the town by
the developer within one year of the date on which ownership or control of the
capital facility passes to the town.
   3.   The developer shall submit a draft credit agreement to the town manager
or authorized designee for review in the form provided to the applicant by the
town. The draft credit agreement shall include, at a minimum, all of the
following information and supporting documentation:
      a.   A legal description and map depicting the location of the subject
development for which the credits are being applied. The map shall depict the
location of the capital facilities that have been or will be provided.
      b.   An estimate of the total EDUs that will be developed within the
subject development depicted on the map and described in the legal description.
      c.   A list of the capital facilities, associated physical attributes,
and the related costs as stated in the infrastructure improvements plan.
      d.   Documentation showing the date of acceptance by the town, if the
capital facilities have already been provided.
      e.   The total amount of the credits to be applied within the subject
development and the calculations leading to the total amount of the credits.
      f.   The credits to be applied to each EDU within the subject development
for each category of necessary public services.
   4.   The town’s determination of the credits to be allocated is final.
   5.   Upon execution of the credit agreement by the town and the applicant,
credits shall be deemed allocated to the subject development.
   6.   Any amendment to a previously approved credit agreement must be
initiated within two years of the town’s final acceptance of the eligible
capital facility for which the amendment is requested.
   7.   Any credit agreement approved as part of a development agreement shall
be amended in accordance with the terms of the development agreement and
section
17-17-13 below.
F.   Issuance of credits. Credits allocated pursuant to subparagraph
17-17-12 D above may be issued and applied toward the gross impact fees due
from a development, subject to the following conditions:
   1.   Credits issued for an eligible capital facility may only be applied to
the development impact fee due for the applicable category of necessary public
services, and may not be applied to any fee due for another category of
necessary public services.
   2.   Credits shall only be issued when the eligible capital facility from
which the credits were derived has been accepted by the town or when adequate
security for the completion of the eligible capital facility has been provided
in accordance with all terms of an executed development agreement.
   3.   Where credits have been issued pursuant to subparagraph
17-17-12 F. 2 above, an impact fee due at the time a building permit is issued
shall be reduced by the credits stated in or calculated from the executed
credit agreement. Where credits have not yet been issued, the gross impact fee
shall be paid in full, and a refund of the credits shall be due when the
developer demonstrates compliance with subparagraph
17-17-12 F. 2 above in a written request to the town.
   4.   Credits, once issued, may not be rescinded or reallocated to another
permit or parcel, except that credits may be released for reuse on the same
subject development if a building permit for which the credits were issued has
expired or been voided and is otherwise eligible for a refund under
subparagraph
17-17-15 A. 2. a.
   5.   Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section
17-17-12, credits issued prior to January 1, 2012 may only be used for the
subject development for which they were issued. The credits may be transferred
to a new owner of all or part of the subject development in proportion to the
percentage of ownership in the subject development to be held by the new owner.
17-17-13 Development agreements
A.   General. Development agreements containing provisions regarding
development impact fees, development impact fee credits, and/or disbursement of
revenues from development impact fee accounts shall comply with the
requirements of this section.
B.   Development agreement required. A development agreement is required to
authorize any of the following:
   1.   To issue credits prior to the town’s acceptance of an eligible capital
facility.
   2.   To allocate credits to a parcel that is not contiguous with the subject
development and that does not meet the requirements of subparagraph
17-17-12 D. 7 above.
   3.   To reimburse the developer of an eligible capital facility using funds
from development impact fee accounts.
   4.   To allocate different credit amounts per EDU to different parcels
within a subject development.
   5.   For a single family residential dwelling unit, to allow development
impact fees to be paid at a later time than the issuance of a building permit
as provided in subparagraph
17-17-13 H below.
C.   General requirements. All development agreements shall be prepared and
executed in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-500.05 and any applicable requirements
of the town code. Except where specifically modified by this section, all
provisions of section
17-17-12 shall apply to any credit agreement that is authorized as part of a
development agreement.
D.   Early issuance of credits. A development agreement may authorize the
issuance of credits prior to acceptance of an eligible capital facility by the
town when the development agreement specifically states the form and value of
the security (i.e. bond, letter of credit, etc.) to be provided to the town
prior to issuance of any credits. The town shall determine the acceptable form
and value of the security to be provided.
E.   Non-contiguous allocation of credits. A development agreement may
authorize the allocation of credits to a non-contiguous parcel only if all of
the following conditions are met:
   1.   The non-contiguous parcel is in the same service area as that served by
the eligible capital facility.
   2.   The non-contiguous parcel receives a necessary public service from the
eligible capital facility.
   3.   The development agreement specifically states the value of the credits
to be allocated to each parcel and/or EDU, or establishes a mechanism for
future determination of the credits.
F.   Uneven allocation of credits. The development agreement must specify how
credits will be allocated amongst different parcels on a per-EDU basis, if the
credits are not to be allocated evenly. If the development agreement is silent
on this topic, all credits will be allocated evenly amongst all parcels on a
per-EDU basis.
G.   Use of reimbursements. Funds reimbursed to developers from impact fee
accounts for construction of an eligible capital facility must be utilized in
accordance with applicable law for the use of town funds in construction or
acquisition of capital facilities, including A.R.S. § 34-201, et seq.
H.   Deferral of fees. A development agreement may provide for the deferral of
payment of development impact fees for a residential development beyond the
issuance of a building permit; provided that a development impact fee may not
be paid later than 15 days after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy
for that dwelling unit. The development agreement shall provide for the value
of any deferred development impact fees to be supported by appropriate
security, including a surety bond, letter of credit, or cash bond.
I.   Waiver of fees. If the town agrees to waive any development impact fees
assessed on development in a development agreement, the town shall reimburse
the appropriate development impact fee account for the amount that was waived.
J.   No obligation. Nothing in this section obligates the town to enter into
any development agreement or to authorize any type of credit agreement
permitted by this section.
17-17-14 Appeals
A.   General. A development impact fee determination by town staff may be
appealed in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section.
B.   Limited scope. An appeal shall be limited to disputes regarding the
calculation of the development impact fees for a specific development and/or
permit and calculation of EDU’s for the development.
C.   Form of appeal. An appeal shall be initiated in a format prescribed by the
town, and shall be submitted to the town engineer.
D.   Department action. The town engineer shall act upon the appeal within 30
calendar days of the filing of the appeal, and the applicant shall be notified
of the town engineer’s decision in writing.
E.   Appeal to council.   The applicant may appeal the decision of the town
engineer to the council by submitting an appeal to the town clerk within 14
calendar days of the town engineer’s written decision.
F.   Action by council. The council shall hear and act upon the appeal within
45 calendar days of receipt of the appeal, and the applicant shall be notified
of the council’s decision in writing.
G.   Final decision. The council’s decision regarding the appeal is final.
H.   Fees during pendency. Building permits may be issued during the pendency
of an appeal if the applicant (1) pays the full impact fee calculated by the
town at the time the appeal is filed or (2) provides the town with financial
assurances in the form acceptable to the town manager or authorized designee
equal to the full amount of the impact fee. Upon final disposition of an
appeal, the fee shall be adjusted in accordance with the decision rendered, and
a refund paid if warranted. If the appeal is denied by the council, and the
applicant has provided the town with financial assurances as set forth in
clause (2) above, the applicant shall deliver the full amount of the impact fee
to the town within ten days of the council’s final decision on the appeal. If
the applicant fails to deliver the full amount of the impact fees when required
by this subsection, the town may draw upon such financial assurance instruments
as necessary to recover the full amount of the impact fees due from the
applicant.
17-17-15 Refunds of development impact fees
A.   Refunds. A refund (or partial refund) will be paid to any current owner of
property within the town who submits a written request to the town and
demonstrates that:
   1.   The permit that triggered the collection of the development impact fee
has expired or been voided prior to the commencement of the development for
which the permit was issued and the development impact fees collected have not
been expended, encumbered, or pledged for the repayment of financing or debt;
or
   2.   The owner of the subject real property or its predecessor in interest
paid a development impact fee for the applicable capital facility on or after
August 1, 2014, and one of the following conditions exists:
      a.   The capital facility designed to serve the subject real property has
been constructed, has the capacity to serve the subject real property and any
development for which there is reserved capacity, and the service which was to
be provided by that capital facility has not been provided to the subject real
property from that capital facility or from any other infrastructure.
      b.   After collecting the fee to construct a capital facility the town
fails to complete construction of the capital facility within the time period
identified in the infrastructure improvements plan, as it may be amended, and
the corresponding service is otherwise unavailable to the subject real property
from that capital facility or any other infrastructure.
      c.   For a category of necessary public services other than water or
wastewater facilities, any part of a development impact fee is not spent within
ten years of the town’s receipt of the development impact fee.
      d.   Any part of a development impact fee for water or wastewater
facilities is not spent within 15 years of the town’s receipt of the
development impact fee.
      e.   The development impact fee was calculated and collected for the
construction cost to provide all or a portion of a specific capital facility
serving the subject real property and the actual construction costs for the
capital facility are less than the construction costs projected in the
infrastructure improvements plan by a factor of 10% or more. In such event, the
current owner of the subject real property shall, upon request as set forth in
this section, be entitled to a refund for the difference between the amounts of
the development impact fee charged for and attributable to such construction
cost and the amount the development impact fee would have been calculated to be
if the actual construction cost had been included in the fee report. The refund
contemplated by this subsection shall relate only to the costs specific to the
construction of the applicable capital facility and shall not include any
related design, administrative, or other costs not directly incurred for
construction of the capital facility that are included in the development
impact fee as permitted by A.R.S. § 9-463.05.
B.   Earned interest. A refund of a development impact fee shall include any
interest actually earned on the refunded portion of the development impact fee
by the town from the date of collection to the date of refund. All refunds
shall be made to the record owner of the property at the time the refund is
paid.
C.   Refund to government. If a development impact fee was paid by a
governmental entity, any refund shall be paid to that governmental entity.
17-17-16 Oversight of development impact fee program
A.   Annual report. Within 90 days of the end of each fiscal year, the town
shall file with the town clerk an unaudited annual report accounting for the
collection and use of the fees for each service area and shall post the report
on its website in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-463.05 (N) and (O), as amended.
B.   Biennial audit. In addition to the annual report described in paragraph A
of this section, the town shall provide for a biennial, certified audit of the
town’s land use assumptions, infrastructure improvements plan and development
impact fees.
   1.   An audit pursuant to this subsection shall be conducted by one or more
qualified professionals who are not employees or officials of the town and who
did not prepare the infrastructure improvements plan.
   2.   The audit shall review the collection and expenditures of development
fees for each project in the plan and provide written comments describing the
amount of development impact fees assessed, collected, and spent on capital
facilities.
   3.   The audit shall describe the level of service in each service area, and
evaluate any inequities in implementing the infrastructure improvements plan or
imposing the development impact fee.
   4.   The town shall post the findings of the audit on the town’s website and
shall conduct a public hearing on the audit within 60 days of the release of
the audit to the public.
   5.   For purposes of this section a certified audit shall mean any audit
authenticated by one or more of the qualified professionals conducting the
audit pursuant to subparagraph
17-17-16 B. 1 above.
CHAPTER 17-18.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
Chapter 17-18 was adopted by Ordinance 2018.002. For prior history, see former
Marana Land Development Code Chapter 23 (Wireless Communication Facilities),
adopted by Ordinance 97.27.
Sections:
17-18-1   Purpose
17-18-2   Definitions
17-18-3   Applicability; exemptions
17-18-4   Permits required; approval authority
17-18-5   Permit application
17-18-6   Development standards
17-18-7   Design and aesthetic standards
17-18-8   Public notice and hearing requirements
17-18-9   Required findings for approval
17-18-10   Standard conditions of approval
17-18-11   Notice of decision; appeals
17-18-12   Permit renewal
17-18-13   Permit revocation
17-18-14   Facility abandonment or discontinuation; relocation; removal
17-18-15   Transfers involving a wireless facility or permit
17-18-16   Limited exemption from standards
17-18-17   Independent consultant review
17-18-18   Obligation to comply with this chapter
17-18-1 Purpose
A.   The purpose of this chapter is to reasonably regulate, to the extent
permitted by state and federal law, the installation, operation, collocation,
modification and removal of wireless facilities in the town in a manner that
protects and promotes public health, safety and welfare, and balances the
benefits that flow from robust wireless services with the unique and historic
character, aesthetics, and local values of the town.
B.   This chapter does not intend to, and shall not be interpreted or applied
to:
   1.   Prohibit or effectively prohibit personal wireless services; or
   2.   Unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent
personal wireless services; or
   3.   Regulate the installation, operation, collocation, modification or
removal of wireless facilities on the basis of the environmental effects of RF
emissions to the extent that such emissions comply with all applicable FCC
regulations; or
   4.   Prohibit or effectively prohibit any collocation or modification that
the town may not deny under state or federal law; or
   5.   Preempt any applicable state or federal law.
C.   Wireless communication facilities located in the public right-of-way are
subject to the requirements set forth in town code
chapter 12-8 (wireless communication facilities in the right-of-way).
17-18-2 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply throughout this chapter unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise.
A.   “ACC” means the Arizona corporation commission or its successor agency.
B.   “Antenna” means a device used to transmit and/or receive radio or
electromagnetic waves. Examples include, but are not limited to, panel
antennas, directional antennas, microwave dishes and whip (omni-directional)
antennas.
C.   “Approval authority” means the public body or official responsible for
review of permit applications and vested with the authority to approve or deny
them. The approval authority for a project which requires a conditional use
permit refers to the planning commission, except that the approval authority
refers to the council if the commission’s decision is appealed to the council.
The approval authority for a project which requires an administrative wireless
facilities permit or for a project which qualifies as a section 6409(a)
modification refers to the planning manager.
D.   “Array” means one or more antennas mounted at approximately the same level
above ground on tower or base station.
E.   “Base station” means the same as defined in 47 CFR § 1.6100(b)(1), as may
be amended.
F.   “Collocation” means the same as defined in 47 CFR § 1.6100(b)(2), as may
be amended.
G.   “Distributed antenna system” or “DAS” means a network of one or more
antennas and related fiber optic nodes typically mounted to or located at
streetlight poles, utility poles, sporting venues, arenas or convention centers
which provide access and signal transfer for wireless service providers. A DAS
also includes the equipment location, sometimes called a “hub” or “hotel” where
the DAS network is interconnected with one or more wireless service provider’s
facilities to provide the signal transfer services.
H.   “Eligible facilities request” means the same as defined in 47 CFR § 1.6100
(b)(3), as may be amended.
I.   “Eligible support structure” means the same as defined in 47 CFR § 1.6100
(b)(4), as may be amended.
J.   “Existing” means the same as defined in 47 CFR § 1.6100(b)(5), as may be
amended.
K.   “Facility” means an installation used to transmit signals over the air
from facility to facility or from facility to user equipment for any wireless
service and includes, but is not limited to, personal wireless services
facilities.
L.   “FCC” means the federal communications commission, its designated
representative, or its lawful successor.
M.   “Monopole” means the same as defined in A.R.S. § 9-591 paragraph 13, as
may be amended.
N.   “OTARD antenna” means antennas covered by the “over-the-air reception
devices” rule in 47 CFR §§ 1.4000 et seq., as may be amended.
O.   “Personal wireless services” means the same as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332
(c)(7)(C)(i), as may be amended.
P.   “Personal wireless service facilities” means the same as defined in 47
U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C)(ii), as may be amended.
Q.    “Radome” means a weatherproof enclosure, typically constructed from
fiberglass or plastic material, that protects and conceals an antenna or
antennas contained inside.
R.   “RF” means radio frequency.
S.   “Right-of-way” means the same as defined in A.R.S. § 9-591 paragraph 18,
as may be amended.
T.    “Section 6409(a)” means section 6409(a) of the middle class tax relief
and job creation act of 2012, Pub. L. No. 112-96, 126 Stat. 156, codified as 47
U.S.C. § 1455(a), as may be amended.
U.   “Section 6409(a) modification” means any eligible facilities request that
does not cause a substantial change and that is submitted for approval pursuant
to section 6409(a) and the FCC’s regulations at 47 CFR § 1.6100 et seq.
V.   “Site” means the same as defined in 47 CFR § 1.6100(b)(6), as may be
amended.
W.   “Small wireless facility” means the same as defined in A.R.S. § 9-591
paragraph 19, as may be amended.
X.   “Substantial change” means the same as defined in 47 CFR § 1.6100(b)(7),
as may be amended.
Y.   “Tower” means the same as defined in 47 CFR § 1.6100(b)(9), as may be
amended. Includes monopole and wireless support structure.
Z.   “Transmission equipment” means the same as defined in 47 CFR § 1.6100(b)
(8), as may be amended.
AA.   “Utility pole” means the same as defined in A.R.S. § 9-591 paragraph 21,
as may be amended.
BB.   “Wireless” means any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication
service transmitted over frequencies in the electromagnetic spectrum.
CC.   “Wireless support structure” means the same as defined in A.R.S. § 9-591
paragraph 27, as may be amended.
Ordinance 2021.004 replaced “planning director” with “planning manager” in
paragraph C
47 CFR § 1.6100(b)(1) defines “base station” as follows:
   A structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables Commission-
licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a
communications network. The term does not encompass a tower as defined in this
subpart or any equipment associated with a tower.
   (i) The term includes, but is not limited to, equipment associated with
wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and public safety
services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services
such as microwave backhaul.
   (ii) The term includes, but is not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas,
coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable
equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including Distributed
Antenna Systems and small-cell networks).
   (iii) The term includes any structure other than a tower that, at the time
the relevant application is filed with the State or local government under this
section, supports or houses equipment described in paragraphs (b)(1)(i) through
(ii) of this section that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable
zoning or siting process, or under another State or local regulatory review
process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of
providing such support.
   (iv) The term does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant
application is filed with the State or local government under this section,
does not support or house equipment described in paragraphs (b)(1)(i)-(ii) of
this section.
47 CFR § 1.6100(b)(2) defines “collocation” as “The mounting or installation of
transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of
transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications
purposes.”
47 CFR § 1.6100(b)(3) defines “eligible facilities request” as “Any request for
modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially
change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station, involving: (i)
Collocation of new transmission equipment; (ii) Removal of transmission
equipment; or (iii) Replacement of transmission equipment.”
47 CFR § 1.6100(b)(4) defines “eligible support structure” as “Any tower or
base station as defined in this section, provided that it is existing at the
time the relevant application is filed with the state or local government under
this section.”
47 CFR § 1.6100(b)(5) defines “existing” as “A constructed tower or base
station is existing for purposes of this section if it has been reviewed and
approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state
or local regulatory review process, provided that a tower that has not been
reviewed and approved because it was not in a zoned area when it was built, but
was lawfully constructed, is existing for purposes of this definition.”
A.R.S. § 9-591 paragraph 13 provides: “Monopole” means a wireless support
structure that is not more than forty inches in diameter at the ground level
and that has all of the wireless facilities mounted on the pole or contained
inside of the pole.
47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C)(i) defines “personal wireless services” as “Commercial
mobile services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless
exchange access services.”
47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C)(ii) defines “personal wireless service facilities” as
“Facilities for the provision of personal wireless services.”
A.R.S. § 9-591 paragraph 18 provides: “Right-of-way” means the area on, below
or above a public roadway, highway, street, sidewalk, alley or utility
easement. Right-of-way does not include a federal interstate highway, a state
highway or state route under the jurisdiction of the department of
transportation, a private easement, property that is owned by a special taxing
district, or a utility easement that does not authorize the deployment sought
by the wireless provider.
47 CFR § 1.6100(b)(6) defines “site” as “For towers other than towers in the
public rights-of-way, the current boundaries of the leased or owned property
surrounding the tower and any access or utility easements currently related to
the site, and, for other eligible support structures, further restricted to
that area in proximity to the structure and to other transmission equipment
already deployed on the ground.”
A.R.S. § 9-591 paragraph 19 provides: “Small wireless facility” means a
wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: (a) All
antennas are located inside an enclosure of not more than six cubic feet in
volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and
all of the antenna's exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure
of not more than six cubic feet in volume. (b) All other wireless equipment
associated with the facility is cumulatively not more than twenty-eight cubic
feet in volume, or fifty cubic feet in volume if the equipment was ground
mounted before August 9, 2017. The following types of associated ancillary
equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume pursuant to
this subdivision: (i) An electric meter. (ii) Concealment elements. (iii) A
telecommunications demarcation box. (iv) Grounding equipment. (v) A power
transfer switch. (vi) A cutoff switch. (vii) Vertical cable runs for the
connection of power and other services.
47 CFR § 1.6100(b)(7) defines “substantial change” as follows:
   (i) For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it increases
the height of the tower by more than 10% or by the height of one additional
antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed
twenty feet, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it
increases the height of the structure by more than 10% or more than ten feet,
whichever is greater;
      (A) Changes in height should be measured from the original support
structure in cases where deployments are or will be separated horizontally,
such as on buildings' rooftops; in other circumstances, changes in height
should be measured from the dimensions of the tower or base station, inclusive
of originally approved appurtenances and any modifications that were approved
prior to the passage of the Spectrum Act.
   (ii) For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it involves
adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the
edge of the tower more than twenty feet, or more than the width of the tower
structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; for other
eligible support structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of
the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than
six feet;
   (iii) For any eligible support structure, it involves installation of more
than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved,
but not to exceed four cabinets; or, for towers in the public rights-of-way and
base stations, it involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the
ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the
structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than
10% larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets
associated with the structure;
   (iv) It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site;
   (v) It would defeat the concealment elements of the eligible support
structure; or
   (vi) It does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval
of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure or base
station equipment, provided however that this limitation does not apply to any
modification that is non-compliant only in a manner that would not exceed the
thresholds identified in § 1.6100(b)(7)(i) through (iv).
47 CFR § 1.6100(b)(9) defines “tower” as “Any structure built for the sole or
primary purpose of supporting any Commission-licensed or authorized antennas
and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for
wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private,
broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services
and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated
site.”
47 CFR § 1.6100(b)(8) defines “transmission equipment” as “Equipment that
facilitates transmission for any Commission-licensed or authorized wireless
communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers,
antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply.
The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services
including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services,
as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as
microwave backhaul.”
A.R.S. § 9-591 paragraph 21 provides: “Utility pole” means a pole or similar
structure that is used in whole or in part for communications services,
electric distribution, lighting or traffic signals. Utility pole does not
include a monopole.
A.R.S. § 9-591 paragraph 27 provides: “Wireless support structure”: (a) Means:
(i) A freestanding structure, such as a monopole. (ii) A tower, either guyed or
self-supporting. (iii) A sign or billboard. (iv) Any other existing or proposed
structure designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless
facilities. (b) Does not include a utility pole.
Ordinance 2022.006 revised chapter 17-18 by replacing all references to 47 CFR
§ 1.40001 with references to 47 CFR § 1.6100
17-18-3 Applicability; exemptions
A.   This chapter applies to all new facilities and all modifications to
existing facilities for which a permit is issued after the effective date of
this chapter, unless the facility qualifies for an exemption.
B.   Conflicts.
   1.   With respect to wireless communication facilities in the right-of-way,
the provisions in town code
chapter 12-8 shall apply in the event of a conflict with this chapter.
   2.   In all other situations, the provision included in this chapter shall
apply where conflicts exist between this chapter and the remainder of the town
code.
C.   This chapter does not apply to the following:
   1.   Amateur radio facilities
   2.   OTARD antennas
   3.   Facilities owned and operated by the town for its use
17-18-4 Permits required; approval authority
A.   Section 6409(a) permit. All section 6409(a) modifications are subject to
review and approval or denial of a section 6409(a) permit by the planning
manager in accordance with this chapter. Section 6409(a) modifications do not
require an administrative wireless facilities permit; provided, however that
section 6409(a) modifications must comply with all prior conditions of approval
related to concealment or reasonably related to public health and safety.
B.   Exempt small wireless facilities in the right-of-way. Collocation of small
wireless facilities within a right-of-way that are exempt from zoning pursuant
to A.R.S. § 9-592 (I) or (J) do not require a conditional use permit or other
zoning approval, but are subject to the requirements set forth in town code
chapter 12-8.
C.   Administrative wireless facilities permit. A new facility, collocation or
modification to an existing facility is subject to the planning manager’s
approval of an administrative wireless facilities permit, and not subject to a
conditional use permit, when all the following criteria are met:
   1.   The proposed project is not a section 6409(a) modification
   2.   The proposed project qualifies as a design listed in section
17-18-6 A. 2 through 17-18-6 A. 3 below; specifically,
      a.   A collocation on an existing base station outside the right-of-way,
      b.   A collocation on a tower outside the right-of-way, or
      c.   A collocation on an eligible support structure or utility pole in
the right-of-way that is not exempt from zoning (see paragraph
17-18-4 B above).
   3.   The proposed project will not require any limited exemption pursuant to
section
17-18-16 below.
D.   Conditional use permit. Except as provided in paragraphs A through C of
this section, any new facility or modification or collocation to an existing
facility is subject to the approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to
section
17-3-2 of this code.
Ordinance 2021.004 replaced “planning director” with “planning manager” in
paragraphs A and C
Ordinance 2022.006 amended 17-18-4 C.2.
17-18-5 Permit application
A.   Each permit granted under this chapter requires an application.
B.   Unless an exemption or waiver applies, each application submitted under
this chapter must include the following:
   1.   Application fee. The applicable wireless facility application fee in an
amount established by a fee schedule adopted by the council and amended from
time to time.
   2.   Master application. A fully completed and executed master application
on the form provided by the town for that purpose, as may be amended or updated
from time-to-time. The master application must state what approval is being
sought, i.e., conditional use permit, administrative wireless facilities
permit, or section 6409(a) permit.
   3.   Required licenses or approvals. Evidence that the applicant has all
current licenses and registrations from the FCC, the ACC, and any other
applicable regulatory bodies where such license(s) or registration(s) are
necessary to provide wireless communication services utilizing the proposed
wireless communication facility.
   4.   Proof of property rights. Proof either that the applicant is the owner
of the property where the facility is to be located, or that the applicant has
the right to use the property for the facility, in the form of a lease or
license agreement from the property owner. For wireless communication
facilities in the right-of-way, the license need not be submitted with the
application but shall be submitted no later than the applicant’s submission of
a building permit request.
   5.   Site development plans. Fully dimensioned site plan and elevation
drawings prepared and sealed by an Arizona-licensed engineer or architect
showing any existing wireless facilities with all existing transmission
equipment and other improvements, the proposed facility with all proposed
transmission equipment and other improvements and the legal boundaries of the
leased or owned area surrounding the proposed facility and any associated
access or utility easements. For new facilities, the plans shall also include,
in plan and elevation views, a scaled depiction of the maximum permitted
increase as authorized by section 6409(a) using the proposed project as a
baseline.
   6.   Photo simulations. Photo simulations that show the proposed facility in
context of the site from reasonable line-of-sight locations from nearby public
streets or other public viewpoints, together with a map that shows the photo
location of each view angle.
   7.   RF exposure compliance report. A radio frequency report acceptable to
the town prepared and certified by an RF engineer that certifies that the
proposed facility and any collocated facilities will comply with applicable
federal RF exposure standards and exposure limits as set forth in the code of
federal regulations, including without limitation those set forth in 47 CFR §§
1.1307(b), 1.1310, 2.1091, and 2.1093. The RF report must include all of the
following:
      a.   The actual frequency and power levels in watts effective radiated
power (ERP) for all existing and proposed antennas at the site
      b.   Exhibits that show the location and orientation of all transmitting
antennas and the boundaries of areas with RF exposures in excess of the
uncontrolled/general population limit and the boundaries of areas with RF
exposures in excess of the controlled/occupational limit, as these terms are
defined by the FCC.
      c.   Each project site boundary shall be clearly marked and identified
for every transmitting antenna.
   8.   Alternative sites analysis.
      a.   The applicant must provide a list of all existing structures
considered as alternatives to the proposed location, together with a general
description of the site design considered at each location.
      b.   The applicant must also provide a written explanation as to why the
alternatives considered were unacceptable or infeasible, unavailable, or not as
consistent with the development standards in this chapter as the proposed
location. This explanation must include a meaningful comparative analysis and
such technical information and other factual justification as are necessary to
document the reasons why each alternative is unacceptable, infeasible,
unavailable, or not as consistent with the development standards in this
chapter as the proposed location.
      c.   If an existing facility is listed among the alternatives, the
applicant must specifically address why the modification of that wireless
communication facility is not a viable option.
   9.   Noise study. A noise study prepared and certified by an engineer for
the proposed facility and all associated equipment including all environmental
control units, sump pumps, temporary backup power generators, and permanent
backup power generators demonstrating compatibility with existing nearby land
uses and compliance with any applicable noise regulations. The noise study must
also include an analysis of the manufacturers’ specifications for all noise-
emitting equipment and a depiction of the proposed equipment relative to all
adjacent property lines.
   10.   Deposit. A cash or other sufficient deposit tendered by the applicant
to the town for any third party peer review determined by the planning manager
to be necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
C.   The planning manager is authorized and directed to develop permit
applications and other materials specific for wireless facilities, make them
publicly available, and update and amend them as the planning manager deems
appropriate.
D.   Applications for a section 6409(a) permit are exempt from the requirement
for an alternative sites analysis (subparagraph
17-18-5 B. 8 above).
E.   The planning manager may waive a specific application requirement for a
specific project only when all of the following are true:
   1.   The applicant attends a pre-submittal consultation meeting for the
project
   2.   The planning manager finds that compliance with the specific
application requirement would create an unnecessary or unreasonable burden on
the applicant
   3.   The planning manager memorializes the waiver and grounds for it in
writing.
Ordinance 2021.004 replaced “planning director” with “planning manager” in
paragraphs B.10, C, E, E.2, and E.3
17-18-6 Development standards
A.   Preferred siting. All applicants should, to the extent feasible, propose
new facilities and substantial changes to existing facilities with designs
according to the following preferences, ordered from most preferred to least
preferred:
   1.   Collocations on existing base stations outside the right-of-way
   2.   Collocations on towers outside the right-of-way
   3.   Collocations on eligible support structures and utility poles in the
right-of-way that are not exempt from zoning (see paragraph
17-18-4 B above)
   4.   New building-mounted facilities outside the right-of-way
   5.   New towers outside the right-of-way
   6.   New eligible support structures and utility poles in the right-of-way
that are not exempt from zoning (see paragraph
17-18-4 B above).
B.   Preferred locations. All applicants should, to the extent feasible,
propose new facilities and substantial changes to existing facilities in non-
residential zones.
   1.   Non-residential preferences. Non-residential preferences are as
follows, ordered from most preferred to least preferred:
      a.   Town-owned or -controlled parcels, not including right-of-way
      b.   Parcels in industrial zones
      c.   Parcels in commercial zones
      d.   Right-of-way in non-residential areas
   2.   Residential preferences. If an applicant seeks to site wireless
facilities in a residential zone, the applicant should, to the extent feasible,
propose new facilities and substantial changes to existing facilities in
residential zones according to the following preferences, ordered from most
preferred to least preferred:
      a.   In the right-of-way abutting a residential zone
      b.   Town-owned or -controlled parcels
      c.   Parcels that contain approved non-residential conditional uses and
do not contain approved residential uses
      d.   Parcels that contain approved non-residential conditional uses and
do contain approved residential uses
      e.   Parcels that do not contain single-family residences
      f.   All other parcels.
   3.   Additional alternative sites analysis. If an applicant proposes to
locate a new facility or substantial change to an existing facility on a parcel
that contains a single-family residence, the applicant shall provide an
additional alternative sites analysis that at a minimum shall include a
meaningful comparative analysis of all the alternative sites in the more
preferred locations that the applicant considered, and states the underlying
factual basis for concluding why each alternative in a more preferred location
was:
      a.   Technically infeasible;
      b.   Not available; and/or
      c.   More intrusive.
17-18-7 Design and aesthetic standards
A.   General design and aesthetic standards. All facilities must conform to the
following standards.
   1.   Concealment.
      a.   All new facilities and substantial changes to existing facilities
must incorporate concealment measures and/or techniques appropriate for the
proposed location and design.
      b.   All ground-mounted equipment must be completely concealed to the
extent feasible according to the following preferences, ordered from most
preferred to least preferred:
         i.   Within an existing structure including, but not limited to, an
interior equipment room, mechanical penthouse or dumpster corral
         ii.   Within a new structure designed to integrate with or mimic the
adjacent existing structure
         iii.   Within an underground equipment vault if no other feasible
above-ground design that complies with subsections (i) or (ii) exists.
   2.   Height.
      a.   General. All new facilities and substantial changes to existing
facilities must not exceed the applicable zone height limit, provided, however,
that the approval authority may approve height extensions of not more than
eight feet above the applicable zone height limit when the proposed site is (1)
mounted on the rooftop of an existing building; (2) completely concealed; and
(3) architecturally integrated into the underlying building. This exception
does not apply to any towers or utility poles.
      b.   Right-of-way. New facilities and substantial changes to existing
facilities in the right-of-way must conform to the height limitations set forth
in
chapter 12-8 of this code.
   3.   Setbacks.
      a.   General. All facilities must comply with all applicable setback
requirements of the zone where the facility is located.
      b.   Right-of-way. Facilities in the right-of-way shall conform to the
clearance and location limitations set forth in
chapter 12-8 of this code.
   4.   Collocation. Applicants shall design their facilities to accommodate
future collocated facilities to the extent feasible.
   5.   Fences. The town will not approve any barbed wire, razor wire, or
electrified fences associated with a proposed facility.
   6.   Landscaping. In addition to any landscaping required by the town for
concealment or screening purposes, the applicant shall propose, install and
maintain additional landscaping to replace any existing landscaping displaced
during the construction or installation of the applicant’s facility on private
property or in the right-of-way. The applicant’s landscaping plan shall be
subject to the town’s approval.
   7.   Backup or standby power sources and generators. The town may not
approve any fossil fuel-powered backup power sources or generators unless the
applicant demonstrates that the facility cannot feasibly achieve its power
needs with batteries, fuel cells, or other similarly non-polluting, low noise-
level means.
   8.   Lights. Unless otherwise required under FAA or FCC regulations,
applicants may install only timed or motion-sensitive light controllers and
lights, and must install lights that comply with the town-adopted outdoor
lighting code. Lighting must avoid illumination impacts to adjacent properties
to the maximum extent feasible. The town may, in its discretion, exempt an
applicant from the foregoing requirement when the applicant demonstrates a
substantial public safety need. All aircraft warning lighting must use lighting
enclosures that avoid illumination impacts to properties in the town to the
maximum extent feasible.
   9.   Noise. All transmission equipment and other equipment, including
without limitation air conditioners and sump pumps, associated with the
facility must not emit sound that exceeds the applicable noise limits
established by the town.
   10.   Signage and advertising. No facility may display any signage or
advertisements unless expressly allowed by the town in a written approval,
recommended under FCC regulations, or required by law or permit condition.
Every facility shall at all times display signage that accurately identifies
the facility owner and provides the facility owner’s unique site number, and
also provides a local or toll-free telephone number to contact the facility
owner’s operations center.
   11.   Code compliance. Applicant shall design and maintain all facilities in
compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, codes,
regulations, ordinances or other rules.
B.   Tower-mounted facilities. In addition to the general standards set forth
in paragraph A of this section, all tower-mounted facilities must conform to
the following standards.
   1.   General design preferences. All applicants should, to the extent
feasible and appropriate for the proposed location, design new towers according
to the following preferences, ordered from most preferred to least preferred:
      a.   Faux architectural features, include, but are not limited to, bell
towers, clock towers, lighthouses, obelisks, and water tanks
      b.   Faux cactus
      c.   Monopalms.
   2.   Most disfavored designs. The town may not approve any designs that do
not conceal the antennas within a radome or other concealment device without a
limited exemption pursuant to this chapter.
   3.   Tower-mounted equipment. All tower-mounted equipment must be mounted as
close to the vertical support structure as possible to reduce its visual
profile. Applicants should mount non-antenna, tower-mounted equipment,
including, but not limited to, remote radio units/heads, surge suppressors, and
utility demarcation boxes, directly behind the antennas to the maximum extent
feasible.
   4.   Ground-mounted equipment. Notwithstanding subparagraph
17-18-7 A. 1. b above, applicants must conceal ground-mounted equipment
associated with tower-mounted facilities with opaque fences or other opaque
enclosures. The town may require, as a condition of approval, design and/or
landscape features in addition to other concealment when necessary to blend the
equipment or enclosure into the surrounding environment.
   5.   Concealment standards for faux trees and cacti. All permits for faux
tree and cactus facilities approved under this chapter are subject to the
following required conditions of approval:
      a.   The canopy must completely envelop all tower-mounted equipment and
extend beyond the tower-mounted equipment at least 18 inches;
      b.   The canopy must be naturally tapered to mimic the particular tree or
cactus species;
      c.   All tower-mounted equipment, including all antennas, equipment
cabinets, cables, mounts, and brackets, must be painted flat natural colors to
mimic the particular tree or cactus species;
      d.   For faux trees, all antennas and other tower-mounted equipment
cabinets must be covered to blend in with the faux foliage; and
      e.   For faux trees, the entire vertical structure must be covered with
permanently-affixed three-dimensional faux bark cladding to mimic the
particular tree species.
C.   Building- or facade-mounted facilities. In addition to the general
standards set forth in paragraph A above, all building- or facade-mounted
facilities must conform to the following standards.
   1.   General design preferences. All applicants should, to the extent
feasible, propose new non-tower facilities according to the following
preferences, ordered from most preferred to least preferred:
      a.   Completely concealed and architecturally integrated facade- or
rooftop-mounted base stations with no visible impacts from any publicly
accessible areas at ground level, including, but not limited to, antennas
behind existing parapet walls or facades replaced with RF-transparent material
and finished to mimic the replaced materials.
      b.   Completely concealed new structures or appurtenances designed to
mimic the support structure’s original architecture and proportions, including,
but not limited to, cupolas, steeples, chimneys, and water tanks.
   2.   Facade-mounted equipment. Applicants must conceal all facade-mounted
transmission equipment behind screen walls as flush to the facade as
practicable. The town may not approve any “pop-out” screen boxes unless the
design is architecturally consistent with the original support structure. The
town may not approve any exposed facade-mounted antennas, which includes
exposed antennas painted to match the facade.
   3.   Rooftop-mounted equipment. The town may approve unscreened rooftop
transmission equipment only when it expressly includes a condition of approval
that the equipment is effectively concealed due to its low height and setback
from the roofline.
   4.   Ground-mounted equipment. Outdoor ground-mounted equipment associated
with base stations must be avoided whenever feasible. In locations visible or
accessible to the public, applicants must conceal outdoor ground-mounted
equipment with opaque fences or landscape features that mimic the adjacent
structure(s), including, but not limited to, dumpster corrals and other
accessory structures.
D.   Facilities in the right-of-way. Facilities in the right-of-way must
conform to the requirements of
chapter 12-8 (wireless communication facilities in the right-of-way) of this
code.
17-18-8 Public notice and hearing requirements
A.   Before the planning commission may grant any conditional use permit under
this chapter, the planning commission shall conduct a noticed public hearing as
provided in section
17-3-2 of this code.
B.   Before the planning manager may grant any administrative wireless
facilities permit or approve any application for a section 6409(a) modification
under this chapter, notice of the application shall be posted on the project
site. The notice shall include a general explanation of the proposed facility,
modification, or collocation, and a general description, in text or by diagram,
of the location of the real property that is the subject of the application.
For a section 6409(a) modification, the notice shall also state: “Federal law
may require approval for this application. Further, Federal Communications
Commission regulations may deem this application granted by the operation of
law unless the town approves or denies the application, or the town and
applicant reach a mutual tolling agreement.”
Ordinance 2021.004 replaced “planning director” with “planning manager” in
paragraph B
17-18-9 Required findings for approval
A.   Conditional use permit. The planning commission may grant a conditional
use permit for a new wireless facility or a substantial change to an existing
wireless facility only when the planning commission makes all the findings
required by section
17-3-2 of this code, as well as the following additional findings.
   1.   The proposed use is deemed essential or desirable to the public
convenience or welfare.
   2.   The total area of the site and the setbacks of all facilities from
property and street lines are of sufficient magnitude in view of the character
of the land and of the proposed development that significant detrimental impact
on surrounding properties is avoided.
   3.   The appearance of the developed site in terms of the arrangement,
height, scale and architectural style of the buildings, location of parking
areas, landscaping and other features is compatible with the character of the
area.
   4.   The applicant demonstrated that it proposed the least intrusive means
to achieve its technical objectives.
B.   Administrative wireless facilities permit. The planning manager may grant
an administrative wireless facilities permit for a new wireless facility or a
substantial change to an existing wireless facility when the planning manager
finds all of the following:
   1.   The proposed design qualifies as a design subject to administrative
approval as set forth in this chapter.
   2.   The proposed location qualifies as a location subject to administrative
approval as set forth in this chapter.
   3.   The proposal conforms to all applicable design standards set forth in
this this chapter.
   4.   The proposed project will not require any exemption pursuant to section
17-18-16 of this chapter.
C.   Section 6409(a) permit.
   1.   Findings for approval. The planning manager may approve a section 6409
(a) modification when the planning manager finds that the proposed collocation
or modification qualifies as an eligible facilities request and does not cause
a substantial change.
   2.   Grounds for denial. In addition to any other alternative recourse
permitted under federal law, the planning manager may deny a section 6409(a)
permit when the planning manager finds that the proposed collocation or
modification:
      a.   Violates any legally enforceable standard or permit condition
reasonably related to public health and safety; or
      b.   Involves a structure constructed or modified without all regulatory
approvals required at the time of the construction or modification; or
      c.   Involves the replacement of the entire support structure; or
      d.   Does not qualify for mandatory approval under section 6409(a) for
any lawful reason.
   3.   Any denial of a section 6409(a) permit application shall be without
prejudice to the applicant, the real property owner, or the project. Subject to
the application and submittal requirements in this chapter, the applicant may
immediately resubmit a permit application for a conditional use permit, an
administrative wireless facilities permit, or a section 6409(a) permit as
appropriate.
Ordinance 2021.004 replaced “planning director” with “planning manager” in
paragraphs B, C.1, and C.2
17-18-10 Standard conditions of approval
The following standard conditions of approval apply to all permits issued under
this chapter, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
A.   Permit term. Any validly issued conditional use permit or administrative
wireless facilities permit for a wireless facility will automatically expire at
12:01 a.m. local time exactly ten years and one day from the issuance date.
B.   Code compliance. The permittee shall at all times maintain compliance with
all applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations and other rules.
C.   Inspections; emergencies. The town or its designee may enter onto the
facility area to inspect the facility upon reasonable notice to the permittee.
The permittee shall cooperate with all inspections. The town reserves the right
to enter or to direct its designee to enter the facility and support, repair,
disable or remove any elements of the facility in emergencies, or when the
facility threatens imminent harm to persons or property.
D.   Contact information for responsible parties. The permittee shall at all
times maintain accurate contact information for all parties responsible for the
facility, which shall include a phone number, street mailing address, and email
address for at least one natural person. All such contact information for
responsible parties shall be provided to the planning department upon
permittee’s receipt of the planning department’s written request, except in an
emergency as determined by the town, when all contact information for
responsible parties shall be immediately provided to the planning manager upon
verbal request.
E.   Indemnities. The permittee and, if applicable, the non-government owner of
the private property upon which the facility is located shall defend, indemnify
and hold harmless the town, its agents, officers, officials, and employees (i)
from any and all damages, liabilities, injuries, losses, costs, and expenses,
and from any and all claims, demands, lawsuits, writs of mandamus, and other
actions or proceedings brought against the town or its agents, officers,
officials, or employees to challenge, attack, seek to modify, set aside, void,
or annul the town’s approval of the permit, and (ii) from any and all damages,
liabilities, injuries, losses, costs, and expenses, and any and all claims,
demands, lawsuits, or causes of action and other actions or proceedings of any
kind or form, whether for personal injury, death or property damage, arising
out of or in connection with the activities or performance of the permittee or,
if applicable, the private property owner or any of each one’s agents,
employees, licensees, contractors, subcontractors, or independent contractors.
If the town becomes aware of any such actions or claims, the town shall
promptly notify the permittee and the private property owner and shall
reasonably cooperate in the defense. It is expressly agreed that the town shall
have the right to approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld,
the legal counsel providing the town’s defense, and the property owner and/or
permittee (as applicable) shall reimburse the town for any costs and expenses
directly and necessarily incurred by the town in the course of the defense.
F.   Interference with public safety radio services. If the town finds reason
to believe that permittee’s radio communications operations are causing
interference with the town’s radio communications operations, then the
permittee shall, at its cost, immediately cooperate with the town to either
rule-out permittee as the interference source or eliminate the interference.
Cooperation with the town may include, but shall not be limited to, temporarily
switching the transmission equipment on and off for intermittent testing.
G.   Adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Permittee shall undertake all
reasonable efforts to avoid undue adverse impacts to adjacent properties and/or
uses that may arise from the construction, operation, maintenance,
modification, and removal of the facility.
H.   General maintenance. The site and the facility, including, but not limited
to, all landscaping, fencing and related transmission equipment, must be
maintained in a neat and clean manner and in accordance with all approved plans
and conditions of approval.
I.   Graffiti removal. All graffiti on facilities must be removed at the sole
expense of the permittee in accordance with
chapter 11-3 of this code.
J.   RF exposure compliance. All facilities must comply with all standards and
regulations of the FCC and any other state or federal government agency with
the authority to regulate RF exposure standards.
K.   Optional completion time limit. As a condition of approval, the approval
authority may establish a reasonable time limit for completion of the approved
facility.
L.   Section 6409(a) modifications. In addition to all applicable standard
conditions of approval required under this section, any section 6409(a) permit
granted by the planning manager or deemed granted by the operation of law
includes the following conditions of approval:
   1.   No permit term extension. The town’s grant or grant by operation of law
of a section 6409(a) permit constitutes a federally-mandated modification to
the underlying permit or approval for the subject tower or base station. The
town’s grant or grant by operation of law of a section 6409(a) permit will not
extend the permit term for any conditional use permit, administrative wireless
facilities permit, or other underlying regulatory approval and its term shall
be coterminous with the underlying permit or other regulatory approval for the
subject tower or base station.
   2.   Accelerated permit terms due to invalidation. If any court of competent
jurisdiction invalidates any portion of section 6409(a) or any FCC rule that
interprets section 6409(a) such that federal law would not mandate approval for
any section 6409(a) modification, the permit or permits issued in connection
with a section 6409(a) modification(s) shall automatically expire one year from
the effective date of the judicial order. A permittee shall be required to
remove its improvements approved under the invalidated section 6409(a) permit
unless it has submitted an application for either a conditional use permit or
an administrative wireless facilities permit for those improvements before the
one-year period ends. The planning manager may extend the expiration date on
the accelerated permit upon a written request from the permittee that shows
good cause for an extension.
   3.   No waiver of standing. The town’s grant or grant by operation of law of
a section 6409(a) modification does not waive, and shall not be construed to
waive, any standing by the town to challenge section 6409(a), any FCC rules
that interpret section 6409(a), or any section 6409(a) modification.
Ordinance 2021.004 replaced “planning director” with “planning manager” in
paragraphs D, L, and L.2
17-18-11 Notice of decision; appeals
A.   Within five working days after final decision by the approval authority on
an application submitted for approval pursuant to this chapter, notice of the
decision shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the master
application. The town shall provide the reasons for any denial either in the
written decision or in some other written record available at the same time as
the denial.
B.   Any person or entity may appeal a final decision by the planning
commission on a conditional use permit application to the council in accordance
with section
17-3-2 of this code. The council shall review the decision of the planning
commission de novo.
C.   Any person or entity may appeal a final decision by the planning manager
on an administrative wireless facilities permit application to the council in
accordance with this paragraph. The appeal must state in plain terms the
grounds for reversal and the facts that support those grounds. The appellant
must pay a fee in an amount established by a fee schedule adopted by the
council and amended from time to time at the time the appeal is filed. The
council shall review the decision of the planning manager de novo solely on the
specific issues raised by the appellant.
D.   Subject to applicable federal timeframes for local review, any person or
entity may file a written appeal to the council to reverse the planning
manager’s final decision to approve or deny without prejudice a section 6409(a)
permit application. The appeal must state in plain terms the grounds for
reversal and the facts that support those grounds. The appellant must pay a fee
in an amount established by a fee schedule adopted by the council and amended
from time to time at the time the appeal is filed. The council shall review the
decision of the planning manager de novo.
Ordinance 2021.004 replaced “planning director” with “planning manager” in
paragraphs C and D
17-18-12 Permit renewal
A.   Any application to renew any conditional use permit or administrative
wireless facilities permit granted under this chapter must be tendered to the
town between 365 days and 180 days prior to the expiration of the current
permit, and shall be accompanied by all required application materials, fees
and deposits for a new application as then in effect.
B.   The town shall review an application for permit renewal in accordance with
the standards for new facilities as then in effect.
C.   If an applicant timely submits a permit renewal application and the town
is unable to fully review the application prior to its expiration, the planning
manager shall grant a written temporary extension on the permit term to allow
sufficient time to review the application.
Ordinance 2021.004 replaced “planning director” with “planning manager” in
paragraph C
17-18-13 Permit revocation
A.   A permit granted under this chapter may be revoked for noncompliance with
any enforceable permit, permit condition, or law applicable to the facility.
B.   When the planning manager finds reason to believe that grounds for permit
revocation exist, the planning manager shall send written notice by certified
U.S. mail, return receipt requested, to the permittee at the permittee’s last
known address that states the nature of the noncompliance as grounds for permit
revocation. The permittee shall have a reasonable time from the date of the
notice to cure the noncompliance or show that no noncompliance ever occurred.
C.   If the permittee fails to cure any noncompliance after notice and
opportunity to dispute or cure the noncompliance, the council shall conduct a
noticed public hearing to determine whether to revoke the permit. The permittee
shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard and may speak and submit written
materials to the council. After the noticed public hearing, the council may
deny the revocation or revoke the permit when it finds that the permittee had
notice of the noncompliance and a reasonable opportunity to cure the
noncompliance, but failed to comply with any enforceable permit, permit
condition, or law applicable to the facility. Written notice of the council’s
determination and the reasons for it shall be dispatched by certified U.S.
mail, return receipt requested, to the permittee’s last known address.
D.   Upon revocation, the council may take any legally permissible action or
combination of actions necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare.
Ordinance 2021.004 replaced “planning director” with “planning manager” in
paragraph B
17-18-14 Facility abandonment or discontinuation; relocation; removal
A.   To promote the public health, safety and welfare, the planning manager may
declare a facility abandoned or discontinued when:
   1.   The permittee notifies the planning manager that it abandoned or
discontinued the use of a facility for a continuous period of 90 days; or
   2.   The permittee fails to respond within 30 days to a written notice sent
by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested, from the planning manager
that states the basis for the planning manager’s belief that the facility has
been abandoned or discontinued for a continuous period of 90 days; or
   3.   The permit expires and the permittee has failed to file a timely
application for renewal.
B.   After the planning manager declares a facility abandoned or discontinued,
the permittee shall have 90 days from the date of the declaration, or a longer
time as the planning manager may approve in writing as reasonably necessary,
to:
   1.   Reactivate the use of the abandoned or discontinued facility subject to
the provisions of this chapter and all conditions of approval; or
   2.   Transfer its rights to use the facility, subject to the provisions of
this chapter and all conditions of approval, to another person or entity that
immediately commences use of the abandoned or discontinued facility; or
   3.   Remove the facility and all improvements installed solely in connection
with the facility, and restore the site to a condition compliant with all
applicable codes consistent with the then-existing surrounding area.
C.   If the permittee fails to act as required in paragraph B of this section
within the prescribed time period, the council may deem the facility abandoned
at a noticed public meeting. The planning manager shall send written notice by
certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested, to the last-known permittee or
real property owner that provides 30 days (or longer time as the planning
manager may approve in writing as reasonably necessary) from the notice date to
take any of the actions listed in subparagraphs B.1 through B.3 of this
section.
D.   If the permittee fails to act as required in paragraph C of this section
within the prescribed time period, the town may remove the abandoned facility,
restore the site to a condition compliant with all applicable codes and
consistent with the then-existing surrounding area, and repair any and all
damages that occurred in connection with such removal and restoration work.
   1.   The town may, but shall not be obligated to, store the removed facility
or any part of it, and may use, sell or otherwise dispose of it in any manner
the town deems appropriate.
   2.   The last-known permittee or its successor-in-interest and, if on
private property, the real property owner shall be jointly liable for all costs
incurred by the town in connection with its removal, restoration, repair and
storage, and shall promptly reimburse the town upon receipt of a written
demand, including any interest on the balance owing at the maximum lawful rate.
   3.   The town may, but shall not be obligated to, use any financial security
required in connection with the granting of the facility permit to recover its
costs and interest.
   4.   Until the costs are paid in full, a lien shall be placed on the
facility, all related personal property in connection with the facility and, if
applicable, the real private property on which the facility was located for the
full amount of all costs for removal, restoration, repair and storage. The town
shall cause the lien to be recorded with the recorder’s office of the county
where the facility is located. Within 60 days after the lien amount is fully
satisfied including costs and interest, the town shall cause the lien to be
released.
E.   After a permittee fails to comply with any provision in this section, the
council may elect to treat the facility as a nuisance to be abated as provided
by applicable law.
Ordinance 2021.004 replaced “planning director” with “planning manager” in
paragraphs A, A.1, A.2, B, and C
17-18-15 Transfers involving a wireless facility or permit
A.   Within 30 days after a permittee transfers any interest in the facility or
permit(s) in connection with the facility, the permittee shall deliver written
notice to the town.
B.   The written notice required in this section must include all of the
following:
   1.   The transferee’s legal name
   2.   The transferee’s full contact information, including a primary contact
person, mailing address, telephone number and email address
   3.   A statement signed by the transferee that the transferee shall accept
of all permit terms and conditions.
C.   Failure to submit the notice required by this section shall be a cause for
the town to revoke the applicable permits pursuant to and following the
procedure set out in this chapter.
17-18-16 Limited exemption from standards
A.   An applicant seeking an exemption under this section for personal wireless
services facilities on the basis that a permit denial would effectively
prohibit personal wireless services must demonstrate to the approval authority
with clear and convincing evidence all of the following:
   1.   A significant gap in the applicant’s service coverage exists.
   2.   All alternative sites identified in the application review process are
either technically infeasible or not potentially available.
B.   All exemptions granted under this section are subject to review and
reconsideration by the council. The applicant always bears the burden to
demonstrate why an exemption should be granted.
17-18-17 Independent consultant review
A.   The planning manager is authorized to, in his or her discretion, select
and retain an independent consultant with expertise in telecommunications
satisfactory to the planning manager in connection with any permit application.
B.   The planning manager may request independent consultant review on any
issue that involves specialized or expert knowledge in connection with the
permit application. Such issues may include, but are not limited to:
   1.   Permit application completeness or accuracy;
   2.   Planned compliance with applicable RF exposure standards;
   3.   Whether technically feasible and potentially available alternative
locations and designs exist;
   4.   The applicability, reliability and/or sufficiency of analyses or
methodologies used by the applicant to reach conclusions about any issue within
this scope; and
   5.   Any other issue that requires expert or specialized knowledge
identified by the planning manager.
C.   The applicant must pay for the cost of independent consultant review and
for the consultant’s testimony in any hearing as requested by the planning
manager, and must provide a reasonable advance deposit of the estimated cost of
such review with the town prior to the commencement of any work by the
consultant. The applicant must provide an additional advance deposit to cover
the consultant’s testimony and expenses at any meeting where that testimony is
requested by the planning manager. Where the advance deposit is insufficient to
pay for the cost of such review and/or testimony, the planning manager shall
invoice the applicant and the applicant shall pay the invoice in full within
ten calendar days after receipt of the invoice. No permit shall issue to an
applicant where that applicant has not timely paid a required fee, provided any
required deposit, or paid any invoice as required in the code.
Ordinance 2021.004 replaced “planning director” with “planning manager” in
paragraphs A, B, B.5, and C
17-18-18 Obligation to comply with this chapter
An applicant or permittee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply
with every provision of the code, this chapter, any permit issued hereunder, or
any applicable law or regulation by reason of any failure of the town to
notice, enforce, or request compliance by the applicant or permittee.
CHAPTER 17-19.
SILVERBELL ROAD CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT
Chapter 17-19 was inserted into the town code by Ordinance 2021.010
Sections:
17-19-1   Purposes
17-19-2   Applicability
17-19-3   Interpretation; scope of regulations
17-19-4   Definitions
17-19-5   Effect of other provisions
17-19-6   Design review overlay district
17-19-7   Design guidelines, objectives and considerations
17-19-8   Application requirements
17-19-9   Restrictions on other required documents
17-19-10   Silverbell Road Corridor Overlay District development plan
procedures
17-19-11   Use regulations
17-19-12   Performance standards
17-19-13   Development standards
17-19-14   Exhibit 1 - Map of Silverbell Road Corridor Overlay District
17-19-1 Purposes.
A.   The following regulations are hereby established to promote the health,
safety, general welfare and the orderly growth of the Silverbell Road corridor.
These regulations were created to accomplish the following:
   1.   Achieve the goals and policies defined within the town of Marana
general plan;
   2.   Establish basic development standards for structures, as well as
landscaping, and other improvements within the corridor; and
   3.   Promote good quality and innovative site design while encouraging the
efficient use of land and capital investment and promoting safe and efficient
traffic circulation.
B.   This chapter further seeks to encourage and promote commercial development
which is oriented to serve the adjacent neighborhoods. This overlay district is
intended to provide for specific uses in a planned commercial setting which
will be compatible with, and complimentary to, adjacent uses including nearby
residential neighborhoods. The overlay district will promote a high level of
architectural and landscaping excellence. More specifically, the creation of
this special district shall be encouraged through a coordinated set of design
principles for site planning, structures, architecture, landscaping, and
signage. These principles are intended to guide development activity in a
manner that results in compatibility in terms of land use, site design, and
aesthetics.
C.   No land use or development within the Silverbell Road Corridor Overlay
District boundaries, subject to these regulations, shall commence or be
approved except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. This
chapter shall regulate all land use and development within the overlay district
and shall supplement the provisions of the underlying zoning district and the
applicable specific plan(s) that comprise the area.
D.   The Silverbell Road Corridor Overlay District provides for a variety of
uses such as multi-family residential, offices, commercial retail and
commercial services on undeveloped and previously developed commercial
property. Compatibility with existing land uses is intended for new
development.
17-19-2 Applicability
A.   The regulations for the Silverbell Road Corridor Overlay District shall
apply to all commercial and multi-family developments within the district and
to any property within the district subsequently changed to a commercial or
high density residential land use designation as a result of rezoning or a
specific plan amendment. This chapter applies to any commercial land, parcel,
lot or project site lying adjacent to Silverbell Road between Cortaro Road and
Twin Peaks Road. These regulations shall also apply to any commercial or multi-
family residential project site contiguous to any applicable land, parcel, lot
or project site adjacent to Silverbell Road.
B.   The regulations of this title shall apply to the area known as the
Silverbell Road Corridor Overlay District, the boundaries of which are shown on
exhibit 1 to this chapter, and on the town of Marana zoning map.
17-19-3 Interpretation; scope of regulations
A.   The regulations set forth by this title shall be minimum regulations for
new or proposed commercial or multiple family developments and shall apply
uniformly to each class of use, structure or land, except as otherwise provided
in this chapter.
B.   For building and development occurring subsequent to the enactment of this
chapter, no building structure or land shall be used or occupied and no
building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with all of
the regulations of this chapter. These regulations shall not apply to
properties for which development approval has been obtained prior to the
effective date of this chapter.
17-19-4 Definitions
Certain words used in this chapter shall be interpreted as defined within this
section or as defined in
chapter 17-1 (title, intent, purpose and definitions).
A.   Abutting: The condition of two adjoining properties having a common
property line or boundary, including cases where two or more lots adjoin only
corner or corners, but not including cases where adjoining lots are separated
by a street or alley. (Also see adjacent/adjoining; contiguous).
B.   Adjacent/Adjoining: The condition of being near to or close to but not
necessarily having a common dividing line, i.e., two properties which are
separated only by a street or alley shall be considered as adjacent to each
other. (Also, see abutting; contiguous).
C.   Compatible: Capable of existing together in harmony and without conflict
or ill effects.
D.   Contiguous: Next to, abutting, or touching and having a boundary, or
portion thereof which is common or coterminous, as distinguished from being
adjacent. (Also see abutting; adjacent/ adjoining.)
17-19-5 Effect of other provisions
These provisions are intended to supplement the requirements of the underlying
zoning district or specific plan. If any provision of this chapter is found to
be in conflict with any other provision of this code or with any provision of
the Continental Ranch Specific Plan, Pima Farms Specific Plan or Pima Farms
North Specific Plan, the provision that establishes the higher and/or more
restrictive standard shall prevail.
17-19-6 Design review overlay district
A.   Purpose. To guide the general appearance of buildings and improvements and
achieve the stated objectives of the Silverbell Road Corridor Overlay District.
The Design Review (DR) Overlay District is superimposed over the Silverbell
Road Corridor Overlay District.
B.   Applicability. The Design Review (DR) Overlay District includes the entire
Silverbell Road Corridor Overlay District. Such development includes, but is
not limited to, new commercial, institutional, office, multi-family residential
projects, proposed conversions, exterior remodeling, exterior restoration,
enlargement or expansion of existing buildings, and requires the submittal of a
design review plan pursuant to this chapter. The development or modification of
an individual single family detached dwelling on a single parcel is
specifically excluded from the requirements of the Design Review Overlay
District.
C.   Standards. No new land use or development within the boundaries of the
Silverbell Road Corridor Overlay District shall commence or be approved except
in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
17-19-7 Design guidelines, objectives and considerations
Town staff will review all design review applications and evaluate each
application for compliance with standards that address the following items.
A.   Site design considerations: How the site design impacts adjacent
residences and neighborhoods, sensitive lands, viewsheds, adjacent streets,
pedestrian needs, and parking lot function and safety.
   1.   Compatibility. Examine the functional relationship of the site to its
surroundings. Protection of adjacent residential neighborhoods is the Town's
primary concern. Particular attention should be given to the location of
parking, driveways, outdoor lighting, outdoor use areas and compatibility of
uses. Adjoining residential areas should be protected by maintaining a
landscape buffer edge and directing building openings away from residential
areas.
   2.   Traffic patterns. Evaluate the separation or integration of vehicular,
pedestrian and bicycle traffic patterns. The development of land in cooperation
with owners of adjoining properties is encouraged where parking, driveways,
plazas and entries can be shared. Pedestrian and vehicular safety should be
maximized by carefully siting and limiting the number of driveways.
   3.   Off-street parking. Evaluate the arrangement and adequacy of off-street
parking facilities and access points. Parking should be safe, easily accessible
and not allowed to dominate the entire development. Plant materials should
accent and define entries. Large paved areas should be scaled down by
introducing different materials. Whenever possible, parking should be located
to the rear or side of buildings to provide screening and a strong
architectural street edge. Paving materials should be compatible with other on-
site materials. Additional specialty paving materials such as tile, brick and
exposed aggregate should be introduced where appropriate.
   4.   Loading areas. The location, arrangement, and dimensions of loading
ramps, docks and bays should minimize visual and noise impacts on adjacent
residential areas; and,
   5.   The location and screening of trash receptacles. Careful screening of
undesirable elements such as loading, trash receptacles, mechanical equipment,
etc., is critical.
   6.   The illumination plans and hours of operation.
   7.   Circulation visibility. Evaluate the site distance requirements of the
streets and driveways. Adequate site distance for motorists and pedestrians
entering and exiting the site must be ensured. Landscaping should not interfere
with circulation effectiveness.
   8.   The coordination of the site development with the planned right-of-way
alignments, acquisitions and street improvements.
   9.   Urban design and aesthetic considerations.
   10.   Solar considerations. Trees and architectural features such as
overhangs, trellises and awnings are encouraged to provide shade from the
summer sun.
   11.   Any sensitive lands located on the property or possibly affected by
the proposed development must be avoided, mitigated or otherwise resolved per
town, county, state or federal requirements and recommendations.
B.   Site landscaping and buffering. The site landscaping should provide a
highly attractive landscaping that buffers unwanted views and sound, creates an
interesting streetscape, and provides a safe transition between contrasting
uses.
   1.   Evaluate the location, height, and materials of walls, fences and
screen plantings. Selection of plant materials should be based on year-round
interest, color, branching pattern, etc. Parking lots should be broken up with
landscaped buffers. Trees should provide a lush overhead canopy for solar
control. The overall effect of both the perimeter landscaping and the interior
landscaping should be one of a relatively consistent tree cover which will
shade the pavement and vehicles.
   2.   Evaluate plans for the on-going maintenance of the finished
landscaping.
   3.   Evaluate plans for safe sound and site buffers in consideration of the
preservation of adjoining residential neighborhoods relative to view sheds,
ambient noise levels, light and air, both on the site and on adjacent property.
Earth berming, fences or dense landscaping should be used at the perimeter of
the parking areas to provide for visual enclosure and screening.
   4.   The design and utilization of open spaces and trails, if applicable.
C.   Site grading and drainage: The on-site grading and drainage shall provide
slope and soil stabilization, prevent soil erosion, and minimize off-site
impact.
   1.   Evaluate plans for soil removal, fill work, soil stabilization, and
erosion control.
   2.   Evaluate plans for plantings, ground covers, or shrubbery as a means to
prevent dust, stabilize soils and control erosion.
D.   Signage: Commercial signage should provide business identification,
minimize clutter and confusion and comply with the provisions of this chapter
and
chapter 17-10 (signs).
   1.   Evaluate the size, location, lighting, and hours of operation of all
signs and advertising features to achieve compliance with this chapter. Signage
plans for the entire site should indicate how signs will be illuminated, their
design and spatial relationship to other site amenities, including buildings.
Signage, window designs and awnings are most effective when color coordinated
with the building facade. Darker, deeper and brighter colors on these elements
create interest on the facade and call attention to windows and doorways.
   2.   Evaluate the function and maintenance aspects of signs and other
advertising features.
E.   Utilities. Utility systems should not detract from building or site
appearance. The size and location of all service systems should be appropriate
and maintainable.
   1.   Electrical and telephone service systems shall be underground; and,
   2.   Transformers and pad-mounted mechanical and electrical equipment shall
be screened.
F.   Building design considerations. The commercial design standards defined in
chapter 17-8 (multi-family, commercial, and industrial design standards) shall
be used in conjunction with the following building design considerations.
   1.   Building mass. Evaluate the building mass and its relationship to
surrounding development and its proposed use. The relationship to the
surrounding uses shall be considered in respect to the scale and massing of the
proposed uses.
   2.   Proportion of building. Evaluate the height to width relationship of
new structures for compatibility with the proposed use.
   3.   Building openings. Evaluate openings. They should provide interest
through the use of such features as balconies, bays, porches, covered entries,
overhead structures, awnings, changes in building facade and roofline
alignment.
   4.   Relationship of exterior materials. Evaluate the appropriateness of
exterior materials and color to reduce apparent building mass and blend with
the surrounding area. Exterior building materials should be genuine and not
simulated. Shadow patterns created by architectural elements such as overhangs,
trellises, projections and awnings are encouraged to contribute to a building's
character while aiding climate control.
   5.   Building color. Building color should be compatible with the
neighborhood and should reinforce the visual character of the proposed
building. Warm muted shades should be used as the body or overall building
background color. Brighter, more intense and richer hues of related or
contrasting color should be used as accent colors and highlight colors for
architectural elements.
   6.   Building elevations. Building elevation treatments should be carried to
all sides of the building. Building construction and design shall be used to
create a structure with substantially equal attractive sides of high quality,
rather than placing emphasis on the front elevation of the structure and
neglecting or downgrading the aesthetic appeal of the side and rear elevations.
The character of the surrounding residential development should be incorporated
into the architectural design and materials. Production designs common to fast
food restaurants, convenience markets, etc., are strongly discouraged.
   7.   Roofline. Rooflines of buildings on adjacent properties should be
considered in the design to avoid clashes in style and materials. All roof
materials and colors should complement the primary building material and color.
   8.   Accessory buildings. Accessory structures and additions should utilize
the same materials and design as the primary structure.
   9.   Evaluate compliance of architectural design with the requirements of
the appropriate specific plan, when applicable.
17-19-8 Application requirements
Prior to the approval of a development plan application or issuance of a
building permit to erect, construct, alter, remodel, move or otherwise change
the use of a building or structure within the Silverbell Road Corridor Overlay
District, an applicant must submit a complete design review application to the
planning department and receive approval of the application.
A.   All applications shall be submitted in accordance with the applicable
application, checklist, and procedural guide, and shall be in compliance with
chapter 17-8 (multi-family, commercial, and industrial design standards).
   1.   Architectural plans: In addition to the development plan, architectural
plans are required that include the following:
      a.   Building materials;
      b.   At least four elevations, so that all sides of the development are
presented. Perspectives, models or other graphic materials may be submitted at
the option of the applicant and the planning manager;
      c.   Proposed color scheme of the entire building, including roof;
      d.   Site photographs of the site and adjacent properties;
      e.   Color and texture chips of actual sample materials may be submitted
at the option of the applicant or as may be required by the planning manager;
and,
      f.   Scale drawings of all signs showing size, material, text or other
graphic symbols, colors and illumination.
   2.   Landscape plans: Landscape plans shall be submitted in accordance with
the applicable application, checklist and procedural guide, as well as
chapter 17-11 (environmental
resource preservation, native plant protection, and landscape requirements).
   3.   Existing structures and sites: Applicants proposing conversion,
remodeling, renovation, enlargement or expansion of existing structures or
sites shall submit sufficient information and detail so that the planning
department may determine compliance with the provisions of this title.
17-19-9 Restrictions on other required documents
A.   Building permits. The town shall not issue a building permit to any
applicant within the Silverbell Road Corridor Overlay District until the design
review application has been accepted by the planning department.
B.   Certificate of occupancy. The town shall not issue a final certificate of
occupancy to the applicant until all of the requirements of the design review
process have been met.
17-19-10 Silverbell Road Corridor Overlay District development plan procedures
A.   Development plan review. Development plan review is required for any non-
single family development within the Silverbell Road Corridor Overlay District.
B.   Application and approval. The application and approval process for a
development plan in the Silverbell Road Corridor Overlay District shall be in
conformance with the process set forth in section
17-3-4 (Development plans).
C.   Appeal procedure. An applicant may appeal a final action by the planning
manager on a development plan review to the board of adjustment pursuant to
subsection
17-2-2(C)(2).
D.   Modifications. A request to modify, expand, or otherwise change an
approved development plan application, not in substantial conformance with the
planning manager’s approval, shall be processed according to the provisions of
this title.
   1.   The following modifications shall require an amended application:
      a.   A request that would significantly alter the design of the site or
buildings / structures.
      b.   A request to change or delete a condition approved by the planning
manager.
   2.   Minor modifications to an approved plan may be approved by the planning
manager as specified below:
      a.   Minor relocation of building pads provided that the modification
does not significantly alter the site design in terms of parking layouts,
vehicular circulation, landscape design and other similar components of the
development plan provided that ordinance requirements are still met.
      b.   An increase or decrease in a proposed setback provided that the
ordinance requirements are still met.
      c.   A minor change to landscape design and plant material changes.
      d.   A minor change to parking lot / site plan.
Ord. 2025.024 amended paragraphs B, C, D, and D1b of this section.
17-19-11 Use regulations
A.   The allowable uses within the Silverbell Road Corridor Overlay District
were selected to permit a full range of retail sales, as well as personal,
professional and business services required to meet the demands of a developing
local market. The uses are intended to promote attractive development, an open
and pleasant street appearance, and compatibility with adjacent residential
areas. It is recognized that certain uses may be appropriate within the
district; however, may have unique characteristics such as proposed location,
site or building design, or standards of operation that may have a greater
impact than other uses upon adjoining properties, businesses or residences.
These uses have been designated as conditional uses and will require a
conditional use permit. Limitations are imposed upon uses within the district
which limit the full range of uses permitted within the underlying zone or
specific plan. It is recognized that some of the uses allowed within the
underlying zones or specific plans may not be compatible with the intent of the
district and compliance with architectural guidelines would not be practical.
B.   Permitted uses. The following land uses are permitted in the Silverbell
Road Corridor Overlay District, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
   1.   Community, multiservice, neighborhood or senior citizens center.
   2.   Daycare center (adult, child or handicapped).
   3.   Health services (excluding hospitals and substance abuse centers).
      a.   Blood donor stations.
      b.   Convalescent or nursing home.
      c.   Medical or dental labs.
      d.   Offices and clinics of medical doctors, dentists, optometrists or
chiropractors.
      e.   Outpatient clinics.
   4.   Office uses.
      a.   Business or personal service.
      b.   Governmental.
      c.   Financial.
      d.   Social services.
      e.   Veterinarian (including kennel for indoor inpatient hospitalization
services of small animals).
   5.   Public and semi-public.
      a.   Art gallery.
      b.   Civic clubs.
      c.   Churches and religious institutions.
      d.   Library.
      e.   Museum.
      f.   Schools: public and private.
   6.   Personal service establishments.
      a.   Barber and beauty shop.
      b.   Carpet cleaning establishments (provided that no on-site cleaning is
conducted).
      c.   Interior decorator.
      d.   Dry cleaning and laundry and garment pressing establishments (non-
industrial service to the general public only).
      e.   Locksmith.
      f.   Parcel packing/ mailing service.
      g.   Pet grooming, (provided that no animals shall be kept on the
premises overnight).
      h.   Photography studio, photo finishing.
      i.   Tailor, seamstress.
      j.   Tanning salon.
   7.   Repair of:
      a.   Bicycles.
      b.   Cameras.
      c.   Clocks, watches, jewelry.
      d.   Computers.
      e.   Household appliances.
      f.   Musical instruments.
      g.   Optical goods.
      h.   Radios, televisions and electronics.
      i.   Shoes.
   8.   Retail uses.
      a.   Antique stores.
      b.   Appliance stores (household or minor).
      c.   Art stores or galleries.
      d.   Arts and crafts shops.
      e.   Auto parts/ supply stores (no installation).
      f.   Bakery shop, bagel shop.
      g.   Banks, financial institutions and similar uses, provided drive-thru
facilities and queuing lines are located a minimum of 75 feet from a
residential district.
      h.   Bicycle shops.
      i.   Book stores (new or used).
      j.   Camera and photographic supply stores.
      k.   Candy, nut or confectionary stores.
      l.   Card stores.
      m.   Carpet and floor covering stores.
      n.   Clothing, apparel or accessory stores.
      o.   Computer and computer software stores.
      p.   Convenience stores.
      q.   Drugstores.
      r.   Fabric stores.
      s.   Florist and plant shops.
      t.   Food store and markets.
      u.   Frame shops.
      v.   Furniture and appliance rental center.
      w.   Gift shops.
      x.   Grocery stores.
      y.   Hardware, paint stores.
      z.   Hobby shops.
      aa.   Ice cream shops.
      bb.   Jewelry stores.
      cc.   Laundromats, automatic self-service (provided that the
establishment is operated exclusively as a retail business and laundry machines
are of an automatic type, capable of being operated by the public and shall not
include machines ordinarily found in industrial laundries).
      dd.   Lighting stores.
      ee.   Liquor stores.
      ff.   Luggage and leather goods.
      gg.   Music stores.
      hh.   Office supply stores.
      ii.   Optical goods.
      jj.   Pet/pet supplies.
      kk.   Photocopying services.
      ll.   Record, tape or CD stores.
      mm.   Religious goods.
      nn.   Restaurants, cafes, delicatessens or coffee shops, including
outdoor seating areas.
      oo.   Second hand stores and thrift stores, provided there is no outside
display or storage of merchandise.
      pp.   Shoe stores.
      qq.   Sporting goods stores.
      rr.   Stamp and coin shops.
      ss.   Stationery stores.
      tt.   Tobacco stores.
      uu.   Toy stores.
      vv.   Variety stores.
      ww.   Video tape/DVD rentals.
      xx.   Other uses which the planning manager determines to be similar in
nature, function and operation to listed permitted uses.
      yy.   Accessory uses and structures, subordinate, appropriate and
incidental to the above permitted uses, including supportive services directly
related to and located within the same building as the primary use. Automated
teller machines (ATMs) are permitted accessory uses provided they are not free
standing.
C.   Permitted temporary uses and structures. The following temporary uses and
structures shall be permitted subject to the issuance of a temporary use permit
in accordance with section
17-3-3 (temporary use permit).
   1.   Contractor's office and/or storage. Temporary structures for the
storage of tools and equipment or containing supervisory offices of the minimum
necessary in connection with a project on site may be established and
maintained only during the progress of active construction under an effective
grading, building or other development permit. Such temporary structure(s)
shall be immediately removed upon project completion or upon expiration of the
applicable permits.
   2.   Holiday related sales lots.
D.   Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted conditionally,
subject to the provisions of section
17-3-2 (conditional use permits).
   1.   Automobile service uses, including gasoline service stations, service
shops performing minor auto repair, fuel sales, oil change and lubrication
shops, muffler shops, auto glass shops, auto detail shops, speedometer shops
and tire shops, not to include body repair, painting, major engine or
transmission repair, or radiator repair. All service, except the sale of
gasoline, shall be within an enclosed building. No service bays associated with
an automotive use shall be visible from a public street;
   2.   Automobile and truck sales and rental, new or used;
   3.   Bars, taverns, cocktail lounges;
   4.   Car wash establishments, including full-service and self-service, coin-
operated facilities, provided a full-time attendant is on-site and wash bays
are not visible from a public street;   
   5.   Emergency medical care facility 24 hour operations;
   6.   Restaurants, cafes, delicatessens or coffee shops providing drive-thru
or drive-up service;
   7.   Lodging facilities, including hotels and motels;
   8.   Pawn shops;
   9.   Plant nurseries, including open air display and storage;
   10.   Recreational vehicle and boat storage;
   11.   Self-storage facilities;
   12.   Small equipment and light machinery sales or rental;
   13.   Tattoo establishments;
   14.   Wireless communications facilities, subject to the provisions of
chapter 17-18;
   15.   Any establishment receiving deliveries other than between the hours of
6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
E.   Prohibited uses. The following uses are not permitted uses within the
Silverbell Road Corridor Overlay District:
   1.   Adult entertainment uses;
   2.   Automobile bodywork and painting;
   3.   Bowling alleys;   
   4.   Commercial outdoor recreation;
   5.   Heavy equipment and machinery sales or rental;
   6.   Hospitals;
   7.   Industrial uses;
   8.   Kennels, except as permitted in section
17-19-11(B)(4)(e);
   9.   Live entertainment facilities, including nightclubs which include
dancing and music performed by more than one musician;
   10.   Major automobile repair facilities, including major engine, mechanical
or transmission repair and radiator service;
   11.   Manufactured home sales;
   12.   Open air or outside storage uses, including swap meets and storage of
inoperable or damaged vehicles, except as permitted in sections
17-19-11(D)(9) and (10);
   13.   Recreational vehicle sales;
   14.   Theatres;
   15.   Towing businesses; and
   16.   Warehousing uses, excepting self-storage facilities.
17-19-12 Performance standards
The following limitations shall apply to the conduct of uses within the
Silverbell Road Corridor Overlay District:
A.   No outdoor storage of equipment or materials (except screened trash
containers) or outside mechanical repair or service is permitted.
B.   There shall be no manufacturing, compounding, processing or treatment of
products other than that which is clearly incidental to a retail store or
business, and where all such completed products are sold at retail on the
premises.
C.   No use shall be established, maintained or conducted within the Overlay
District which may cause the dissemination of noxious smoke, gas, dust, odor or
any other atmospheric pollutant outside of the building in which the use is
conducted.
D.   No use shall result in noise perceptible beyond the boundaries of the
immediate site of the use. All noise sources shall be identified such as
parking areas, trash dumpsters, mechanical equipment and loading areas. Screen
walls and landscaping shall be employed which screen these areas from the
adjacent residential neighborhoods.
E.   No use shall result in the creation of traffic hazards or undue congestion
of any public street.
17-19-13 Development standards
The following standards shall apply to all developments within the Silverbell
Road Corridor Overlay District:
A.   General development standards.
   1.   All development proposed within the district shall comply with
chapter 17-8 (multi-family, commercial, and industrial design standards).
   2.   Commercial lots adjacent to a residential district shall require a 25
foot landscape buffer in the side and rear yards adjacent to or facing the
residential area. Such buffers shall not be used for the purpose of parking,
loading, servicing or any other activity. Screening shall consist of decorative
screening walls or landscaping combination that will provide a barrier of
adequate height at the time of installation.
B.   Landscaping. The intent of the landscaping requirements is to provide
corridor residents and businesses with highly attractive landscaping that
buffers unwanted views, creates an interesting streetscape, and provides a safe
and effective transition between potentially incompatible land uses. In
addition, these requirements regulate the protection of native vegetation as a
significant natural resource. All development within the Silverbell Road
Corridor Overlay District shall provide site landscaping including buffer
yards, parking lot landscaping and screening as required in this chapter and in
accordance with
chapters 17-11 (environmental resource preservation, native plant protection,
and landscape requirements) and
17-8 (multi-family, commercial, and industrial design standards).
C.   Off-street parking and loading. The number, size and design of all parking
spaces, driveways and loading areas for all development within the Silverbell
Road Corridor Overlay District shall comply with the applicable specific plan
or the provisions of
chapter 17-9 (parking) and the following requirements:
   1.   Access control and driveway locations will be evaluated per town
standards. Joint driveways are desirable whenever possible in order to minimize
the number of access points to streets.
   2.   All parking shall be off-street in paved, landscaped parking areas.
   3.   No parking or maneuvering space is permitted within any required
landscape buffer.
   4.   Loading or service areas shall not be located adjacent to residential
areas.
D.   Signs. Sign standards are hereby established to promote a high quality
visual appearance throughout the Silverbell Road Corridor Overlay District; to
allow individual businesses to clearly identify themselves and the goods and
services offered; to create a unique environment to attract visitors; to
safeguard and enhance property values; to reduce potential hazards to motorists
and pedestrians; and to eliminate excessive and confusing sign displays. All
signs for developments within the Silverbell Road Corridor Overlay District
shall comply with the provisions of
chapter 17-10 (signs).
   1.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to double-faced, ground-mounted
monument style, with proper landscaping. Freestanding pole signs are
prohibited.
E.   Screening. To create an attractive environment and visually screen land
uses that are not fully compatible, the following standards shall apply to all
development within the Silverbell Road Corridor Overlay District:
   1.   All service entrances and loading areas must be screened from adjacent
properties, and view from adjacent public streets. Such screening shall consist
of decorative walls and or landscaping combination that will provide a barrier
of adequate height at the time of installation.
   2.   All refuse containers and trash handling areas shall be enclosed and
screened from public view. All screening devices shall be constructed of
materials and colors compatible with those of the primary building(s). Chain
link fencing (with or without slats) is not allowed.
   3.   No articles, materials, trash, debris, equipment or inoperable vehicles
shall be stored or kept in the open or exposed to view from the adjacent
streets, sidewalks, or adjacent properties. This limitation does not apply to
temporary storage of materials, equipment and supplies needed for the
construction of improvements on a site, provided such items are completely
removed immediately upon completion of each phase of construction.
   4.   All equipment, such as but not limited to, mechanical, electrical,
communications and air conditioning shall be selected and located in a manner
consistent with the architecture of the project and shall be screened from view
from adjacent properties and public streets. Parapet walls, enclosing walls,
louvers and grills shall be used to conceal from view all equipment on site or
on the roofs of buildings. Exceptions may be made for equipment that, by nature
of simple geometric shape, blends well with the architecture of the project.
Satellite dishes and other communications equipment must be integrated with the
architecture or screened in an acceptable manner.
   5.   All utilities including electric power, telephone, gas and water shall
be located underground. Utilities shall be coordinated with landscape plans to
ensure proper screening and landscaping around utility vaults, box
transformers, etc.
F.   Lighting. Exterior lighting should be designed as part of the
architectural and landscape themes. Site lighting should serve functional,
safety and aesthetic purposes. Site and security lighting shall be designed to
enhance the quality of the development. Screening of lights from residential
areas and glare from traffic areas shall be required. All site lighting shall
be in compliance with the adopted Marana outdoor lighting code.
G.   Design standards. To maintain a high level of architectural quality of
buildings and structures, all new development within the Silverbell Road
Corridor Overlay District shall comply with the standards herein, as well as
the commercial design standards defined in
chapter 17-8 (multi-family, commercial, and industrial design standards).
   1.   Building design should reflect traditional or contemporary variations
of southwestern architecture and should reflect an individual style. Reliance
on or the use of standardized "corporate or franchise" style is discouraged.
   2.   High-quality construction and materials should be used to ensure that
the aesthetic quality of buildings will not diminish over time. Building design
must be consistent in material usage and detail on all elevations. Exterior
materials that may be utilized in various aspects of the building design
includes brick masonry, natural stone masonry, concrete (with an approved
architectural finish), glass (use of highly reflective coating may be limited),
plaster, stucco, wood and cultured stone.
   3.   No masonite, visible asphaltic exterior material, aluminum or steel
siding, non-architectural sheet metal or other similar materials shall be used
on any building except as a trim material, as approved.
   4.   Materials for roofs, eaves and canopies may include tile, fireproof
faux wood shakes or metal with standing rib seams.
   5.   Deep eaves, overhangs, canopies and other architectural features that
provide shelter from the elements and shade in the summer shall be incorporated
into the building design where feasible.
   6.   Roof-top heating and air conditioning equipment and similar features
shall be painted so as to be non-reflective and shall be screened from view.
17-19-14 Exhibit 1 - Map of Silverbell Road Corridor Overlay District
The Map of Silverbell Road Corridor Overlay district is set forth as Exhibit 1
of this chapter 17-19.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8f7f7ffafca715800b8e11aa8fbcfd63c41686c7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2526.png]
 
TITLE 18
PUBLIC NUISANCE AND PROPERTY PRESERVATION
Title 18 was adopted by Ordinance 2021.025.
CHAPTER
18-1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER
18-2.   PUBLIC NUISANCES
CHAPTER
18-3.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
CHAPTER
18-4.   ADDITIONAL VIOLATIONS
CHAPTER
18-5.   ENFORCEMENT
CHAPTER
18-6.   APPEALS
CHAPTER 18-1.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:
18-1-1   Purpose and scope
18-1-2   Definitions
18-1-3   Conflicts and interpretation
18-1-4   Severability
18-1-1 Purpose and scope
A.   The purposes of this title are:
   1.   To promote the health and safety of the citizens of the Town by
protecting neighborhoods against public nuisances, and
   2.   To protect neighborhoods from Blight through property preservation.
B.   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this title, this title shall
apply to all buildings and land within the town.
18-1-2 Definitions
A.   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this title, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   1.   Abate means correct, including, but not limited to, repair,
rehabilitate, demolish or remove.
   2.   Accessory improvements means improvements to land other than buildings,
including, but not limited to, driveways, parking areas, pools, sidewalks,
walkways, bridges, exterior steps, railings, monuments, fences, signs,
screening walls and retaining walls.
   3.   Attractive nuisance means a condition, instrumentality, machine or
other agency, which is dangerous to children or other individuals because of
their inability to appreciate peril and which may reasonably be expected to
attract them.
   4.   Blight means unsafe or unsanitary conditions including, but not limited
to, the accumulation of litter or debris; buildings, accessory improvements and
structures with holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, or rusting; dead,
damaged or uncontrolled plant growth or lack of maintenance; and any other
similar condition of neglect, excessive use, decay, degeneration, disrepair,
deterioration or infestation that constitutes a fire hazard or may have an
adverse effect upon the health and safety of citizens and adjoining properties.
   5.   Building means any structure or part thereof intended to be or actually
used by humans or animals for any purpose, including, but not limited to,
living, sleeping, eating, cooking, sanitation, medical service, business,
government, worship, education, recreation or storage.
   6.   Clean fill means clay, rock, sand or soil which is free of plant
growth, debris and litter.
   7.   Debris means junk, including, but not limited to, lumber, furniture,
furniture parts, cabinets, appliances, sinks, abandoned or neglected equipment,
inoperable motor vehicles or parts thereof, or the remains of something of
little or no apparent economic value.
   8.   Designee means a person appointed in writing by the town manager as
authorized to carry out specific actions to enforce this title. The writing
shall be filed with the town clerk and shall specify the designee's authority.
   9.   Exterior building surfaces means outside walls, roofs, fixtures and
attachments to a building or structure, including, but not limited to, doors,
windows, gutters, down spouts, lights, antennas, satellite dishes, porches,
posts, railings, garages, eaves, trims, patios and chimneys.
   10.   Garbage means any discarded or spoiled animal or plant matter
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of food; and
any other animal or matter subject to rapid decomposition.
   11.   Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, figure, drawing or other
defacement that is written, marked, scratched, drawn, painted or otherwise
affixed to any exterior building surface, unscreened area, accessory
improvement or vehicle.
   12.   Grass means herbage intended to be or actually used for food, fodder
or lawn.
   13.   Infestation means the presence or apparent presence of insects,
rodents, birds, animals or other noxious pests of a kind or in a quantity that
may have an adverse effect upon a building or structure or upon the health and
safety of citizens.
   14.   Inoperable motor vehicle means a vehicle that cannot be driven upon
the public streets for reasons including, but not limited to being unlicensed,
not currently registered, wrecked, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of
being moved under its own power.
   15.   Land means all land in the town and all buildings, structures and
accessory improvements located thereon.
   16.   Landscaped area means an exterior improvement or change of land
through plant growth or natural or artificial topping material such as rocks or
stones, or a combination of plant growth and topping material.
   17.   Landscape waste means any dirt, dust, sand, stones, excavation
material, leaves, landscape clippings, severed plant growth or any other
material resulting from landscape installation or maintenance.
   18.   Leaf blower means any device that generates a stream of air that is
designed or used to move landscape waste or litter.
   19.   Litter means all solid waste including, but not limited to, ashes,
street cleanings, severed plant growth, garbage, dead animals, animal feces,
inoperable motor vehicles or parts thereof, solid commercial and industrial
waste, paper, rags, empty barrels, crates, packing cases, boxes, cartons, wood
shavings, packing material, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, landscape
clippings, leaves, metal, mattresses, bedding, crockery, bottles, cans, glass,
plaster, plastic, asphalt, tile, rock, bricks, clean fill, fill dirt,
excavation material, or other materials tending to create an unsightly
condition and having an adverse effect upon the health and safety of citizens.
   20.   Major Vehicle Repair means the removal from any vehicle of a major
portion thereof including, but not limited to, the differential, transmission,
head, engine block, or oil pan.
   21.   Natural desert means undisturbed, unimproved land with undisturbed
native vegetation.
   22.   Occupant means the person occupying or having custody of a structure
or premise as a lessee or otherwise.
   23.   Owner means any person, agent, firm, partnership, or corporation
having legal or equitable interest in the property, holding title to the
property, or otherwise having control of the property.
   24.   Plant growth means vegetation, whether living or dead, including, but
not limited to, grass, flowers, weeds, vines, bushes, shrubs, cacti or trees.
   25.   Pool means a constructed or excavated exterior area designed to
contain a regular supply of water, including, but not limited to, a swimming
pool, spa, waterfall, pond or other body of water.
   26.   Public place means any town-owned street, sidewalk, alley, easement or
other public way, and any public park, square, space, land or building.
   27.   Public roadway means that part of the street used or intended for use
by the general public for motor vehicles.
   28.   Regularly used in the commission of a crime means one or more law
enforcement agencies have documented three or more complaints alleging criminal
activity in three or fewer consecutive months at the address or location of the
building or land.
   29.   Responsible party means an owner, lessee, mortgagee, property manager,
tenant, or occupant of all specified properties, including buildings, grounds,
lots, or premises.
   30.   Street means the full right-of-way used by the general public for
road, highway, alley, pedestrian walkway or bikeway purposes, whether or not
improved or accepted for maintenance by the town.
   31.   Structure means any item constructed or erected, the use of which
requires a location on the ground or attached to something having a location on
the ground, but not including a vehicle.
   32.   Unscreened means visible from a place reasonably accessible to the
general public or to a person standing on adjacent land.
   33.   Vacant lot means land that has been or has not been disturbed and/or
was previously developed, and may contain structures but does not contain
buildings.
   34.   Vehicle means any device in, upon or by which a person or property is
or may be transported or drawn on a street, including, but not limited to, an
off-road vehicle, an all-terrain vehicle, a dirt bike, a buggy, a trailer, an
aircraft of any kind and a device used exclusively on rails or tracks.
   35.   Watercraft means any device specifically designed for use on water,
including, but not limited to, a boat, canoe, jet ski or pontoon.
   36.   Weed means any uncultivated plant growth, including, but not limited
to, bull thistle, cocklebur, foxtail, horseweed, lambs quarters, London rocket,
mallow, milkweed, pigweed, mustards, prickly lettuce, ragweed, Russian thistle,
tumbleweed, shepherds purse, sowthistle, white horsenettle, willow weed, and
plant growth defined as noxious weeds in state statutes regardless of whether
an owner or occupant regards the plant growth as desirable.
Ordinance 2025.016 amended section 18-1-2 to replace the term “abandoned or
junked vehicle” with “inoperable motor vehicle” and add the terms “occupant”,
“owner”, and “responsible party”, by removing paragraph A.1, inserting
paragraphs A.14, A.22, A.23, and A.29, renumbering the other paragraphs
sequentially, and amending resulting paragraphs A.7 “debris” and A.19 “litter”.
18-1-3 Conflicts and interpretation
A.   Where a provision of this chapter is in conflict with a provision of any
other title of the Town Code existing on the effective date of this title, the
provision which establishes the higher standard for the protection of the
public health and safety shall prevail.
B.   Where two or more provisions of this chapter are in conflict, the
provision which establishes the higher standard for the protection of the
public health and safety shall prevail.
C.   The town manager or designee may render interpretations of this title and
adopt regulations to clarify its provisions. Each interpretation shall be
posted on the town's web site.
18-1-4 Severability
The provisions of this title are severable. If any section, subsection,
sentence or phrase of this title is declared invalid, that declaration shall
not affect the remaining provisions of this title.
CHAPTER 18-2.
PUBLIC NUISANCES
Sections:
18-2-1   Public nuisances
18-2-1 Public nuisances
A.   Except as otherwise permitted by law, each of the following conditions is
a public nuisance on any land or in any building in the town and is unlawful,
when the condition is or may be detrimental to the life, health or safety of
individuals or the public:
   1.   Animal manure that is neither used for fertilizing lawns or gardens nor
securely protected from insects and the elements.
   2.   Putrid, unsound or unwholesome bones, meat, hides, skins, or other
animal parts; dead animals, fish or fowl; butcher's trimmings and offal; waste
vegetation; liquid waste; animal matter, garbage, human or animal excreta,
sewage and other similar offensive substances.
   3.   A dumping ground or other land or building used for depositing litter
or debris, or wrecking, disassembling, rebuilding, repair, storage or
accumulation of three or more vehicles, or of machinery, or parts of vehicles
or machinery.
   4.   Noxious exhalations and other airborne irritations, including, but not
limited to, smoke, soot, dust, fumes or other gases, offensive odors, or other
annoyances.
   5.   Burning litter, debris, sawdust or other material resulting in smoke,
gases, ashes, soot, cinders, sawdust or other material being transported to or
deposited on land or buildings.
   6.   Disposing of litter, debris, sawdust or other material in a manner that
results in its unauthorized deposit on land or buildings.
   7.   An unsecured or abandoned excavation, pit, well, other hole or pool.
   8.   A privy, vault, cesspool, sump, pit, pool, accumulated water or similar
condition that is foul, malodorous, or subject to infestation, pollution or
stagnation.
   9.   An unsecured building that is vacant, abandoned, dilapidated,
structurally unsound, or partially destroyed for more than 48 consecutive
hours.
   10.   An abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other
container that has an attached airtight door or lid, snaplock or other locking
device that may not be released from the inside.
   11.   Plant growth or any other condition, sign, structure, vehicle or
watercraft that obstructs or interferes with or renders dangerous the use or
passage of any public place.
   12.   Plant growth or any other condition, sign, structure, vehicle or
watercraft that obstructs or interferes with sight distance or the visibility
of any traffic control device or sign.
   13.   Plant growth or any other condition that constitutes a fire hazard or
encourages infestation or noxious pests.
   14.   Infestation.
   15.   A building or land regularly used in the commission of a crime.
   16.   Blight.
   17.   Attractive nuisances.
   18.   Graffiti.
CHAPTER 18-3.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Sections:
18-3-1   Litter control
18-3-2   Vehicles and watercraft
18-3-3   Buildings, structures and accessory improvements
18-3-4   Land
18-3-5   Blowing landscape waste
18-3-6   Preservation of natural desert
18-3-7   Dilapidated buildings prohibited
18-3-1 Litter control
A.   No person shall throw, deposit or dump any litter or debris on any land.
B.   A person may store litter and debris in a secure receptacle with a tight
lid for collection if the receptacle is maintained so that litter and debris
are prevented from being blown or deposited on any public place or adjacent
land.
C.   Only as permitted by law, a person may store litter and debris within any
building.
18-3-2 Vehicles and watercraft
A.   An owner and/or occupant of land where an inoperable motor vehicle, or a
vehicle or watercraft being restored or undergoing major repair, is located,
shall store the vehicle and watercraft in an enclosed area so that the vehicle
and watercraft are not visible from any point outside the land. A vehicle or
watercraft with a cover is considered not visible if the cover’s manufactured
use is strictly for covering of vehicles and watercraft, it fits as intended,
and the cover is in good condition without holes, tears, or general disrepair.
B.   Except as otherwise permitted by law, there shall be no more than two
inoperable motor vehicles on any property.
C.   Except as otherwise permitted by law, no person shall display a vehicle or
watercraft for sale on land of another or within the right of way.
D.   No person shall park a vehicle or watercraft on any street or public place
for the principal purpose of washing, greasing, or repairing the vehicle or
watercraft, except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
E.   No person shall park an inoperable motor vehicle on any street or on
public property.
Ordinance 2025.016 amended paragraphs A and B and added paragraph E.
18-3-3 Buildings, structures and accessory improvements
A.   The owner and/or occupant of a building shall maintain all exterior
building surfaces to be free of blight and graffiti.
B.   The owner and/or occupant of land where a structure and/or an accessory
improvement is located shall maintain the accessory improvement free of blight
and graffiti.
18-3-4 Land
A.   The owner and/or occupant of land shall maintain the land free of:
   1.   Blight, garbage, litter or debris;
   2.   Noxious exhalations and other airborne irritations, including, but not
limited to, smoke, soot, dust, fumes or other gases, offensive odors or other
annoyances;
   3.   Plant growth, infestation, and any other condition that encourages
infestation or otherwise adversely affects the health and safety of individuals
or the public; or
   4.   Weeds, grass higher than nine inches, poison oak, and poison ivy; or
plant growth that is dead, dry, uncultivated, or overgrown.
B.   In addition to the requirements of subsection A of this section, the owner
and/or occupant of land shall also maintain the following areas free of grass
higher than nine inches, poison oak, poison ivy, weeds, blight, garbage, litter
and debris: adjacent rights-of-way from the back of the curb or edge of paving
in the street, through the owner's and/or occupant's land, to the centerline of
any adjacent alley or right-of-way, if present.
C.   In addition to the requirements of subsection B of this section, the owner
and/or occupant of a business shall maintain the parking lot, lighting and
landscaped areas adjacent to or surrounding the business in good repair and
free of grass higher than nine inches, weeds, garbage, litter and debris.
D.   The owner and/or occupant of a business that sells or accepts soil,
vegetation, landscape material, trash, recycling or any similar commodity shall
maintain the property entry, exits and adjoining right of way free from debris,
deposits, pollutants and safety hazards.
E.   The owner and/or occupant of land that has been subject to dumping on more
than one occasion shall take measures to secure the land to prevent future
dumping. The measures may include erecting a fence, constructing a ditch and
berm, or placing four-foot high posts at four-foot intervals. Any measures
under this subsection shall be taken only in conformance with required permits.
F.   Except as otherwise permitted by law and by the landowner in writing, no
person shall place clean fill or fill dirt on land of another.
G.   The owner and/or occupant of land where a pool is located shall maintain
the pool to avoid health or safety hazards, infestation, pollution, stagnation
and blight.
H.   Agricultural activities regulated by state law are excluded from this
section.
Ordinance 2025.016 amended paragraphs A.3 and A.4 for clarification.
18-3-5 Blowing landscape waste
Use of a leaf blower shall be limited to blowing landscape waste on the user's
property and shall not result in landscape waste being blown into the public
roadway or another's property.
18-3-6 Preservation of natural desert
A.   The purpose of this section is to recognize that preservation of the
unique natural desert in limited areas of the town promotes the health and
safety of the citizens of the town.
B.   Except for a condition that is a public nuisance as set forth in section
18-2-1, the property maintenance standards that require the owner and/or
occupant of land to maintain the land free of the plant growth set forth in
subsections
18-3-4 A.4 and B shall not apply to:
   1.   Natural desert within public places.
   2.   Natural desert within natural area open space as established in
conformance with the town Land Development Code.
   3.   Natural desert areas within state-owned land.
   4.   Natural desert that has never been graded or disturbed.
18-3-7 Dilapidated buildings prohibited
Each owner, lessee, tenant, resident or occupant shall maintain a property so
that it is free of dilapidated buildings. Dilapidated building means any real
property structure that is likely to burn or collapse and its condition
endangers the life, health, safety or property of the public, and includes, but
is not limited to, a building that is abandoned, inadequately maintained, in
disrepair, neglected, vandalized, constructed in a faulty manner, not of
sufficient strength or stability, not anchored, attached or fastened in place
to an adequate supporting foundation, unsecured or in a state of deterioration.
CHAPTER 18-4.
ADDITIONAL VIOLATIONS
Sections:
18-4-1   Additional violations
18-4-2   Barbed wire, razor wire, razor ribbon, concertina wire, electrified
fencing or similar features prohibited; exceptions
18-4-3   Each day separate violation
18-4-1 Additional violations
A.   No person shall create, maintain or permit a public nuisance as defined in
section
18-2-1 above.
B.   No person shall create, maintain, permit or assist any violation of this
title, or fail to perform any act or duty required by this title.
C.   No person shall interfere or attempt to interfere with a town agent
investigating or abating a violation of this title.
D.   No person shall knowingly make a false statement or knowingly mislead a
town agent investigating or abating a violation of this title.
E.   No person shall place any personal property, materials, goods, wares,
merchandise or similar items of any kind in or upon any public street,
sidewalk, alleyway or right-of-way. Items placed by or approved by the Town are
exempt from this subsection, including:
   1.   Portable basketball hoops, goalie nets, and similar items, during the
actual time they are in use within residential areas.
   2.   Trash and recycling receptacles properly placed for collection in the
following manner:
      a.   Where curbing exists, containers shall be placed on the street with
the wheels against the curb.
      b.   In all other locations, containers shall be placed within two feet
of the street in a manner that does not obstruct or otherwise impede access to
any sidewalk.
18-4-2 Barbed wire, razor wire, razor ribbon, concertina wire, electrified
fencing or similar features prohibited; exceptions
A.   The use as a fence or wall, either in whole or part, of barbed wire, razor
wire, razor ribbon, concertina wire, electrified fencing or similar features is
prohibited on all residentially zoned land throughout the town.
B.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section and unless
otherwise prohibited by law, barbed wire and electrified fencing used to
control livestock that complies with Arizona Game and Fish Department
guidelines for Wildlife Compatible Fencing that does not exceed Town of Marana
fencing height standards is permitted within any residential district that
meets the criteria established for the keeping of livestock.
C.   For the purposes of this section, livestock has the same meaning as
defined in A.R.S. § 3-1201.
18-4-3 Each day separate violation
Each day any violation of any provision of this title or the failure to perform
any act or duty required by this title continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
CHAPTER 18-5.
ENFORCEMENT
Sections:
18-5-1   Authority
18-5-2   Presumptions
18-5-3   Enforcement options
18-5-4   Misdemeanor violations
18-5-5   Inspections
18-5-6   Voluntary compliance
18-5-7   Corrective action plans
18-5-8   Civil complaints
18-5-9   Civil complaints; court appearance or failure to appear
18-5-10   Authority to issue criminal complaints
18-5-11   Jurisdiction and procedure of municipal court
18-5-12   Procedure for abatement petitions filed in municipal court
18-5-13   Procedure for emergency abatement petitions filed in municipal court
18-5-14   Civil penalties
18-5-15   Criminal penalties
18-5-16   Additional fees
18-5-17   Notice to abate
18-5-18   Service of notice to abate
18-5-19   Effect of notice to abate
18-5-20   Town may abate
18-5-21   Town assessment for abatement
18-5-22   Assessment lien
18-5-23   Emergency abatement
18-5-24   Notice to abate; abatement regarding criminal activity
18-5-25   Town may abate or bring action; abatement regarding criminal activity
18-5-26   Town recordation of action
18-5-27   Assessment for abatement regarding criminal activity
18-5-28   Declaration of structure unfit for human habitation
18-5-1 Authority
The town manager or designee, town attorney, code enforcement officers and
Marana police officers shall enforce this title.
18-5-2 Presumptions
A.   The owner of land, as recorded in the Pima County Recorder's Office, is
presumed to have control over the land and buildings and accessory improvements
on the land. If more than one person is recorded as the owner of land, all
persons on record are presumed to have joint and separable control over the
land and buildings and accessory improvements on the land. The occupant
residing or operating a business on land or in a building is presumed to have
control over the building and land on which it is located. These presumptions
shall not prevent the enforcement of this chapter against persons other than
record owners, to include lessees, tenants and occupants.
B.   Under the state statutes regarding criminal nuisance, the owner,
leaseholder or person with legal privilege to control land, shall be deemed to
have notice of the criminal nuisance as set forth in the state statutes.
C.   All presumptions are rebuttable.
18-5-3 Enforcement options
A.   The town, its officers and employees may enforce this title by one or more
lawful means, including but not limited to, voluntary compliance,
administrative and civil consent orders, civil enforcement, including
injunctive action, criminal enforcement and abatement by administrative
procedure, emergency abatement and abatement regarding criminal activity. The
town may also require restitution and additional fees. The town may immediately
remove any hazardous item, structure or sign from any street or public place.
One type of enforcement neither limits nor precludes the town from pursuing any
other type of enforcement.
B.   A violation of this title is in addition to any other violation of the
Town Code. Enforcement of a violation of this title in no way limits
enforcement of any other violation of the Town Code or of state statutes.
18-5-4 Misdemeanor violations
Notwithstanding the provisions of section
18-5-3, a violation of this title may only be deemed a class one misdemeanor if
the violation is:
A.   The second or subsequent public nuisance as defined in section
18-2-1; or
B.   The second or subsequent violation of any other section within two years
of the first violation.
18-5-5 Inspections
A.   The town manager or designee, code enforcement officers or Marana police
officers may inspect buildings or land to determine compliance with this title.
B.   Building exteriors and unscreened land may be inspected at any time with
or without the presence of the owner or occupant in conformance with legal
requirements governing administrative inspections of buildings and land.
C.   Except in a situation presenting an imminent hazard to life, health or
public safety, building interiors and screened land shall be inspected during
the normal business hours of the town, unless otherwise arranged, upon:
   1.   The owner's or occupant's consent; or
   2.   Any administrative or court order.
18-5-6 Voluntary compliance
The town manager or designee, code enforcement officers or Marana police
officers may seek voluntary compliance with this title through warnings,
notices, compliance orders, or other means to achieve efficient and effective
compliance.
18-5-7 Corrective action plans
The town may enter into a written corrective action plan, signed by the town
manager or a code supervisor, with a person accused of violating this title.
The corrective action plan may be enforced as a contract is enforced or by any
other lawful means, including the issuance of a citation at the expiration of
the time given in the plan.
18-5-8 Civil complaints
A.   The town manager or designee, code enforcement officers, the town attorney
and Marana police officers may bring civil complaints under this title.
B.   The complaint shall include a written description and statutory
designation of the violation(s).
C.   The town shall attempt to hand deliver the civil citation to the person
accused of violating this Code. If the town is unable to hand deliver the civil
citation, the town may serve it by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, or by any means allowed by the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure, to
include alternative service methods approved by the court. If the town sends a
citation via certified or registered mail, an additional copy must also be sent
by regular mail.
D.   The citation is deemed served on the date it is hand delivered or, if
mailed, on the date of signature on the return receipt.
18-5-9 Civil complaints; court appearance or failure to appear
A.   On the date specified in the complaint, the defendant shall appear in
municipal court in person or through an attorney. The defendant shall admit or
deny the allegations in the complaint. If the defendant admits the allegations,
the court shall enter judgement against the defendant and impose the civil
penalties set forth in section
18-5-14 below, and require additional fees pursuant to
18-5-16 below. If the defendant denies the allegations, the court shall set the
matter for hearing.
B.   If a defendant served with a complaint fails to appear on the date
specified in the complaint, or fails to appear at the hearing set by the court,
the allegations in the complaint are deemed admitted. The court shall enter
judgement against the defendant and impose the civil penalties set forth in
section
18-5-14 below, and require additional fees pursuant to
18-5-16 below.
18-5-10 Authority to issue criminal complaints
A Marana police officer may issue a criminal citation or the town attorney may
bring criminal complaints under this title.
18-5-11 Jurisdiction and procedure of municipal court
A.   The municipal court has jurisdiction over all civil complaints, town
petitions for abatements including emergency abatements and all criminal
citations to enforce this title.
B.   The municipal court shall follow the Arizona Rules of Court for Civil
Traffic Violation Cases for civil complaints to enforce this title, except as
modified or where inconsistent with this title, local rules of the court, or
rules of the Arizona Supreme Court.
C.   The municipal court shall follow the Arizona Rules of Criminal Procedure
for criminal actions to enforce this title.
D.   The municipal court may order abatements to enforce this title either upon
petition from the town attorney or incidental to a hearing on a civil or
criminal violation of this title when requested by the town.
18-5-12 Procedure for abatement petitions filed in municipal court
A.   After notice to the owner and any responsible party, the judge shall
conduct a hearing. Both the town and defendant(s) shall have an opportunity to
be heard and present evidence. The rules of evidence shall not apply to these
hearings but the judge may make rulings on the conduct of these hearings to
ensure that they proceed in an orderly and efficient manner. The judge shall
determine whether a violation of this title exists and order an abatement of
the violation as appropriate in accordance with subsection B of this section.
The court's determination shall be based on a preponderance of the evidence. If
a defendant fails to appear for a hearing, the court shall hold the hearing in
the defendant's absence. If the town fails to appear for a hearing, the court
shall dismiss the petition without prejudice.
B.   Upon finding that abatement is appropriate, the court may order
demolition, board-up, cleanup, inspection or any other action the court deems
reasonably necessary to abate the violation.
C.   Demolition of a structure shall only be ordered following issuance of
notice as required by subsection A of this section to the owner and any
responsible parties with an interest in the property that is recorded in the
office of the county recorder and in accordance with this title. Notice to the
interested parties may be recorded against the property.
D.   The reasonable costs of any abatement permitted by the court's order shall
be the responsibility of the owner and may be assessed and recorded as provided
in sections
18-5-21 and
18-5-22.
E.   The notice required in subsection A shall generally comply with Rule 4 of
the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure, except that upon petition by the town
attorney the court may, upon a finding of good cause, deem the notice
requirement satisfied by notice being posted in a conspicuous location on the
subject property.
F.   The provisions of
chapter 18-6 of this title do not apply to abatements brought under this
section.
18-5-13 Procedure for emergency abatement petitions filed in municipal court
A.   If a violation of this title presents an imminent hazard to life, health
or public safety, the court may immediately consider and grant emergency
abatement orders brought on behalf of the town by the town attorney.
B.   Notice of the abatement petition and order shall be posted on the property
in accordance with subsection
18-5-23 B.3.
C.   The provisions of
chapter 18-6 of this title and subsection
18-5-23 E do not apply to abatements brought under this section.
18-5-14 Civil penalties
A.   The civil penalty may be determined by the court, by plea agreement, or by
stipulation. The court shall also impose all other fees and surcharges
applicable under state statutes and Titles 5 and 18 of the town code, including
section
18-5-16.
B.   On proper evidence that the violation(s) has been corrected and the
defendant is in compliance with this title at the time of the hearing, the
penalties may be reduced.
18-5-15 Criminal penalties
A.   The criminal penalty may be determined by the court, by plea agreement, or
by stipulation. The court shall also impose all other fees and surcharges
applicable under state statutes and Titles 5 and 18 of the town code, including
section
18-5-16.
B.   On proper evidence that the violation(s) has been corrected and the
defendant is in compliance with this title at the time of the hearing, the
penalties may be reduced.
18-5-16 Additional fees
In addition to the penalties of sections
18-5-14 and
18-5-15, the court shall, as part of its sentence, impose all costs of
abatement to compensate the town for its costs to bring a building or land into
compliance with this title. Additionally, the court may impose inspection
costs, court costs and prosecution costs.
18-5-17 Notice to abate
A.   If, after an inspection, the town finds one or more violations of this
title, the town may require correction of the violation(s). If the town
requires correction, the town may issue a notice to abate to the owner, the
owner's authorized agent or the owner's statutory agent, and the occupant or
lessee.
B.   The notice to abate shall be in writing and shall set forth:
   1.   The identification of the land where the violation is located, by legal
description, including the street address, if known, or by book, map and parcel
number, if the street address is unknown.
   2.   A statement of the violation(s) in sufficient detail to allow a
reasonable person to identify and correct the violation(s).
   3.   The date by which the owner, the owner's authorized agent, the owner's
statutory agent, the occupant or lessee shall correct the violation, which date
shall not be less than 30 days from service of the notice.
   4.   The name and phone number of the inspector who sent the notice.
   5.   The estimated cost of abatement to the town.
   6.   If the violation(s) is not corrected by the date specified for
abatement, the town may abate the violation(s), assess the owner, occupant and/
or the lessee the cost of abatement, and record a lien on the land for the
assessment.
   7.   The appeal procedures, if any.
18-5-18 Service of notice to abate
A notice to abate shall be served by any of the following methods:
A.   By hand delivering a copy of the notice to abate to the owner, the owner's
authorized agent or the owner's statutory agent, and the occupant or lessee.
B.   By mailing a copy of the notice to abate, by certified mail, to the owner,
the owner's authorized agent or the owner's statutory agent, and the occupant
or lessee at the last known address and at the address to which the tax bill
for the land was last mailed.
C.   The notice to abate is deemed served on the date it is hand delivered or,
if mailed, on the date it is deposited in the United States mail.
18-5-19 Effect of notice to abate
A.   A notice to abate is effective upon any person served in conformance with
section
18-5-18 or section
18-5-23 and any person with actual notice.
B.   A notice to abate runs with the land.
C.   The town may record a notice to abate in the Pima County Recorder's
Office.
18-5-20 Town may abate
If the owner, occupant or lessee subject to the notice to abate fails to
correct the violation(s), the town may:
A.   Abate the violation(s),
B.   Assess the owner, occupant and/or the lessee the cost of abatement, and
C.   Record a lien on the land for the assessment.
18-5-21 Town assessment for abatement
A.   Following abatement, the town shall prepare a statement of the cost of
abating the violation of this chapter.
B.   The statement shall be mailed to the owner, the owner's statutory agent,
the occupant and lessee at the address used to serve the notice to abate.
C.   The statement shall set forth:
   1.   The statement of cost is an assessment upon the land from which the
town abated the violation.
   2.   The payment of the statement of cost shall be made by the date
specified in the statement of cost.
   3.   If payment is not made by the date specified in the statement of cost,
the town shall place a lien on the land in the amount of the statement.
   4.   The appeal procedures, if any.
18-5-22 Assessment lien
A.   The town's statement of cost under section
18-5-21 above shall be:
   1.   An assessment on the land from which the town abated the violation(s),
and
   2.   Collected at the same time and in the same manner as other town
assessments are collected.
B.   The town shall record the assessment in the Pima County Recorder's Office.
From the date of its recording, the assessment shall be a lien on the land.
C.   The lien shall be inferior only to general tax liens.
D.   After recording the lien, the town may institute an action to enforce the
lien in the Superior Court for Pima County. The recorded assessment is prima
facie evidence of the truth of all matters recited in the assessment and the
regularity of all proceedings before the recordation. Upon judgement of
foreclosure and order of sale, the town shall sell the land to satisfy the
lien.
E.   A prior assessment under this section is not a bar to a later assessment.
Any number of liens on the same land may be enforced in the same action.
F.   Failure to enforce the lien shall not affect its validity.
18-5-23 Emergency abatement
A.   If a violation of this title presents an imminent hazard to life, health
or public safety, the town may notify the owner, the owner's authorized agent,
the owner's statutory agent, occupant or person responsible for the violation
to correct the violation immediately or the town may abate the violation.
B.   A notice for emergency abatement may be written, oral or electronic. A
written notice shall be served by any of the following methods:
   1.   By hand delivering a copy of the notice to the owner, the owner's
authorized agent, the owner's statutory agent, occupant, lessee and/or person
responsible for the violation, or
   2.   By mailing a copy of the notice to the owner, the owner's authorized
agent, the owner's statutory agent, occupant, lessee and/or person responsible
for the violation at the last known address, or
   3.   By prominently posting a copy of the notice on the building, accessory
improvement, land or vehicle in violation.
C.   Written notice is deemed served on the date it is hand delivered, or if
mailed, on the date it is deposited in the United States mail, or the date it
is posted.
D.   Whether or not notice is served, the town may abate the violation.
E.   Upon request, the owner, the owner's authorized agent, the owner's
statutory agent, occupant, lessee or person responsible for a violation that
presents an imminent hazard to life, health or public safety, shall be granted
a hearing before the board of adjustment appointed pursuant to
chapter 18-6 of this title, but the appeal shall not stay the town's abatement
of the violation.
F.   The effect of a notice for emergency abatement under this section shall be
as set forth for a notice of abate in section
18-5-19 above.
G.   The town may assess the owner, occupant or person responsible for a
violation for the cost of any emergency abatement by any means authorized by
law.
18-5-24 Notice to abate; abatement regarding criminal activity
A.   If the town finds that a building or land is regularly used in the
commission of a crime, the town shall issue a notice to abate to the owner, the
owner's managing agent, the occupant and any other person responsible for the
use of the building or land for criminal activity.
B.   The notice to abate shall be in substantial conformance with the state
statutes. The notice to abate may contain the date by which the owner, the
owner's managing agent, the occupant, and other person responsible for the use
of the building or land for criminal activity, shall correct the violation,
which date shall not be less than 30 days from the service of the notice.
C.   The service of the notice to abate shall be in conformance with the state
statutes.
D.   The notice to abate is deemed served on the date it is hand delivered or,
if mailed, on the date it is deposited in the United States mail.
18-5-25 Town may abate or bring action; abatement regarding criminal activity
A.   If the owner, the owner's managing agent or any other person responsible
for the use of the building or land for criminal activity fails to correct the
nuisance, the town may:
   1.   Abate the use of the building or land for criminal activity.
   2.   Bring an action in superior court to abate the use of the building or
land for criminal activity.
B.   If the court enters a temporary restraining order, the town shall serve
upon the defendant(s), any applicable statutory agent, and any legal occupant
the town believes may claim an interest in the building or land:
   1.   Notice of the entry of the temporary restraining order;
   2.   Copies of the temporary restraining order and the complaint; and
   3.   Notice of the possibility for a hearing, which shall be in substantial
conformance with the state statutes.
C.   The service of the documents set forth in subsection B of this section
shall be in conformance with state statutes.
18-5-26 Town recordation of action
A.   If the town brings an action to abate the use of a building or land for
criminal activity, the town shall file a notice of the action in the Pima
County Recorder's Office.
B.   The notice shall be in conformance with state statutes.
18-5-27 Assessment for abatement regarding criminal activity
A.   The court may assess the owner for the cost of abating the nuisance.
B.   The town shall record the assessment in the Pima County Recorder's Office.
From the date of its recording, the assessment shall be a lien on the land.
C.   The lien shall be inferior only to general tax liens, child support liens,
restitution liens and prior recorded mortgages.
D.   The town may enforce the lien as set forth in subsections D, E, and F of
section
18-5-22.
18-5-28 Declaration of structure unfit for human habitation
If a structure presents an imminent hazard to life, health or public safety,
the town may declare the structure unfit for human habitation, and order it to
be vacated.
CHAPTER 18-6.
APPEALS
Sections:
18-6-1   Board of adjustment; authority and filing
18-6-2   Hearing procedure
18-6-3   Time extensions
18-6-4   Appeal from decision of the board of adjustment
18-6-1 Board of adjustment; authority and filing
A.   The board of adjustment shall hear and decide:
   1.   Appeals to an interpretation of this title by the town manager or
designee and posted on the town's web site.
   2.   Appeals to a notice of an administrative abatement, a notice to vacate
or an assessment.
B.   A request for a time extension or an appeal shall be in writing and shall
be filed with the town clerk within ten days of the date of, as applicable:
   1.   The interpretation's posting on the town's web site; or
   2.   The notice to abate, the notice to vacate, or the assessment.
C.   If a person fails to request a time extension or appeal within ten days,
the failure constitutes:
   1.   A waiver of the right to a hearing; and
   2.   An admission of the validity of the notice or assessment.
D.   The request for a time extension shall specify what time extension is
necessary and reasonable.
E.   The appeal shall specify why:
   1.   The land or building subject to the notice is not in violation of this
chapter;
   2.   The interpretation is incorrect; or
   3.   The assessment is excessive.
F.   A fee of $25.00 dollars shall accompany the request or appeal. In case of
financial hardship, the fee may be suspended until the board of adjustment
renders the decision. The board of adjustment may waive the fee upon a finding
of financial hardship.
18-6-2 Hearing procedure
A.   The board of adjustment shall set a date for hearing on the request or
appeal within 15 days of the town clerk's receipt of the request or appeal.
B.   The hearing shall be informal and without a jury, except that testimony
shall be given under oath or affirmation. The technical rules of evidence do
not apply, except for the statutory provisions relating to privileged
communications. The board of adjustment may make orders to fairly and
efficiently determine the truth and decide the case. The burden of proof at the
hearing shall be on the town by a preponderance of the evidence.
C.   The board of adjustment shall:
   1.   Render a decision within 15 days of the hearing.
   2.   Prepare findings and a decision.
   3.   Mail the findings and decision to all the parties to the request or
appeal, by certified mail unless at the conclusion of the hearing a decision is
rendered and communicated to the parties.
D.   Rule 7 of the Arizona Rules of Procedure in civil traffic violation cases
shall govern requests for recusal of the hearing officer.
E.   Rules 12 and 13 of the Arizona Rules of Procedure in civil traffic
violation cases shall govern representation by counsel in these proceedings.
18-6-3 Time extensions
A.   The board of adjustment may grant one extension of the time set forth in
an administrative notice to abate under this title. The extension shall not
exceed 90 days after the date of the hearing.
B.   The board of adjustment shall grant an extension only where it finds:
   1.   A hardship in bringing the land into compliance within the time set
forth in the notice to abate; and
   2.   A reasonable plan by which the land will be brought into compliance
within the time extension.
C.   The extension granted by the board of adjustment shall run from the date
the board of adjustment mails the findings and decision as set forth in section
18-6-2 above.
18-6-4 Appeal from decision of the board of adjustment
A party aggrieved by the board of adjustment's decision may appeal to superior
court. An appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the date of the board of
adjustment's decision or shall be waived.
APPENDIX. TABLE OF REVISIONS
This appendix was added for administrative tracking purposes on February 17,
2006
Ordinance Adopted Effective Description
Ordinance Adopted Effective Description
2006.01   2-17-   2-17-2006 Added chapter 9-11 (methamphetamine ordinance)
          2006
N/A       N/A     2-17-2006 February 17, 2006 scrivener s correction renumbered sections 15-1-8 and 15-1-9 under the
                            authority of Ordinance 2005.22, confirmed by Ordinance 2008.16
2006.04   3-7-    4-7-2006  Added chapter 10-6 (smoking ordinance); moved former chapter 10-6 to chapter 10-7
          2006
2006.08   4-4-    4-4-2006  Revised section 5-6-1 (municipal court fees)
          2006
2006.14   6-6-    6-6-2006  Revised chapters 3-1 and 3-2 (adding and revising various town officer positions)
          2006
2006.15   6-6-    7-7-2006  Revised section 5-2-3 (hearing officers) and added chapter 5-7 (civil town code
          2006              violation enforcement)
2006.16   6-6-    7-7-2006  Building codes update ordinance (various title 7 revisions)
          2006
2006.21   7-11-   7-11-2006 Amended the animal code by revising sections 6-1-2 and 6-8-2 and replacing chapters 6-
          2006              2 and 6-3
                            Amended chapter 2-6 (special and standing boards, commissions and committees) by
2006.25   9-5-    9-5-2006  revising section 2-6-1 and replacing section 2-6-2 with new sections 2-6-2 through 2-6-
          2006              5 and deleted chapter 2-7 (special committees), chapter 2-8 (planning and zoning
                            commission) and chapter 2-9 (board of adjustment)
                            Amended title 12 (traffic) by revising section 12-2-11 (speed limits) to remove specific
                            roadway segments from the town code and replace them with a separate speed limit map and
2006.31   11-7-   12-7-2006 table, rewriting chapter 12-3 (parking) to prohibit parking within right-of-way to
          2006              display vehicles or goods for sale and to align town and state parking regulations, and
                            revising and moving the various penalty provisions so that they appear within the
                            chapter to which they apply
2006.33   12-5-   1-5-2007  Amended section 7-1-2 to adopt by reference new (in most cases the 2006) versions of
          2006              various national codes, with local amendments
2007.04   3-6-    5-1-2007  Deleted chapter 10-6 and section 10-7-5 (smoking ordinance)
          2007
2007.05   3-20-   3-20-2007 Added section 4-1-8 (public safety employee organization meet and confer)
          2007
2007.11   5-1-    7-1-2007  Added chapter 5-8 (home detention ordinance)
          2007
2007.12   5-1-    7-1-2007  Added section 5-6-2 (probation monitoring fees)
          2007
2007.13   5-1-    6-1-2007  Amended various animal code fees and penalties in sections 6-2-8, 6-2-9, 6-2-12 and 6-5-
          2007              2
2007.14   6-5-    6-5-2007  Added dog waste removal time limit in section 6-3-5(B)
          2007
2007.15   6-5-    6-5-2007  Revised park firearm regulations in section 13-1-3 and penalties in section 13-1-4
          2007
2007.18   8-7-    9-7-2007  Added chapter 10-6 (special events permit)
          2007
2007.21   9-4-    9-4-2007  Revised municipal court prosecution and court improvement fees (section 5-6-1(B)(2) and
          2007              (4))
          9-18-             Revised section 7-1-2(A)(8) to adopt the 2006 international fire code, with local
2007.22   2007    9-18-2007 amendments, and changed all title 7 occurrences of building department to building
                            safety department
                            September 18, 2007 scrivener s correction changed building department to building safety
N/A       N/A     9-18-2007 department in sections 9-6-5(B), 9-6-6(E)(6) and 9-6-8(A) to conform to Ordinance
                            2007.22, under the authority of Ordinance 2005.22, confirmed by Ordinance 2008.16
2007.31   12-18-  12-18-    Revised various water service fees in sections 14-6-2, 14-7-2, 14-7-3 and 14-9-15
          2007    2007
                            Revised chapters 5-2 and 5-3 to place administrative control of the municipal court
2007.32   12-18-  12-18-    under the town magistrate, added class 1 before misdemeanor in sections 5-7-4(B) and 5-
          2007    2007      7-11, and conformed all inconsistent references to the court throughout the town code to
                            municipal court
2008.04   1-22-   1-22-2008 Changed the name of title 12 from traffic to traffic and highways and added chapter 12-
          2008              7 (construction in town rights-of-way)
2008.08   3-4-    3-4-2008  Added section 12-2-12 (speed limits in areas undergoing roadway construction) and
          2008              revised section 12-2-15 (penalties)
2008.11   5-20-   6-20-2008 Added chapter 12-8 (solicitation of employment, business or contributions from occupants
          2008              of vehicles traveling on town streets or highways)
2008.15   7-1-    7-1-2008  Revised boards and commissions requirements in section 2-6-2 (application,
          2008              recommendation, appointment and removal) and section 2-6-3 (terms of office)
2008.16   8-5-    9-4-2008  Amended the title of chapter 1-4 and added section 1-4-5, authorizing the town attorney
          2008              and town clerk to correct scrivener s errors
2008.17   8-5-    9-5-2008  Increased certain dog license fees in sections 6-2-8, 6-2-9, and 6-2-12
          2008
2008.18   8-12-   8-12-2008 Adopted the 2008 Marana outdoor lighting code, referenced in section 7-1-2 (building
          2008              codes adopted)
2008.19   8-12-   8-12-2008 Revised title 3 by amending and adding certain employee positions, amending section 3-1-
          2008              2, 3-1-3, and 3-1-4, and adding sections 3-2-11, 3-2-12, and 3-2-13
                            September 4, 2008 scrivener s error correction revised the cross-reference in section
N/A       N/A     9-4-2008  12-2-15 (penalties), which had been renumbered by Ordinance 2008.08, under the authority
                            of town code section 1-4-5
N/A       N/A     9-19-2008 September 19, 2008 scrivener s error correction to section 10-2-4, deleting a wayward
                            reference to section 10-4-2, under the authority of town code section 1-4-5
2009.03   2-24-   3-27-2009 Amended section 14-7-1 to revise water base fees and consumption rates
          2009
2009.04   3-3-    3-3-2009  Adopted chapter 11-8 (leaving a child under the age of eight years unattended in a motor
          2009              vehicle) and renumbered existing chapters 11-8 and 11-9
                            April 30, 2009 scrivener s error correction to section 11-5-2, deleting a wayward
N/A       N/A     4-30-2009 reference to section 11-8-2 and correcting it to refer to section 11-9-2, under the
                            authority of town code section 1-4-5
2009.10   6-2-    6-2-2009  Amended section 2-3-1 (vice mayor) to expand the time for selection from 20 days to June
          2009              30 following the date of the general election
                            Replaced specifically-stated fees throughout the town code with references to the
2009.11   6-9-    7-10-2009 separately-adopted comprehensive fee schedule, modifying sections 5-6-1, 6-2-8, 6-2-9,
          2009              6-2-12, 9-1-3, 9-2-8, 9-6-7, 9-7-2, 10-5-3, 12-5-3, 14-5-2, 14-6-2, 14-6-6, 14-6-11, 14-
                            6-12, 14-7-1, 14-7-2, 14-7-3, 14-8-8, 14-9-14, and 14-9-15
2009.13   6-23-   7-10-2009 Corrected the last sentence of section 14-7-3 (C)
          2009
                            Transferred licensing duties from the town clerk to the license inspector by deleting
                            the word clerk from sections 9-1-1 (A), 9-1-2 (B), 9-1-5 (B), 9-1-10 (A), 9-2-6 (B), 9-
          6-23-             2-8 (B), 9-6-2 (L), and 9-6-5 (E)(10); replacing town clerk with license inspector in
2009.14   2009    6-23-2009 sections 9-1-1 (C)(3), 9-1-2 (A), 9-1-3 (D), 9-1-3 (G), 9-1-10 (D), 9-1-12, 9-2-2 (A),
                            9-2-4, 9-2-6 (A), 9-2-8 (C), 9-2-8 (F), 9-2-9, 9-2-11, 9-2-12 (A), 9-2-12 (C), 9-6-5
                            (A), 9-6-5 (F), 9-6-6, 9-6-10, 9-6-12, 9-6-14, 9-6-15, 9-6-16, and 9-6-21; and amending
                            sections 9-1-6 and 9-1-10 (C).
2009.15   7-21-   8-21-2009 Prohibited smoking in certain town park areas by adding subparagraph 18 to section 13-1-
          2009              3.
2009.18   8-4-    8-4-2009  Revised the provisions relating to board, commission and committee appointments and
          2009              terms of office by amending sections 2-6-2 and 2-6-3.
          12-1-             Amended section 4-1-4 ( Departmental rules and regulations) by deleting the requirement
2009.24   2009    12-1-2009 for town council approval and by adding the last two sentences, relating to compliance
                            with federal, state, and town ordinances and regulations.
N/A       N/A     1-5-2010  January 5, 2010 scrivener s error correction to section 11-5-4 (I), correcting a wayward
                            cross-reference, under the authority of town code section 1-4-5
2009.25   12-15-  12-15-    Corrected the licensing duties revisions made by Ordinance 2009.14 in sections 9-1-5, 9-
          2009    2009      6-11, and 9-6-12
2010.01   1-5-    2-5-2010  Added chapter 1-9 ( Code compliance )
          2010
2010.02   1-5-    2-5-2010  Revised chapter 5-7 relating to the municipal court procedures and sanctions for civil
          2010              violations of the town code
                            March 31, 2010 scrivener s error correction to the numbering of sections5-7-7 through 5-
N/A       N/A     3-31-2010 7-11 as inadvertently renumbered by Ordinance 2010.02, under the authority of town code
                            section 1-4-5
          5-4-              Revised section 2-5-5 ( Effective date of ordinances, resolutions and franchises ) by
2010.06   2010    6-4-2010  amending the title and adding which is subject to voter referendum in the first sentence
                            of paragraph A
N/A       N/A     5-17-2010 May 17, 2010 scrivener s error correction to the cross-referencing in sections 11-10-4
                            (A) and (A) (1) and 11-10-5 (A), under the authority of town code section 1-4-5
                            July 12, 2010 scrivener s revisions to entire code to use automatic numbering for
N/A       N/A     7-12-2010 sections and automatic cross-referencing. The word Section was deleted from the title of
                            each section, and subsection cross-reference formats were standardized. Standardizations
                            by authority of town code section 1-4-5
          7-20-             Revised section 13-1-3 (use and occupancy rules and regulations) by deleting the
2010.09   2010    7-20-2010 prohibition against carrying firearms in parks and making other revisions to conform to
                            Laws 2010 chapter 19
2010.10   7-20-   8-20-2010 Added chapter 13-2 (fingerprinting and criminal history records checks of parks and
          2010              recreation personnel and volunteers)
          8-3-              Revised paragraph B of section 9-1-3 (fees; payment; term of licenses; annual renewal
2010.13   2010    9-2-2010  required) to clarify that fees must be paid to the town for all applications to the
                            Arizona department of liquor licenses and control
2010.14   8-17-   8-17-2010 Revised section 5-2-1 (town magistrate) to provide for the appointment of the magistrate
          2010              for a two year term beginning on the date of appointment
2011.01   2-15-   3-18-2011 Added chapter 9-4 (massage establishments)
          2011
                            Amended various sections in chapters 3-1 and 3-2, revising positions appointed by,
2011.03   2-15-   2-15-2011 removed by and reporting to the town manager, deputy town manager, assistant town
          2011              manager, and general manager; updating responsibilities; renaming special projects
                            administrator to manager; and adding the position of director of strategic initiatives
2011.08   3-1-    3-1-2011  Amended section 2-4-1 (regular and special council meetings) to include procedures to
          2011              cancel and add council meetings as necessary
2011.09   3-15-   4-15-2011 Amended chapter 10-5 (fireworks) to add definitions and describe prohibited and
          2011              permitted activities to conform to state law
N/A       N/A     3-24-2011 March 24, 2011 scrivener s revisions to the numbering within sections 9-4-2 and 9-4-20
                            by authority of town code section 1-4-5
                            March 24, 2011 scrivener s revisions to the capitalization in the portions of section 2-
N/A       N/A     3-24-2011 4-1 paragraph A added by Ordinance 2011.08 to conform to the stylistic conventions
                            adopted by Ordinance 2005.22, by authority of town code section 1-4-5
2011.14   6-21-   6-21-2011 Deleted police commander from the unclassified service list in section 3-1-3, deleted
          2011              section 3-2-13 (police commander), and renumbered the following section to conform
2011.17   7-19-   8-19-2011 Amended town code title 8, the Marana tax code, to add the 2010-2011 amendments
          2011
                            Adopted massage establishments revisions; amended sections 9-4-2, 9-4-3, 9-4-6, 9-4-7,
2011.22   9-6-    9-6-2011  9-4-8, 9-4-9, 9-4-12, 9-4-13, and 9-4-14; added section 9-4-15; and amended and
          2011              renumbered sections 9-4-16 and 19; and renumbered sections 9-4-17, 9-4-18, 9-4-20, 9-4-
                            21, 9-4-22, 9-4-23, and 9-4-24 to conform
2011.24   9-6-    10-7-2011 Comprehensively revised title 14 to include water and wastewater utilities, and renamed
          2011              it from water to utilities
2011.25   9-20-   10-21-    Revised section 2-2-6 D. 3 to change the deadline for submission of ballot arguments to
          2011    2011      conform to A.R.S. 19-141 (C)
2011.26   11-1-   12-1-2011 Amended sections 6-1-2, 6-2-8, 6-2-10, 6-3-1, 6-3-2, 6-4-1, 6-4-2, and 6-4-4, and added
          2011              section 6-4-3, relating to animal control
2011.28   11-15-  11-15-    Amended section 2-6-3, relating to terms of office of standing and special boards,
          2011    2011      commissions, and committees
2011.29   11-15-  11-15-    Amended section 9-4-19 by changing massage establishment lighting requirements
          2011    2011
2011.33   12-6-   1-6-2012  Amended section 16-1-2 by changing the membership of the utilities board
          2011
N/A       N/A     12-13-    December 13, 2011 scrivener s revision to the cross-references in section 9-4-2 K by
                  2011      authority of town code section 1-4-5
2012.06   7-17-   8-17-2012 Rewrote chapter 11-7 (storage of inoperable or junked vehicles) and section 11-9-1
          2012              (violations)
                            Amended section 10-1-1 (definitions); added new section 10-1-3 (spilled garbage or
          7-17-             aggregate materials); replaced old section 10-1-3 (illegal dumping) with new section 10-
2012.07   2012    7-17-2012 1-4 (illegal dumping); rewrote chapter 10-2 (formerly removal of litter, now maintenance
                            of property); and deleted chapter 10-7 (penalties) and inserted penalties into the
                            individually-applicable sections
2012.09   8-7-    8-7-2012  Amended sections 2-4-1 (regular and special council meetings), 2-4-2 (agenda preparation
          2012              and distribution), and 2-4-4 (procedures for meetings)
2012.12   11-20-  12-21-    Comprehensively rewrote section 14-9-3 (escaping water)
          2012    2012
          12-4-             Revised the regulations relating to massage establishments found in sections 9-4-2, 9-4-
2012.13   2012    12-4-2012 8, 9-4-9, 9-4-12, 9-4-13, 9-4-14, 9-4-15, 9-4-16, 9-4-18, 9-4-19, 9-4-20, 9-4-21, and 9-
                            4-22
N/A       N/A     12-13-    December 13, 2012 scrivener s revision to the cross-reference in subparagraph 9-4-14 A
                  2012      22 by authority of town code section 1-4-5
N/A       N/A     1-7-2013  January 7, 2013 scrivener s error correction of the spelling of licensee in the third
                            sentence by authority of town code section 1-4-5 B
          4-2-              Added subparagraph C 7 and paragraph D to section 3-2-7 (town attorney), confirming the
2013.005  2013    4-2-2013  town attorney s role as prosecutor and the authority of deputy and assistant town
                            attorneys
2013.007  4-16-   7-1-2013  Revised section 7-1-2 (building codes adopted) to reference newer versions of the
          2013              national codes and to add the 2012 international fuel gas code
2013.010  6-18-   7-19-2013 Revised paragraph G of section 6-2-8 ([dog] license fees ) to change pay a license fee
          2013              to timely renew a license
                            Made various minor revisions to chapter 12-7 (construction in town rights-of-way);
2013.011  6-18-   7-22-2013 specifically, in sections 12-7-5 (permit process), 12-7-8 (construction requirements),
          2013              12-7-9 (newly constructed asphalt pavements), 12-7-12 (fees; late fees), and 12-7-13
                            (classification; penalties)
2013.013  7-2-    8-3-2013  Revised sections 9-1-6 and 9-1-7 to include code compliance officers
          2013
2013.014  8-6-    9-6-2013  Revised section 9-1-12 regarding verification of principal business purpose for
          2013              regulation of sexually oriented businesses
2013.015  8-6-    9-6-2013  Revised sections 3-1-3 and 3-2-12 to change the office of assistant chief of police to
          2013              deputy chief of police
2013.016  8-6-    9-6-2013  Revised section 2-1-6 (bond) to clarify elected officials coverage with a blanket bond
          2013
2013.017  8-6-    9-6-2013  Revised chapter 10-2 (maintenance of property) to address dilapidated buildings
          2013
2013.019  8-20-   9-20-2013 Revised sections 2-2-1, 2-2-3, 2-2-5, and 2-3-1 to conform to the 2012 revisions to
          2013              A.R.S. 16-204 concerning consolidated elections
N/A       N/A     9-24-2013 Town attorney s scrivener s error correction of the section heading of section 9-1-1,
                            changing licensed to license, under the authority of section 1-4-5
2013.026  11-19-  12-20-    Deleted section 4-1-8 (public safety employee-employer relations; meet and confer)
          2013    2013
          12-17-            Changed 5% to the actual costs in section 10-2-7 (removal by town [of rubbish, trash,
2013.028  2013    1-17-2014 weeds and dilapidated buildings from property]; costs assessed appeal; recording of
                            assessment)
                            Revised sections 5-7-2 (commencement of [civil code violation] action; jurisdiction of
2013.029  12-17-  1-17-2014 Marana municipal court) and 5-7-4 (authority to detain persons to serve civil code
          2013              complaint; failure to provide evidence of identity; penalty) to allow use of the Arizona
                            traffic ticket and complaint form and making other clarifying revisions
N/A       N/A     1-17-2014 Town attorney s scrivener s error correction of capitalization in section 5-7-2 and 5-7-
                            4 as revised by ordinance 2013.029, under the authority of section 1-4-5
2014.008  3-4-    4-4-2014  Revised the title and text of chapter 10-6 (formerly special event permits, now special
          2014              events)
2014.009  3-4-    4-4-2014  Revised subparagraph E.1 of section 11-5-3 (noise standards in the resort and recreation
          2014              zone) to refer to special event permit and the process in chapter 10-6
2014.011  5-6-    8-1-2014  Added title 17 as a placeholder for the future recodification of the land development
          2014              code, and added new chapter 17-17 (development impact fee ordinance)
2014.014  5-20-   6-20-2014 Changed references to A.R.S. 4-101(29) throughout chapter 9-5 to A.R.S. 4-101; added
          2014              section 9-5-8; and deleted and replaced chapter 9-9 (penalty)
                            Amended chapters 3-1, 3-2, and 3-3 by revising several sections in dealing with the
2014.018  7-1-    7-1-2014  classification of officers and employees, and deleting sections addressing special
          2014              projects manager, assistants to the town manager, deputy chief of police, director of
                            strategic initiatives, and rules and regulations
2014.019  7-1-    8-1-2014  Amended sections 4-1-2 (appointment of officers) and 4-1-3 (compensation of officers)
          2014
                            Town attorney s scrivener s error corrections of capitalization, use of numerals, cross-
N/A       N/A     7-9-2014  referencing, and grammar in section 9-5-8, paragraphs 32 and 39 of section 17-17-3,
                            paragraph A of section 17-17-7, subparagraph A. 2 of section 17-17-9, and paragraph B of
                            section 17-17-14, under the authority of section 1-4-5
2014.020  8-5-    8-5-2014  Amended section 3-2-4 (town clerk) paragraph B to provide for a person designated by the
          2014              town manager (instead of the town council) to act in the town clerk s absence
          9-2-              Deleted former paragraph B of section 9-1-3 (fees; payment; term of licenses; annual
2014.021  2014    10-3-2014 renewal required); and deleted and replaced chapter 9-7 (formerly liquor license tax ;
                            now liquor licenses ) in its entirety
2014.022  9-2-    10-3-2014 Added new chapter 3-5 (claims and settlement)
          2014
          12-2-             Revised section 13-2-3 (fingerprinting of current and prospective parks and recreation
2014.029  2014    12-2-2014 personnel and volunteers; criminal history record information) and added section 13-2-4
                            (alternative background investigations)
2015.004  1-20-   2-20-2015 Added new chapter 14-10 (industrial wastewater ordinance)
          2015
                            Rewrote section 13-1-2 (spirituous liquor prohibited; permits; exception; definitions);
2015.006  2-3-    3-6-2015  revised section 13-1-3 (use and occupancy rules and regulations) to create an exception
          2015              for the prohibition on glass containers (paragraph A. 15); and simplified and renamed
                            section 13-1-4 (violations; classification)
          6-30-             Globally replaced utilities department with water department and utilities director with
2015.015  2015    6-30-2015 water director throughout the town code, and revised the definitions at section 14-10-
                            5 paragraphs 11 and 12
2015.020  12-1-   7-1-2015  Added new section 14-6-4 (bill adjustment for excessive water leak)
          2015
2015.021  12-15-  1-15-2016 Added chapters 17-1, 17-2, 17-3, 17-5, 17-6, 17-15, and 17-16
          2015
2016.005  5-17-   6-17-2016 Repealed chapter 12-8 (formerly solicitation of employment, business or contributions
          2016              from occupants of vehicles traveling on town streets or highways )
2016.009  6-28-   6-28-2016 Amended section 7-5-1 (sewage disposal)
          2016
2016.010  6-28-   7-29-2016 Amended section 9-4-9 (massage establishment license application; separate license;
          2016              husband and wife; additional requirements), paragraph 21
2016.015  8-2-    9-2-2016  Amended title 17 (land development), chapter 17-5 (subdivisions), section 17-5-2
          2016              (procedure)
2016.017  9-6-    9-6-2016  Amended the definitions of fire chief and fire department in section 1-3-2 (definitions
          2016              and interpretation)
          9-6-              Amended title 10 (health and sanitation), sections 10-2-6 (Appeal) and 10-2-7 (removal
2016.019  2016    9-6-2016  by town; costs assessed; appeal; recording of assessment) by replacing council with
                            board of adjustment
          1-3-              Amended title 10 (health and sanitation), section 10-6-6 (application review)
2017.001  2017    2-3-2017  subparagraph J (insurance) and section 10-6-8 (grounds for denial) revising subparagraph
                            E and adding subparagraphs H through L
2017.002  1-3-    2-3-2017  Added subparagraph 17-5-2 (A)(3) for subdivisions with ten or fewer lots
          2017
          3-21-             Revised title 13 (parks & recreation) by amending section 13-1-3 (use and occupancy
2017.006  2017    4-20-2017 rules and regulations) subparagraph 12 and adding section 13-1-4 (model aircraft
                            operation; definition; prohibitions; exceptions)
2017.011  5-16-   7-1-2017  Comprehensively revised title 6 (animal control)
          2017
2017.015  6-20-   7-21-2017 Comprehensively revised title 15 (Marana regional airport)
          2017
2017.022  11-7-   12-8-2017 Comprehensively revised chapter 3-4 (procurement)
          2017
2017.025  12-5-   1-5-2018  Revised title 6 (animal control) by amending section 6-3-7 (now license fees; rebate;
          2017              penalty fees)
2017.027  12-5-   1-5-2018  Revised title 17 (land development) by amending section 17-1-4 (definitions) to add a
          2017              definition of micro-hospital
          12-19-            Revised title 17 (land development) by amending chapter 17 (development impact fee
2017.029  2017    1-19-2018 ordinance) to modify the definitions of general office land use category and medical
                            facilities land use category in section 17-17-3 (definitions)
          1-16-             Revised title 12 (traffic and highways) by adding a new chapter 12-8 (wireless
2018.002  2018    2-16-2018 communication facilities in the right-of-way); and revised title 12 (land development)
                            by adding chapter 17-18 (wireless communication facilities)
2018.003  2-6-    3-9-2018  Revised title 10 (health and sanitation) by revising the definition of refuse in section
          2018              10-2-1 (definitions)
                            Revised title 6 (animal control) by renaming chapter 6-5 (now animal waste removal);
                            revising sections 6-1-1 (definitions), 6-2-2 (appointment of animal control officers;
                            authority), 6-2-4 (commencement of action), 6-2-6 (enforcement; continuing violations),
                            6-3-4 (license required; classification), 6-3-5 (vaccination certificate prerequisite to
                            license), 6-3-9 (now transfer of license; classification), 6-3-13 (counterfeiting or
          2-6-              transferring of tags prohibited; classification), 6-5-1 (now animal waste removal;
2018.004  2018    3-9-2018  exceptions; classification), 6-7-1 (keeping vicious or destructive animals prohibited;
                            exceptions; classification), 6-7-2 (now prohibited acts; classification; defenses;
                            findings and orders), 6-7-4 (quarantine of biting animals; reporting; handling and
                            destruction; exception; classification), and 6-8-3 (now impoundment of animals subject
                            to cruelty and neglect and vicious or destructive animals; evaluation); and adding new
                            sections 6-7-5 (evaluation of animals) and 6-7-6 (duty to report animal s status;
                            effect)
          3-20-             Revised title 12 (traffic and highways) by revising sections 12-7-5 (now permit process;
2018.007  2018    4-20-2018 grounds for denial); 12-7-8 (construction requirements), and 12-7-9 (now additional
                            requirements for specified asphalt pavements)
2018.008  3-20-   4-20-2018 Revised title 12 (traffic and highways) by adding a new chapter 12-9 (overdimensional
          2018              vehicles) and renumbering the following chapter (now 12-10, other penalties) to conform
2018.010  4-3-    5-4-2018  Adopted chapter 17-4 (zoning), including only the downtown and mixed-use zones
          2018
2018.013  6-19-   6-19-2018 Amended title 13 (parks & recreation) by amending section 13-1-4 (model aircraft
          2018              operation; definition; prohibitions; exceptions)
          9-4-              Amended title 6 (animal control) by amending section 6-2-2 (appointment of animal
2018.016  2018    10-5-2018 control officers; authority) and section 6-4-1 (dogs at large prohibited; exceptions;
                            classification)
2018.019  10-16-  11-16-    Rewrote section 17-6-4 (height of buildings and structures)
          2018    2018
                            Revised title 14 (utilities) chapter 14-4 (construction and financing of utility
          12-4-             facilities) to modify the oversizing recovery charge provision of section 4-4-3
2018.022  2018    1-4-2019  (capacity requirements) and to add new sections 14-4-4 (refund of cost of facilities
                            funded and installed by the town) and 14-4-5 (notice of protected facility and
                            associated charge)
N/A       N/A     1-15-2019 Town attorney s scrivener s error correction of the first line of section 14-4-4 to add
                            the word is
2019.001  1-15-   2-15-2019 Amended title 9 (business regulations) by adding new chapter 9-12 (commercial filming
          2019              and photography permits)
2019.002  1-15-   2-15-2019 Amended title 15 (Marana regional airport) chapter 15-2 (general use of airport) by
          2019              revising section 15-2-20 (commercial photography or filming)
N/A       N/A     1-19-2019 Town attorney s scrivener s error correction of section 9-12-10 (road closures),
                            paragraph B
2019.004  2-5-    3-8-2019  Amended title 17 (land development) to add chapter 17-10 (signs)
          2019
                            Amended title 6 (animal control) chapter 6-8 (removal, impoundment, forfeiture and
          2-5-              disposition of animals) by revising section 6-8-6 (hearing; rules of hearing; remedies;
2019.005  2019    3-8-2019  testimony of defendant; appeal; costs) to reduce time for appeal, and revising section
                            6-8-7 (findings after court hearing) to eliminate tattooing as an option the town
                            magistrate can order
2019.008  3-19-   3-19-2019 Amended section 12-5-3 (return of impounded vehicle) paragraph A by deleting a sentence
          2019              about vehicle storage on town property
                            Amended title 7 (building) chapter 7-1 (building codes), section 7-1-2 (building codes
2019.011  4-16-   5-17-2019 adopted) by updating and revising the list of code documents incorporated by reference,
          2019              and section 7-1-6 (administrative appeal process) by changing the appeal body from the
                            board of appeals to the board of adjustment
                            Amended title 9 (business regulations) by adding new chapter 9-1 (general provisions);
                            renumbering and replacing chapter 9-2 (business licenses), renumbering and replacing
                            chapter 9-3 (formerly peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants; now peddlers);
                            renumbering and replacing chapter 9-4 (swap meets); renumbering chapter 9-5 (massage
                            establishments) and making minor revisions to sections 9-5-3 (duties of license
          6-4-              inspector; appeals) and 9-5-24 (licenses; cumulative regulation); renumbering chapter 9-
2019.012  2019    7-5-2019  6 (clothing and conduct for qualified establishments); renumbering chapter 9-7 (liquor
                            licenses) and amending sections 9-7-5 (license application), 9-7-6 (issuance of license;
                            denial; annual renewal required), and 9-7-9 (expiration of license), and adding new
                            section 9-7-17 (additional reporting requirements); renumbering chapter 9-9 (cable
                            television); deleting former chapter 9-9 (penalty); amending chapter 9-10 (surface
                            mining and land reclamation) by revising section 9-10-6 (fees); and adding chapter 9-13
                            (mobile food vendors)
2019.013  6-18-   7-19-2019 Repealed and replaced former chapter 9-9 (cable television) with new chapter 9-9 (video
          2019              service)
N/A       N/A     7-26-2019 Town attorney s scrivener s error correction of section 9-1-5 paragraph A
                            Amended title 9 (business regulations) by modifying section 9-1-2 (definitions) to
                            delete short-term rentals for a period of 29 days or less from the definition of
                            residential real property rental and to add a definition for vacation rental or short-
2019.016  8-6-    8-6-2019  term rental; added section 9-2-4 (vacation rental or short-term rental contact
          2019              information) and renumbered the remaining sections in chapter 9-2 to conform; modified
                            section 9-3-3 (exemptions) to add an exemption for soliciting orders for goods or
                            services; and modifying section 9-13-5 (additional application requirements) to delete a
                            requirement to provide a copy of the state-issued mobile food unit license
2019.018  8-6-    9-6-2019  Amended title 17 (land development) to add chapter 17-9 (parking)
          2019
2019.022  10-15-  11-15-    Amended section 17-6-14 (medical marijuana dispensary) to add new paragraphs G and H
          2019    2019
2019.024  12-17-  1-17-2020 Amended subparagraph (C)(7) of section 17-6-14 (medical marijuana dispensary) to expand
          2019              the permissible operating hours to 10 p.m.
          1-21-             Amended paragraph A of section 2-2-1 (primary election ) to set the primary election on
2020.004  2020    2-21-2020 the first Tuesday in August of even-numbered years; and amended section 2-2-7
                            (initiative and referendum) to clarify the number of signatures needed
2020.019  11-17-  11-17-    Amended title 11 (offenses) to adopt chapter 11-9 (recreational marijuana) and renumber
          2020    2020      existing chapters 11-9 and 11-10
                            Amended title 14 (utilities) chapter 14-4 (construction and financing of utility
          12-1-             facilities) by revising sections 14-4-3 (capacity requirements), 14-4-4 (refund of cost
2020.020  2020    1-1-2021  of facilities funded and installed by the town), and 14-4-5 (notice of protected
                            facility and associated charge) to make the protected facility designation and protected
                            facility charge available for drainage facilities
2020.021  12-15-  1-15-2021 Amended section 17-5-3 (subdivision requirements) to replace subparagraph B.9 with a
          2020              revised subparagraph B.9 (recreational area)
                            Corrected cross-references in section 11-5-2 paragraph A, section 11-5-4 paragraph I,
N/A       N/A     1-15-2021 section 11-11-4 paragraphs A and A.1, and section 11-11-5 paragraph A, to conform to
                            renumbering by Ordinance 2020.019
                            Amended chapter 17-3 (administration and enforcement) by revising sections 17-3-1
          2-16-             (amendment procedure) and 17-3-2 (conditional use permits), replacing section 17-3-3
2021.003  2021    3-19-2021 (temporary use permit), adding section 17-3-5 (classification; enforcement; continuing
                            violations), and renumbering and amending subsequent sections as 17-3-6 (responsibility
                            for violation) and 17-3-7 (responsibility for enforcement)
                            Replaced section 17-2-3 (formerly planning director; now planning department and
2021.004  4-6-    4-6-2021  planning manager); deleted section 17-2-4 (cultural resources preservation board);
          2021              amended title 17 (land development) to replace planning director with planning manager
                            throughout
                            Amended title 6 (animal control) by revising sections 6-1-1 (definitions), 6-2-4
          4-6-              (commencement of action), 6-4-1 (dogs at large prohibited), 6-5-1 (animal waste
2021.005  2021    5-7-2021  removal), and 6-6-2 (neglect prohibited); chapter 6-7 (vicious, aggressive, or
                            destructive animals and biting animals); and chapter 6-8 (removal, impoundment,
                            forfeiture and disposition of animals), sections 6-8-3 through 6-8-10
2021.007  4-20-   5-21-2021 Amended paragraph B of section 7-1-2 (building codes adopted) to adopt the 2021 Town of
          2021              Marana outdoor lighting code
2021.009  5-18-   6-18-2021 Amended chapter 10-6 (special events) by revising section 10-6-2 (definitions) to
          2021              include temporary extension of premises/patio permit
                            Amended title 17 (land development) by repealing and replacing chapters 17-1 (title,
                            intent, purpose and definitions), 17-4 (zoning), 17-5 (subdivisions), 17-6 (general
                            development regulations), by adding new chapters 17-7 (residential design standards),
                            17-8 (multi-family, commercial, and industrial design standards), 17-11 (environmental
          6-15-             resource preservation, native plant protection, and landscape requirements), 17-12
2021.010  2021    7-16-2021 (protection of cultural resources), 17-13 (standards for grading and related site work),
                            17-14 (hillside development), 17-19 (silverbell road corridor overlay district) , and by
                            revising sections 17-3-1 (amendment and rezoning),17-9-2 (parking requirements), 17-9-4
                            (bicycle parking), 17-15-10 (provisions for flood hazard reduction), 17-16-1 (general
                            provisions), 17-16-2 (prohibitions and controls to reduce the discharge of pollutants in
                            stormwater), and 17-16-3 (compliance monitoring)
                            Adopted title 18, including chapters 18-1 (general provisions), 18-2 (public nuisances),
          11-16-  12-17-    18-3 (property maintenance), 18-4 (additional violations), 18-5 (enforcement) and 18-6
2021.025  2021    2021      (appeals); and repealed chapter 10-2 (maintenance of property), chapter 11-7 (storage of
                            inoperable or junked vehicles), sections 10-1-4 (illegal dumping) and 11-3-3 (graffiti
                            prohibited; abatement procedures; penalty)
2022.001  1-18-   2-18-2022 Revised sections 3-4-5 (definitions), 3-4-7 (town council approval), 3-4-8 (town manager
          2022              approval), and 3-4-19 (small purchases)
2022.003  2-15-   3-18-2022 Revised section 17-2-2 (board of revisions)
          2022
                            Revised section 17-3-1 (amendment and rezoning), chapter 17-4 (zoning), section 17-11-7
                            (landscape requirements), chapter 17-15 (floodplain and erosion hazard management code),
2022.006  3-15-   4-15-2022 and chapter 17-16 (stormwater management); revised chapter 17-6 (general development
          2022              regulations) to add new section 17-6-10 (height of buildings and structures); revised
                            chapter 17-14 (hillside development) to add new section 17-14-5 (average cross slope
                            calculations)
                            Corrected numbering of section 1-4-5 subparagraphs C.1 and C.2, to conform to Ordinance
N/A       N/A     7-13-2022 2008.16; corrected cross-reference in section 11-9-5 paragraph A.1, to conform to
                            renumbering by Ordinance 2021.010
2022.012  8-16-   9-16-2022 Added new chapter 14-11 Non-Potable Water service within Cortaro-Marana irrigation
          2022              district boundaries
2022.017  10-4-   11-4-2022 Amends section 17-15-10 (provisions for flood hazard reduction)
          2022
2022.018  10-18-  11-18-    Amends section 9-13-7 (operational requirements)
          2022    2022
2022.019  10-18-  11-18-    Amends section 2-3-4 (powers and duties of the mayor)
          2022    2022
2022.020  10-18-  11-18-    Amends section 5-2-1 (town magistrate)
          2022    2022
2022.022  10-18-  11-18-    Amends sections 17-4-2 (use matrix), 17-4-7 (commercial zoning districts), 17-6-8
          2022    2022      (medical marijuana dispensary), and 17-10-15 (classification; enforcement; removal)
                            Amends sections 17-1-6 (definitions), 17-4-2 (use matrix), 17-4-3 (use conditions
2022.026  11-15-  12-16-    matrix), 17-4-19 (zone C - large lot zone), renames chapter 17-6 general and
          2022    2022      miscellaneous development regulations, adds section 17-6-11 (solar energy systems and
                            energy storage facilities
2023.005  2-21-   7-1-2023  Amends section 17-3-1 (amendment and rezoning)
          2023
          3-7-              Amends sections 6-1-1 (definitions), 6-7-2 (evaluation of animals), 6-7-5 (hearing
2023.006  2023    4-7-2023  regarding declaration; findings after court hearing; rules of hearing; costs), and 6-7-
                            6 (prohibited acts; classification; defenses; findings and orders)
          4-4-              Amends section 9-1-2 (definitions), repeals section 9-2-4 (vacation rental or short-term
2023.009  2023    5-4-2023  rental contact information) and renumbers the subsequent sections, and adds new chapter
                            9-14 (short-term and vacation rentals)
2023.011  4-4-    N/A       Continues provisions of section 9-5-7 (manager license required; non-transferability)
          2023
2023.012  4-18-   5-18-2023 Amends sections 17-4-5 (residential zoning districts) and 17-4-7 (commercial zoning
          2023              districts)
2023.014  5-16-   6-16-2023 Amends section 2-2-1 (primary election; date; declaration of elected candidate)
          2023
2023.015  5-16-   7-1-2023  Amends section 10-6-2 (definitions) to include major and minor special event definitions
          2023
2023.018  5-16-   6-16-2023 Amends section 11-5-4 (construction noise; extended work permits)
          2023
2023.021  6-20-   7-21-2023 Adds subparagraphs 1. and 2. to paragraph B of section 17-5-4B (subdivisions;
          2023              performance guarantee)
2023.023  8-1-    8-1-2023  Repeals subparagraph 6. to paragraph B of section 12-7-5 (permit process; grounds for
          2023              denial)
2023.031  9-19-   10-19-    Amends Table 3 in section 17-4-3 (use conditions matrix)
          2023    2023
          9-19-   10-19-    Amends definitions 182. and 209. in section 17-1-6 (definitions), amends Table 2 in
2023.032  2023    2023      section 17-4-2 (use matrix), amends Table 3 in section 17-4-3 (use conditions matrix),
                            and adds section 17-6-12 (transitional housing)
2023.036  10-17-  11-17-    Adds subparagraphs a. and b. and amends subparagraph 2 of paragraph C of section 3-1-3
          2023    2023      (position status)
2023.037  10-17-  11-17-    Adds new chapter 6-10 (pet stores)
          2023    2023
          10-17-  11-17-    Adds definition to section 6-1-1 (definitions), amends 6-4-1 (dogs at large prohibited;
2023.038  2023    2023      exceptions; classification), adds new section 6-4-4 (dog park regulations), and adds
                            paragraph E to section 6-7-2 (evaluation of animals)
2023.039  10-17-  11-17-    Adds paragraph E to section 13-1-1 (domestic animals and pets)
          2023    2023
N/A       N/A     1-2-2024  January 2, 2024 Scrivener s error to correct an extra space in 9-15-2(A)
2024.007  3-20-   4-20-2024 Amends 3-2-4 (town clerk); adds 3-2-8 (town marshal); renumbers subsequent sections
          2024
2024.008  3-20-   4-20-2024 Amends paragraph D of 5-6-1 (fee schedule for court costs)
          2024
2024.009  3-20-   4-20-2024 Amends 4-1-5 (duties of chief of police) by striking subparagraph 5 of paragraph A
          2024
2024.010  4-2-    4-2-2024  Amends 17-4-11 (blended-use (BU)) and 17-4-12 (downtown Marana overlay (DO)) to fix
          2024              conversion and consolidation errors and cross-references
N/A       N/A     N/A       Per email of May 7, 2024, correcting errors in sections 3-2-4, 17-1-6, 17-4-11, 17-4-12
                            Amends paragraph C.5. of 17-5-4 (performance guarantee); paragraph C.4. by adding
                            subparagraphs a. and b. of 17-13-7 (submittals and procedures: major grading type 2);
Res.      4-16-   5-17-2024 paragraph C. of 17-13-10 (inspection and performance defaults); paragraph A. 16. and
2024-011  2024              paragraphs B.1. and B.43. of 17-15-2 (abbreviations and definitions); paragraph E.2.j.
                            of 17-15-9 (administration); and paragraphs B.3.d., C.2., E.12., F.2.a. and F.4., of 17-
                            15-10 (provisions for flood hazard reduction)
                            Amends Table 2 in section 17-4-2 (use matrix), Table 3 in section 17-4-3 (use conditions
2024.014  6-18-   7-19-2024 matrix), and Table 6 in section 17-4-7 (commercial zoning districts); and amends section
          2024              17-5-3 (subdivision requirements) by amending paragraphs B.15., C.1., and C.1.a., and
                            adding paragraph C.3.a.iv.
2024.015  9-3-    10-4-2024 Adds paragraphs C and D to section 3-1-1 (town officers)
          2024
2024.016  9-3-    10-4-2024 Amends paragraph G of section 9-13-7 (operational requirements)
          2024
2024.017  9-3-    10-4-2024 Amends paragraph A of section 12-7-12 (fees; late fees)
          2024
2024.018  9-17-   10-18-    Adds section 11-10-4 (violations of section 11-5-4; classification; enforcement;
          2024    2024      continuing violations)
2024.019  9-17-   10-18-    Amends paragraph A in section 10-6-4 (permit required; non-transferable); and paragraph
          2024    2024      A of section 10-6-8 (grounds for denial)
          10-1-             Amends section 6-1-1 (definitions) by amending at large and leash or lead ; amends
2024.020  2024    11-1-2024 section 6-4-1 (dogs at large prohibited; exceptions; classification) by repealing
                            paragraphs A and B and adding a new paragraph A
2024.021  10-15-  11-15-    Amends section 9-2-2 (exemptions; documentation) by adding subparagraph A.5.
          2024    2024
2024.023  11-6-   12-7-2024 Amends section 9-14-9 (compliance with laws; prohibited uses; accessory dwelling units)
          2024              by adding paragraph F and amending the section title.
N/A       N/A     N/A       Per 11-25-24 email, deleted extra space after the hyphen in A.R.S. 9-461.18 in section
                            9-14-9(F)
2024.026  12-17-  1-17-2025 Amends paragraphs A and B of section 3-5-1 (claims administration); amends paragraph B
          2024              of and adds paragraph C to 3-5-2 (settlement authority)
2024.027  12-17-  1-17-2025 Adds paragraph C (review time frames) to 17-3-1 (amendment and rezoning)
          2024
          12-17-            Amends Table 2 (use matrix) of section 17-4-2 to add “accessory dwelling unit” and Table
2024.028  2024    1-17-2025 3 (conditions per use) of section 17-4-3 to add “accessory dwelling unit”; adds section
                            17-6-14 (accessory dwelling units)
                            Amends section 17-1-6 (definitions) to add “data center” as 55. and renumbers remaining
          12-17-            paragraphs; amends paragraph A to hyphenate “mixed use” and amends Table 2 (use matrix)
2024.029  2024    1-17-2025 of section 17-4-2 to add “data center”; adds paragraph E (data centers) to section 17-4-
                            8 and renumbers paragraph E to F; adds paragraphs B and C to section 17-4-16 (legacy
                            zones) and designates initial paragraph as A; adds section 17-6-13 (data centers)
                            Amending sections 17-4-2 (use matrix) and 17-4-3 (use conditions matrix) to allow up to
          1-7-              6 chickens to be kept on a single-family detached residential lot that is one-half acre
2025.002  2025    2-7-2025  or less in size and prescribing development regulations related to the keeping of
                            chickens; amending section 17-6-7 (animal-keeping) to add additional animal-keeping
                            requirements for chickens
2025.005  3-18-   4-18-2025 Amending sections 3-4-5 (procurement) and 3-4-23 (cooperative purchasing) to authorize
          2025              the town to participate in national purchasing cooperatives
                            Amending section 2-1-4 (vacancies) to provide for filling council vacancies consistent
2025.006  3-18-   4-18-2025 with state law; section 2-2-8 (automatic recount) to clarify when an automatic recount
          2025              is required under state law; and section 2-3-1 (vice mayor) to add a provision for
                            appointment of vice mayor when seat is vacant
          6-3-              Amending section 11-5-4 (construction noise; extended work permits) to add new paragraph
2025.011  2025    6-3-2025  K regarding extended hours for construction activities and relettering existing
                            paragraph K as paragraph L
2025.013  6-17-   7-18-2025 Amending paragraph A of section 7-1-2 (building codes adopted) to reference newer
          2025              versions of the international codes
2025.015  8-18-   9-19-2025 Amends paragraph A of section 2-4-1 (regular and special council meetings) to remove
          2025              election day from automatic rescheduling of regular meetings
                            Amends section 18-1-2 (definitions) to replace “abandoned or junked vehicles” with
          8-18-             “inoperable motor vehicles”, add terms “occupant”, “owner”, and “responsible party”, and
2025.016  2025    9-19-2025 renumber remaining paragraphs; amends section 18-3-2 (vehicles and watercraft) regarding
                            visible storage and parking and to reflect the term “inoperable motor vehicles”; and
                            amends paragraph A of section 18-3-4 (land) to clarify nuisance weeds, grass, etc.
                            Amends paragraph B of section 14-5-1 (provision of utility service; customer
2025.017  8-18-   9-18-2025 responsibility) to clarify regulations on the use and transportation of water by
          2025              customers by replacing paragraph B.1 with B.1 and B.2, renumbering the other paragraphs
                            accordingly, and adding paragraph B.5 with definitions
          9-2-              Amends paragraphs A, B.1, B.2, and B.6 of section 12-7-5 (construction in town rights-
2025.018  2025    10-3-2025 of-way; permit process; grounds for denial) to revise application requirements and adds
                            definitions paragraph B.7
2025.019  9-16-   10-16-    Amends paragraphs E.2 and E.3 of section 14-6-4 to provide for a payment plan for large
          2025    2025      water bills caused by accidental water leak
2025.021  10-21-  10-21-    Amends chapter 5.8 modifying statutory references for home detention program
          2025    2025
          11-18-            Adds new section 17-6-15 (middle housing) and amends chapter 17-4 (zoning) by making
2025.023  2025    1-1-2026  conforming changes to 17-4-2 (use matrix), 17-4-3 (use conditions matrix), and 17-4-9
                            (mixed-use zoning districts)
                            Amending chapter 17-3 (administration and enforcement) by adding new section 17-3-4
                            (development plans) and new section 17-3-5 (site plans and design review plans);
          11-18-            renumbering existing sections; amending chapter 17-5 (subdivisions) by amending section
2025.024  2025    1-1-2026  17-5-2 (procedures) and adding new section 17-5-6 (lot line adjustments, lot ties, and
                            lot combinations); amending chapter 17-19 (Silverbell Road Overlay Corridor District) by
                            amending section 17-19-10 (Silverbell Road Overlay Corridor District development plan
                            procedures
          12-16-  12-16-    Amends chapter 5-6 (fees) to update and clarify fees, remove collection language, and
2025.025  2025    2025      consolidate in one section the court’s authority to waive fees, adds new section 5-6-3
                            (authority to waive fees)
                          
 
 
