PIMA COUNTY,
ARIZONA CODE
A Codification of the General Ordinances of Pima County, Arizona 
____________
 
Contains 2026 S-62 Supplement,
with local legislation through Ordinance 2025-30, passed 12-2-2025,
current through 12-31-2025
____________
 
Supplemented by American Legal Publishing 
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
www.amlegal.com
Publisher's Introduction 
Publisher's Note 
   The Pima County Code is updated quarterly. The information presented here
codifies adopted ordinances through December 31, 2025. This online version
should be used for reference only. Ordinances amending the Pima County Code
which may have been adopted after this update can be obtained in the Office of
the Clerk of the Board.
    This document is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-
factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation
without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number
designates, in sequence, the numbers of the title, chapter, and section. Thus
Section 2.12.040 is Section .040 located in Chapter 12 of Title 2
Administration and Personnel.
   In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying
the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative
history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table which follows the
text of the code. The table lists by (unlinked) number all ordinances, their
subjects, and where they appear in the codification.
   A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific
code provisions by individual section numbers. At this time, there are no
direct hyperlinks from index entries back to the sections they reference.
   Some symbols and tables may not display properly in HTML.
Publication History 
   The Pima County Code was originally published by Book Publishing Company in
1985, published by Code Publishing from June 1994 through August 1996,
published by Pima County Graphic Design Department from March 1997 through
January 2008, published by LexisNexis Municipal Codes from April 2008 to
December 2008, and beginning in 2009, the Pima County Code was published by
Municipal Code Corporation. American Legal Publishing began publishing the code
in 2019.
Publication Information 
   During the republication the Pima County Code has been repaginated and all
dates have been removed from the lower right hand corner of the pages for the
first publication. Future updates will again include date references. The Pima
County Code is updated quarterly.
   The Code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor
decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation
without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number
designates, in sequence, the numbers of the title, chapter and section. Thus,
Section 2.12.040, is Section .040, located in Chapter 12 of Title 2. In most
instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine
vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions.
Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion.
   In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying
the specific sources for the provisions of that section. The legislative
history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table found in the back of
the publication which lists by number all ordinances, their subjects and where
they appear in the codification.
   A subject matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific
code provisions by individual section numbers.
   The supplement direction page, which should be retained for reference,
indicates the ordinances included with each supplement.
Title 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapters: 
   
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION
   
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.01
CODE ADOPTION
Sections: 
1.01.010   Adoption.
1.01.020   Title—Citation—Reference.
1.01.030   Continuity of provisions.
1.01.040   Existing ordinances continued in effect.
1.01.050   Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
1.01.060   Reference to specific ordinances.
1.01.070   Reference includes amendments and penalty section.
1.01.080   Title, chapter and section headings.
1.01.090   Severability.
1.01.010   Adoption.
   The "Pima County Code" is adopted as the code of ordinances for Pima County
pursuant to A.R.S. Title II, Chapter 2, "Powers of County Government." The Pima
County Code will be effective as of the 22nd day of October, 1985; and includes
all ordinances of the board of supervisors enacted through July 17, 1985.
(Ord. 1985-183 § 1, 1985)
1.01.020   Title—Citation—Reference.
   This code shall be known as the "Pima County Code" and it shall be
sufficient to refer to this code as the "Pima County Code" in any prosecution
for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or
equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending,
correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to,
amendment to, correction or repeal of the Pima County Code. Further reference
may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the Pima County
Code and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section
or subsection as it appears in the code.
(Ord. 1985-183 § 2, 1985)
1.01.030   Continuity of provisions.
   The provisions of this code, insofar as they are substantially the same as
ordinance provisions previously adopted by the county relating to the same
subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations, and not
as new enactments.
(Ord. 1985-183 § 3, 1985)
1.01.040   Existing ordinances continued in effect.
   All ordinances, resolutions and regulations of Pima County in force at the
time this code is adopted, and not inconsistent with the provisions thereof,
are continued in force until the same shall be duly amended or repealed.
(Ord. 1985-183 § 4, 1985)
1.01.050   Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
   Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendments of any
ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the county shall in any manner
affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were
committed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee or penalty at said
effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as
affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection
of any such license, fee or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any
violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in
lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any
ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall
continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. 1985-183 § 5, 1985)
1.01.060   Reference to specific ordinances.
   The provisions of this code shall not in any or are otherwise connected with
ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and
which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to
apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code.
(Ord. 1985-183 § 6, 1985)
1.01.070   Reference includes amendments and penalty section.
   Any reference to or in this code to an ordinance or provision of this code
means the ordinance or provision as now or hereafter amended. Reference to any
section of this code shall be understood to refer to and include the penalty
section relating thereto unless otherwise provided. In case of the amendment of
any section of this code containing provisions for which a penalty is provided
in another section, the penalty so provided in the other section shall be held
to relate to the section so amended whether reenacted in the amendatory
ordinance or not, unless the penalty is specifically repealed therein.
(Ord. 1985-183 § 7, 1985)
1.01.080   Title, chapter and section headings.
   Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be
deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or
intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section of this code.
(Ord. 1985-183 § 8, 1985)
1.01.090   Severability.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for
any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The board declares
that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence,
clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more
sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid
or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid
or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full
force and effect.
(Ord. 1985-183 § 17, 1985)
Chapter 1.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections: 
1.04.010   Construction.
1.04.020   Definitions.
1.04.030   Writing defined.
1.04.040   Acts by deputies.
1.04.050   Service of notice.
1.04.060   Proof of notice service.
1.04.070   Prohibited acts include causing or permitting.
1.04.080   Violation-Penalty.
1.04.010   Construction.
   Unless the provisions of the context otherwise require, these general
provisions, rules of construction and definitions shall govern the construction
of this code. The provisions of this code and all proceedings under it are to
be construed with a view to effect its objects and to promote justice.
(Ord. 1985-183 § 9, 1985)
1.04.020   Definitions.
   In this code and in all ordinances and resolutions of the county, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly requires otherwise
or any chapter or section defines differently:
   A.   "Board" means the Pima County board of supervisors.
   B.   "Clerk" means the clerk of the Pima County board of supervisors.
   C.   "Code" means the Pima County Code.
   D.   "County" means Pima County.
   E.   "He," "his," "himself" and "him" mean and include the feminine, neuter
and plural.
   F.   "May" is permissive.
   G.   "Ordinance" means any ordinance passed and adopted by the Pima County
board of supervisors.
   H.   "Person" means any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, joint
venture, association, social club, estate, trust, syndicate, county, city,
municipal corporation, district or other political subdivision, or any other
group or combination acting as a unit.
   I.   "Resolution" means any resolution passed and adopted by the board of
supervisors.
   J.   "Shall" is mandatory.
   K.   "State" means the state of Arizona.
(Ord. 1985-183 § 10, 1985)
1.04.030   Writing defined.
"Writing" includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by
ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement, application or
record required or authorized by this code is made, it shall be made in writing
in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise.
(Ord. 1985-183 § 11, 1985)
1.04.040   Acts by deputies.
   Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon a public officer
or employee, the power may be exercised, or the duty may be performed by a
deputy of the officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized
pursuant to law or ordinance, unless this code expressly provides otherwise.
(Ord. 1985-183 § 12, 1985)
1.04.050   Service of notice.
   Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code, unless different
provisions are otherwise specifically made, the notice may be either by
personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the
United States mail, in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the
person to be notified, at his last known business or residence address as it
appears in the public records of the county or other records pertaining to the
matter to which the notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have
been completed at the time of deposit in the post office or any United States
mailbox.
(Ord. 1985-183 § 13, 1985)
1.04.060   Proof of notice service.
   Proof of giving notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or
employee of this county or by affidavit of any person over the age of eighteen
years which shows service in conformity with this code or other provisions of
law applicable to the subject matter concerned.
(Ord. 1985-183 § 14, 1985)
1.04.070   Prohibited acts include causing or permitting.
   Whenever in this code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include
causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the act or
omission.
(Ord. 1985-183 § 15, 1985)
1.04.080   Violation-Penalty.
   Every offense in this code for which no penalty is prescribed shall be a
Class 3 misdemeanor, as defined by the Arizona Revised Statutes, and shall
carry the penalty provided therein. Each act of violation and every day upon
which such violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 1985-183 § 16, 1985)
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapters: 
   
Chapter 2.04 - BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
   
Chapter 2.08 - CLERK OF THE BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
   
Chapter 2.12 - COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR*
   
Chapter 2.16 - FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE FOR ELECTED OFFICIALS AND CANDIDATES
   
Chapter 2.20 - COUNTY MEET AND CONFER PROCESS
   
Chapter 2.24 - EMPLOYEE MERIT SYSTEM COMMISSION
   
Chapter 2.28 - WORKERS' COMPENSATION
   
Chapter 2.32 - RULEMAKING PROCEDURE
Chapter 2.04
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
Sections: 
2.04.010   General provisions.
2.04.020   Meetings.
2.04.030   Actions of the board.
2.04.040   Initiative power.
2.04.050   Referendum power.
2.04.060   Number of qualified electors.
2.04.070   Initiative procedure.
2.04.080   Referendum procedure.
2.04.090   State law.
2.04.010   General provisions.
   The board of supervisors is the governing body of the county. The powers,
duties and responsibilities of the board of supervisors are established in the
Constitution of the state of Arizona and the Arizona Revised Statutes, Title
11, Chapter 2. Certain administrative and executive powers and duties of the
board may be delegated to other persons or bodies; however, the board has
ultimate responsibility for the affairs of the county.
(Prior code § 11.08.010)
2.04.020   Meetings.
   Meetings of the board shall be held every Tuesday except the fifth of the
month, unless otherwise determined by the board. Such meetings shall take place
in the county governmental complex unless otherwise noticed to the public.
(Prior code § 11.08.020)
2.04.030   Actions of the board.
   Formal actions of the board shall be taken by code ordinance, noncode
ordinance, or resolution.
   A.   Code Ordinance. Formal acts of the board intended to be of general and
permanent nature shall be designated as code ordinances and shall be included
in this code. Such ordinances shall designate the code to be assigned such
ordinance.
   B.   Noncode Ordinance. Formal acts of the board intended to be of general
and permanent application but not intended to become a part of this code shall
be designated noncode ordinances and shall not be included in this code.
   C.   Resolution. All other actions of the board shall be taken by
resolution.
(Prior code § 11.08.030)
2.04.040   Initiative power.
   Fifteen percent of the qualified electors of the county shall have the right
to propose any legislative measure.
(Prior code § 11.08.040(A))
2.04.050   Referendum power.
   Ten percent of the qualified electors of the county shall have the right to
order the submission to the people at the polls of any legislative measure, or
item, section or part of any legislative measure enacted by the board.
(Prior code § 11.08.040(B))
2.04.060   Number of qualified electors.
   The whole number of votes cast in the county for all candidates for governor
at the general election last preceding the filing of an initiative or
referendum petition shall be the basis on which the numbers of electors of the
county required to file such initiative or referendum petition shall be
computed.
(Prior code § 11.08.040(C))
2.04.070   Initiative procedure.
   Initiative petitions shall be in the form prescribed by state law and shall
be presented to the deputy clerk of the board, director, division of elections.
Upon certification that fifteen percent of the qualified electors of the county
have signed such petitions, the board shall:
   A.   Pass such measure without alteration within twenty days; or
   B.   Within twenty-five days proceed to call a special election at which the
proposed measure without alteration shall be submitted to the vote of the
people; or
   C.   Within twenty-five days set the measure without alteration to be
submitted to the vote of the people at the next scheduled general election.
(Prior code § 11.08.040(D))
2.04.080   Referendum procedure.
   Referendum petitions shall be in the form prescribed by state law and shall
be presented to the deputy clerk of the board, director, division of elections,
within thirty days from the passage of the measure proposed to be referred to
the people. Upon certification that ten percent of the qualified electors of
the county have signed such petitions, the measure, item or section thereof
protested shall be suspended from going into operation until the board has
acted to repeal such measure or the people have acted upon such referred
measure at an election. Upon certification, the board shall:
   A.   Repeal the protested measure within twenty days; or
   B.   Within twenty-five days proceed to call a special election, at which
the protested measure shall be submitted to the vote of the people; or
   C.   Within twenty-five days set the measure to be submitted to the vote of
the people at the next scheduled general election.
(Prior code § 11.08.040(E))
2.04.090   State law.
   Provisions of state law applying to initiatives and referendums shall
control all procedures and formats for initiatives and referendums, except as
this section clarifies the provisions of state law.
(Prior code § 11.08.040(F))
Chapter 2.08
CLERK OF THE BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
Sections: 
2.08.010   Appointment.
2.08.020   Duties.
2.08.010   Appointment.
   The board of supervisors appoints the clerk of the board, who shall perform
the duties outlined in Section
2.08.020.
(A.R.S. § 11-241 (part))
2.08.020   Duties.
   The clerk of the board shall:
   A.   Record all proceedings of the board;
   B.   Make full entries of the board's resolutions and decisions on all
questions concerning the raising of money for and allowance of accounts against
the county;
   C.   Record the vote of each member on every question upon which there is a
division or at the request of any member present;
   D.   Sign all orders made and warrants issued by order of the board for the
payment of money;
   E.   Record the reports of the county treasurer of the receipts and
disbursements of the county;
   F.   Preserve and file all accounts acted upon by the board;
   G.   Preserve and file all petitions and record the actions of the board
thereon;
   H.   Record all orders levying taxes;
   I.   Perform all other duties required by law or rule or order of the board.
(A.R.S. § 11-241 (part))
Chapter 2.12
COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR*
Sections: 
2.12.010   Definitions.
2.12.020   Establishment.
2.12.030   Appointment.
2.12.040   Majority vote of board required.
2.12.050   Residency requirement.
2.12.060   Primary obligation of the county administrator.
2.12.070   Duties and responsibilities.
2.12.080   Assistance of officers and employees; creation of committees.
2.12.090   Noninterference.
2.12.010   Definitions.
   A.   "Department" means county agencies, departments, offices, institutions,
boards, commissions, committees and all other branches and divisions of county
administration.
   B.   "Employee" means department heads, deputies and all other persons whose
personal services are engaged for compensation by the county, except officers
and independent contractors.
   C.   "Officer" means appointive and elected county officers as specifically
designated by general law or by ordinance of the board of supervisors.
(Ord. 1993-1 § 1 (part), 1993; Ord. 1990-110 § 1 (part), 1990)
2.12.020   Establishment.
   The "chief executive officer" of Pima County shall be the "county
administrator."
(Ord. 2000-8 § 1 (part), 2000; Ord. 1998-67 § 1 (part), 1998; Ord. 1993-1 § 1
(part), 1993; Ord. 1990-110 § 1 (part), 1990)
2.12.030   Appointment.
   The board of supervisors shall appoint a county administrator who shall
serve at the pleasure of the board and whose compensation shall be as set by
the board. Appointment of the county administrator shall be made on the basis
of the administrative qualifications of the appointee. The county administrator
shall be in the county personnel "unclassified service" and exempt from the
county merit system.
(Ord. 1993-1 § 1 (part), 1993; Ord. 1990-110 § 1 (part), 1990)
2.12.040   Majority vote of board required.
   The appointment removal, suspension or request for resignation of a county
administrator shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of all the
members of the board of supervisors.
(Ord. 1993-1 § 1 (part), 1993; Ord. 1990-110 § 1 (part), 1990)
2.12.050   Residency requirement.
   The county administrator shall establish, within six months of his
appointment, residence within Pima County and maintain residency throughout his
tenure.
(Ord. 1993-1 § 1 (part), 1993; Ord. 1990-110 § 1 (part), 1990)
2.12.060   Primary obligation of the county administrator.
   The duties of the county administrator shall be the primary obligation of
the county administrator and he shall engage in no other pursuits which
conflict with those duties.
(Ord. 1993-1 § 1 (part), 1993; Ord. 1990-110 § 1 (part), 1990)
2.12.070   Duties and responsibilities.
   The county administrator shall report to the board of supervisors of Pima
County, and under the direction of the board of supervisors the county
administrator shall be responsible for the general direction, supervision,
administration, and coordination of all affairs of the county (including county
administrator's office), except those duties exercised by the other elected
officials of the county.
   A.   Subject only to policies adopted or directions given by official
actions of the board, the county administrator shall be responsible for the
general supervision, direction, administration and coordination of all the
affairs of the county except those conducted by the other elected officials of
the county. Except as otherwise provided by statute or ordinance adopted by the
board, the county administrator shall appoint, promote, discipline and remove
all appointive department heads and officers of the county and shall supervise
and direct the official conduct of such appointed positions.
   B.   The county administrator shall prepare and submit to the board a
proposed annual budget and capital program and be responsible for the
administration of the annual budget after its adoption. At the end of each
fiscal year, the county administrator shall prepare and submit to the board a
comprehensive report on the finances and administrative activities of the
county for the preceding fiscal year.
   C.   The county administrator shall have the authority to organize and
reorganize the various county operations and activities, except those conducted
by elected officials, into departments. Head of department positions shall be
designated as "director" unless otherwise provided by law.
   D.   The county administrator shall act as liaison between elected county
department heads and the board. He shall coordinate the affairs of such
departments as they relate to budget, finance and personnel policies of the
county.
   E.   The county administrator shall maintain communication between the board
of supervisors and the boards, committees and commissions of the county
appointed by the board of supervisors and those appointed by the county
administrator.
   F.   The county administrator shall make such reports as the board may
require concerning the operations and administration of the county. He shall
recommend to the board such measures and ordinances as are necessary or
expedient.
   G.   The county administrator shall attend all meetings of the board unless
excused thereby. The county administrator shall review all proposed agenda
items, take action on issues that can be resolved administratively in view of
the powers and duties of the board, direct the preparation of the item for
submission to the board and, in conjunction with the chairman of the board, set
the agenda. The county administrator shall have the right to report on or
discuss any matters before the board which concern the affairs of any of the
departments under the county administrator's supervision.
   H.   The county administrator shall promulgate, with the consent of the
board, such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the functioning of
the various county departments managed by nonelected officials. Such
departments shall submit all proposed rules and regulations to the county
administrator for review and approval prior to issuance.
   I.   The county administrator shall be responsible for administering the
merit system in accordance with this code, the merit system rules, and policies
adopted by official action of the board.
   J.   The county administrator shall establish and maintain a risk management
program.
   K.   The county administrator shall establish and maintain a workers'
compensation program.
   L.   The county administrator shall negotiate, for approval by the board,
and administer intergovernmental agreements between the county and local, state
and federal jurisdictions.
   M.   The county administrator is authorized to sign federal, state and
public grant applications, agreements, assurances and other pertinent grant
documents prepared or received by all county departments.
   N.   The county administrator may initiate and shall coordinate legislative
activities of concern to the county and to county department heads and
appointed and elected officers and inform appropriate department heads and
officers regarding matters pertinent to their operations.
   O.   The county administrator shall be responsible for regulating and
ensuring that all county departments comply with pertinent federal, state and
local regulations concerning criminal history, and/or information required,
except insofar as elected county officials have responsibility therefor.
   P.   The county administrator may pursue and settle claims on behalf of the
county with an anticipated and documented value of up to one hundred thousand
dollars. The civil division of the county attorney's office is authorized to
pursue and settle such claims as directed by the county administrator. The
pursuit and settlement of any claim on behalf of the county requires approval
of the board when the anticipated and documented value exceeds one hundred
thousand dollars. The county administrator or the county administrator's
designee shall submit to the board an annual financial report reflecting the
number of claims and amount of claims pursued on behalf of the county during
that fiscal year.
   Q.   The county administrator shall have such other duties and
responsibilities as are reasonably necessary for the efficient administration
of the county and as may be authorized by the board. Any duty or responsibility
previously delegated to the county administrator shall remain in full force and
effect unless specifically overruled by this code.
(Ord. 2024-8 § 1, 2024; Ord. 2002-94 § 1, 2002; Ord. 2000-76 § 2, 2000; Ord.
2000-8 § 1 (part), 2000; Ord. 1998-67 § 1 (part), 1998; Ord. 1993-1 § 1 (part),
1993; Ord. 1990-110 § 1(part), 1990)
2.12.080   Assistance of officers and employees; creation of committees.
   For assistance in carrying out official duties, the county administrator may
call upon officers and employees in departments under the county
administrator's supervision, so long as that assistance falls within the
legally authorized scope of their activities. The county administrator may
create and appoint committees to provide information and advice on matters that
pertain to the functions assigned to the county administrator.
(Ord. 1993-1 § 1 (part), 1993; Ord. 1990-110 § 1 (part), 1990)
2.12.090   Noninterference.
   A.   No individual member of the board of supervisors nor any member of the
supervisor's personal staff shall give orders, instruct or interfere, publicly
or privately, with any officer or employee under the supervision of the county
administrator except through the county administrator or the county
administrator's designee.
   B.   No individual member of the board nor any member of the supervisor's
personal staff shall direct or request the county administrator or any
subordinate to appoint or remove any person or in any manner other than
official board action take part in the appointment or removal of officers and
employees under the supervision of the county administrator.
   C.   This section shall not limit an individual member of the board of
supervisors or a member of a supervisor's personal staff from seeking
information. The county administrator shall establish, subject to board
approval, a procedure for responding to requests for information from
individual members of the board of supervisors or their personal staff. Nothing
in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the board members or their
personal staff from fully and freely discussing with or suggesting to the
county administrator anything pertaining to county affairs or the interests of
the county.
   D.   No county employee or appointed officer shall take any action based on
an order, instruction or request for action by an individual member of the
board of supervisors or any member of the supervisor's personal staff which
violates this section. A county employee or appointed officer shall immediately
report in writing to the county administrator any such order, instruction,
request for action or interference that may constitute a violation of this
section. The making of such a report shall not be grounds for disciplinary
action or removal of an employee or appointed official.
   E.   Any person who violates subsection A, B or D of this section is guilty
of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
(Ord. 1993-1 § 1 (part), 1993; Ord. 1990-110 § 1 (part), 1990)
Chapter 2.16
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE FOR ELECTED OFFICIALS AND CANDIDATES
Sections: 
2.16.010   Definitions.
2.16.020   Duty to file statement—Exceptions.
2.16.030   Financial information required.
2.16.040   Form.
2.16.050   Violation—Penalty.
2.16.010   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter:
   A.   "Business" includes any enterprise, organization, trade, occupation or
profession, whether or not operated as a legal entity or for profit, including
any business trust, corporation, partnership, joint venture or sole
proprietorship.
   B.   "Compensation" means anything of value or advantage, present or
prospective, including the forgiveness of debt.
   C.   "Gift" includes any gratuity, special discount, favor, hospitality,
service, economic opportunity, loan or other benefit received without
equivalent consideration and not provided to members of the public at large.
   D.   "Member of the household" means the spouse of a public officer, and any
minor child of whom the public officer has legal custody.
   E.   "Public officer" means a person holding an elective office of the
county, except members of the legislature and judges of the superior court.
(Ord. 2010-69, § 1 (part), 2010: prior code § 41.12.010)
2.16.020   Duty to file statement—Exceptions.
   A.   Every public officer shall file with the clerk of the board of
supervisors a sworn financial disclosure statement covering the previous
calendar year, on or before January 31 of each year. Every person appointed to
a public office shall file a sworn financial disclosure statement within
fifteen days of such appointment.
   B.   Candidates for public office shall file with the election filing
officer a sworn financial disclosure statement covering the preceding twelve-
month period at the time of the filing of the nominating petitions.
   C.   The statement shall contain:
      1.   The name and address of the public officer, the name of each member
of the household, and all names under which they do business;
      2.   Identification of each employer and of each source of compensation
amounting to more than one thousand dollars annually received by the public
officer and the members of the household in their own names, or by any other
person for the use or benefit of the public officer and members of the
household, a brief description of the nature of the services for which the
compensation was received. The disclosure of information privileged by law and
the disclosure of individual items of compensation that constitute portions of
the gross income of a business or profession from which the public officer and
the members of the household derive compensation is not required.
      3.   The name of every corporation, trust, business trust, partnership or
association in which the public officer and members of the household, or any
other person for the use or benefit of the public officer and members of the
household, have an investment or holdings of over one thousand dollars at fair
market value as of the date of the statement, or in which the public officer or
a member of the household holds any office or has a fiduciary relationship, and
a value and a description of the financial interest, office or relationship.
The disclosure of the name of any bank or other financial institution with
which the public officer or member of the household has a deposit or withdrawal
share account is not required.
      4.   All real property interests in the state, including street address,
specific location and approximate size or legal description, to which the
public officer or members of the household holds legal title, or a beneficial
interest in, excluding their residences and property used primarily for
personal recreation by the public officer or members of the household and the
value of such interest. If a real property interest was acquired or divested
during the preceding calendar year, the transaction and the date of occurrence
shall also be identified.
      5.   The name and address of any person to whom the public officer and
members of the household owe more than one thousand dollars and the name of any
person who owes the public officer and members of the household more than one
thousand dollars. The disclosure of debts resulting from the ordinary conduct
of a business or profession, debts on the residence of the public officer or
members of the household, debts arising out of secured transactions for the
purchase of consumer goods, and debts secured by cash values on life insurance
is not required.
      6.   The identification of any account receivable exceeding one thousand
dollars held by the public officer or member of the household in their own
names, or by any other person for the use or benefit of the public officer or
members of the household. The disclosure of information privileged by law and
of debts arising from the ordinary conduct of business or profession is not
required.
      7.   The source of each gift, or accumulated gifts from a single source,
of more than five hundred dollars received by the public officer and members of
the household in their own names during the preceding twelve months, or by any
other person for the use or benefit of the public officer and members of the
household. The disclosure of gifts received by inheritance, or by distribution
from a trust established by a spouse or an ancestor, or from relatives is not
required. Political campaign contributions are not gifts.
      8.   A description of any professional occupation or business license in
which a public officer or member of the household has an interest, issued by
the county or by a state department, agency, commission, institution or
instrumentality which requires for its issuance the consideration of the
application by the board of supervisors, including the name in which the
license is issued, the type of business or profession, and its location.
      9.   A list of any bonds issued by the county held by a public officer or
member of the household at any time during the preceding calendar year in
excess of one thousand dollars. If a reportable county bond was acquired or
divested during the preceding calendar year, the transaction and the date of
occurrence shall also be identified.
(Ord. 2010-69 § 1 (part), 2010: prior code § 41.12.020)
2.16.030   Financial information required.
   The sworn financial statement shall contain all information required by the
Arizona Revised Statutes, Sections 38-541 through 38-545, or as shall be
required by the state legislature by future amendment.
(Prior code § 41.12.030)
2.16.040   Form.
   Public officers shall file the sworn financial disclosure statement on a
form provided by the clerk of the board of supervisors.
   Candidates for public office shall file the sworn financial disclosure
statement on a form provided by the election filing officer.
(Ord. 2010-69 § 1 (part), 2010: prior code § 41.12.040)
2.16.050   Violation—Penalty.
   Any public officer or candidate for public office who knowingly fails to
file a financial disclosure statement as required in this chapter, or who
knowingly files an incomplete or false financial disclosure statement is guilty
of a Class 1 misdemeanor, as provided in the Arizona Revised Statutes, Section
38-544.
(Prior code § 41.12.050)
Chapter 2.20
COUNTY MEET AND CONFER PROCESS
Sections: 
2.20.010   Definitions.
2.20.020   Election of employee representative.
2.20.030   Recognition of authorized representative; voluntary transfer from
predecessor organization to successor organization.
2.20.040   County neutrality and employee rights.
2.20.050   Meeting and conferring.
2.20.060   Innovation and quality.
2.20.070   Meet and confer process for certified law enforcement officers.
2.20.010   Definitions.
   In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
   A.   "Eligible employee" means any individual employed by the county
including deputies and sergeants in the sheriff's department. "Eligible
employee" does not include confidential, managerial or supervisory employees,
officers, and elected officials and peace officers as defined in A.R.S. Section
13-105(29), or lieutenants or captains in the Pima County sheriff's department.
   B.   "Confidential employee" means an employee who, has access to
confidential or discretionary information regarding the formulation of county
policy or procedures; or whose functional responsibilities or knowledge
concerning employee relations makes the employee's membership in an employee
organization incompatible with that employee's duties.
   C.   "Managerial employee" means an employee, including any elected
official, who, is engaged predominantly in executive or management functions or
who meets the definition of executive employee set forth in the Department of
Labor regulations codified at 29 C.F.R. 541.100.
   D.   "Predecessor organization" means an organization that has been
recognized as an authorized representative of county employees under this
chapter, but that desires to transfer its status as authorized representative
to a successor organization.
   E.   "Supervisory employee" means an employee, having authority to hire,
transfer, suspend, layoff, recall, promote, discipline or discharge other
employees, or to adjust their grievances, or to effectively recommend such
action if the exercise of such authority is not of a routine or clerical nature
but requires the use of independent judgment, as defined in 29 C.F.R. 541.202.
The term "supervisor" shall include only those individuals who, pursuant to 29
C.F.R. 541.202, perform a preponderance of the above-specified acts of
authority on a day-to-day basis and does not include "lead" persons who direct
employee work but lack such authority.
   F.   "Successor organization" means an organization that a predecessor
organization requests succeed the predecessor organization as county employees'
authorized representative.
(Ord. 2018-1 § 1 (part), 2018; Ord. 2009-69 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 2008-83 § 1
(part), 2008: Ord. 2007-1 § 1 (part), 2007)
2.20.020   Election of employee representative.
   A.   An employee organization shall be recognized as the authorized
representative for eligible employees upon a verified showing that it
represents a majority of eligible employees but such recognition shall be on
the condition that individual employees and representatives of other employee
groups are allowed to communicate freely with county management and the board
on employment and personnel issues and so long as the flow of information to
county management and the board from other sources is not impeded. A verified
showing of majority status shall be established by the following method.
      1.   Subject to the conditions set forth above, an employee organization
shall be entitled to be recognized and certified as the authorized
representative of eligible employees upon receiving a majority of valid votes
cast in a representation election.
      2.   A request for election may be filed by an employee organization with
the county administrator upon a showing that a minimum of thirty percent of
eligible employees have designated the employee organization to represent them.
This showing of interest may be made by petition, signed authorization cards,
active membership cards or a combination thereof. All such documents must
include the legible printed name of the employee, as well as the employee's
signature in order to be verified.
      3.   Within a reasonable time of receiving the petition, signed
authorization cards, active membership cards or a combination thereof, but not
to exceed twenty days, the county administrator shall verify whether the
petition signatures, signed authorization cards, active membership cards or a
combination thereof constitute a valid showing of interest in representation by
an employee organization of at least thirty percent of eligible employees.
   B.   Upon verification of the showing of interest as described in subsection
A, paragraph 2 of this section, the county shall, within five business days,
provide to the petitioning employee organization a list of all eligible
employees. The list shall include the employees' department, and job
classification, if available. The list shall be provided in both written and
electronic format, if available. The determination of which employees are
eligible pursuant to this chapter shall be made by the director of the human
resources department, in consultation with the petitioning employee
organization and the existing authorized representative, if any, and approved
by the County Administrator.
   C.   Upon verification of each group meeting the requirements of subsection
A, paragraph 2 of this section, the county administrator, in consultation with
each employee organization qualifying to appear on the ballot, shall set an
election date that is within thirty calendar days or as mutually agreed upon by
the county administrator and the employee organization and shall, in
consultation with the employee organization, determine the time(s) and location
(s) for the election. The county administrator shall post a notice showing the
date and time of the election.
   D.   Any other employee organization that desires to have its name placed on
the election ballot must file such a request within ten business days of the
first request for an election and must accompany such a request with a verified
showing of interest, as described in subsection A, paragraph 2 of this section,
that at least thirty percent of eligible employees have authorized the employee
organization to represent them.
   E.   The election shall be conducted by secret paper ballot and be held at
such time(s) and place(s) that all eligible employees have an opportunity to
vote. Each employee eligible to vote shall be provided the opportunity to
choose the employee organization he/she wishes to represent him/her from among
those on the ballot, or to choose "none." Each employee organization on the
ballot shall have the opportunity to have an observer stationed at each polling
place for the duration of the election and during the vote count. As the meet
and confer process will enhance public services and employee relations, voting
and participation in this process constitutes a public benefit. Employees shall
be given a reasonable opportunity to vote or to serve as designated election
observers on paid time pursuant to written administrative procedures
promulgated by the county administrator.
   F.   To be certified and recognized as an authorized representative, an
employee organization must receive a majority of the valid votes cast. In an
election involving three or more choices, where none of the choices receives a
majority of the valid votes cast, a runoff election shall be conducted between
the two choices receiving the largest number of votes.
   G.   The election and vote count shall be conducted by the county at minimal
cost and shall be overseen by a neutral third party mutually agreed to by all
participants in the election, who shall serve as the election official. The
election official shall report to the board on findings and conclusions
regarding the election. The board has the final authority to review such
findings and conclusions and to resolve any disputes regarding the operation or
outcome of any such election. All costs of the election shall be borne in equal
amounts among the county and the participants in the election.
(Ord. 2009-69 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 2008-83 § 1 (part), 2008: Ord. 2007-1 § 1
(part), 2007)
2.20.030   Recognition of authorized representative; voluntary transfer from
predecessor organization to successor organization.
   A.   If an employee organization receives a majority of the valid votes cast
in an election provided for in Section
2.20.020, the county administrator shall certify and recognize the organization
as the authorized representative for all eligible employees subject to the
conditions set forth in Section
2.20.020. There shall be one authorized employee organization for purposes of
meeting and conferring, or participating in any other labor-management process
authorized by this chapter. However, nothing in this chapter shall prevent
individual employees or representatives of other employee groups from
communicating directly with county management and the board on employment and
personnel issues and nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to impede
the flow of information to county management and the board from other sources.
   B.   An employee organization recognized as the authorized representative
shall be recognized as such for a minimum of five years. An employee
organization recognized as the authorized representative that is unsuccessfully
challenged in a subsequent election pursuant to this subsection shall be
recognized for an additional minimum of five years. Thereafter, recognition as
the authorized representative shall continue but may be challenged at any time
after five years through the filing of an election request as provided for in
Section
2.20.020. The ballot for any such election shall include the existing
authorized representative and any employee organization that files a valid
petition pursuant to Section
2.20.020.
   C.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a predecessor
organization may request that a successor organization succeed it as authorized
representative. A request under this subsection must:
      1.   Be in writing;
      2.   Be signed by a person authorized to bind the predecessor
organization;
      3.   Be submitted to the county administrator;
      4.   Identify the successor organization; and
      5.   Include a written acknowledgement, signed by a person authorized to
bind the successor organization, stating that the successor organization is
able to and desires to take on the status of county employees' authorized
representative.
   D.   Upon receipt of a request that complies with Section
2.20.030(C), the county must provide reasonable written notice of the request
to all eligible employees within five business days. The written notice may be
transmitted by electronic means. The written notice must identify the
predecessor organization and successor organization, state that the predecessor
organization has requested that the successor organization succeed it as county
employees' authorized representative, and include a protest form on which the
eligible employee can indicate the eligible employee's opposition to the
recognition of the successor organization as authorized representative, along
with instructions for completing the protest form and submitting it. If more
than fifty percent of eligible employees return completed protest forms within
thirty calendar days after the date of the written notice to the eligible
employees, the county administrator must certify that the successor
organization may not succeed the organization as authorized representative, and
that the predecessor organization will continue to be recognized as the county
employees' authorized representative until another authorized representative is
chosen as otherwise provided in this chapter. Otherwise, the county
administrator must certify that the successor organization succeeds the
predecessor organization, and upon that certification the successor
organization will thereafter be recognized as the County employees' authorized
representative for purposes of this chapter. For purposes of Section
2.20.030(B), recognition of the successor organization does not commence a new
term of recognition, and the successor organization is protected from challenge
in a subsequent election only if the predecessor organization was so protected,
and then only for the remainder of the period of time that the predecessor
organization would have been so protected.
(Ord. 2018-1 § 1 (part), 2018; Ord. 2009-69 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 2008-83 § 1
(part), 2008: Ord. 2007-1 § 1 (part), 2007)
2.20.040   County neutrality and employee rights.
   A.   The county's confidential, managerial and supervisory employees, in
their employment dealings with eligible employees, shall remain neutral on the
issue of whether employees are to be represented by an employee organization or
if so, which of any potential employee organizations should be the
representative of such employees. Eligible employees shall not be treated
adversely in the workplace for discussing or expressing their views regarding
employee representation, the employee organization, or workplace issues.
   B.   Employees may join or engage in activities on behalf of an employee
organization on non-county working time or at times otherwise agreed to be the
parties. Employees shall be free from any interference, restraint, or coercion
by any employee, supervisor, or manager because of their membership or
participation in employee organizations, so long as any activity involving any
employee organization or potential employee organization is done on non-county
working time or at times otherwise agreed to by the parties and does not
interfere with or disrupt the work of the county. Employees may talk about
employee organizations on county working time under the same terms applicable
to any other employee conversation regarding non-work related topics.
   C.   Any employee representatives may request payroll deductions for
employee organization dues and other deductions authorized by employees. Such
deductions shall be made if authorized in writing by the employee, and on the
terms authorized by the employee. Any employee who has authorized deductions of
employee organization dues may withdraw any such authorization pursuant to
applicable county policy.
   D.   Upon an employee organization's election as the authorized
representative of eligible county employees, the employee organization's
representatives may, pursuant to written administrative procedures promulgated
by the county administrator have access to public portions of county facilities
during times that they are normally open to the public, and to non-public areas
upon approval of the county administrator or applicable department head, to
meet with employees and conduct employee organization business, provided that
such employees engage in these activities during non-county working time or at
times otherwise agreed to by the parties. The county shall not unreasonably
restrict such access.
   E.   Nothing in this chapter shall require any employee to become a member
of or otherwise be affiliated with any employee organization or penalize in any
manner any employee who chooses such non-affiliation. Individual employees,
groups of employees, and employee representative organizations that are not the
authorized representative may communicate directly and freely with the
management and elected and appointed officials of the county on any matter that
may be the subject of the meet and confer process and the flow of information
to the board shall not be impeded in any way.
(Ord. 2009-69 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 2008-83 § 1 (part), 2008: Ord. 2007-1 § 1
(part), 2007)
2.20.050   Meeting and conferring.
   A.   The purpose of this section is to establish a meet and confer process
within the parameters set forth in Arizona Attorney General Opinion No. 106-004
(R06-008) to develop mutual recommendations in the form of a memorandum of
understanding for submittal to the board. The goals of the meet and confer
process shall include the provision of high quality services, the facilitation
of harmonious relations between employees and county management, enhancing
employee performance, maximizing efficiency, and reducing costs and, therefore,
the tax burden on county residents. The meet and confer process may include
discussions of work issues including wages, benefits, merit system rules,
personnel policies or other terms and conditions of employment. As the
processes outlined in this chapter are for a public purpose, the parties may
agree to provide paid release time for employees to conduct activity for an
authorized employee organization.
   B.   Upon recognition of an employee organization as the authorized
representative of eligible county employees, the county administrator and the
employee organization shall within a reasonable time and by mutual agreement
establish a meet and confer process. The process may include any committees,
organizational structure, processes or schedules to facilitate communication
and achieve mutual goals and may be mutually changed as necessary and
appropriate.
   C.   County management shall meet and confer with an authorized employee
representative upon the authorized employee representative's request.
Representatives of county management and the authorized employee representative
shall meet at mutually agreed upon times and places and confer in good faith
with sincere resolve to reach an agreement which will be committed to a written
memorandum of understanding proposal to the board of supervisors.
      1.   The process shall begin with a written request to meet and confer
from an authorized employee organization. Within ten business days from the
receipt of the employee organization's request, representatives of the employee
organization and the county management's designated representative(s) shall
begin meeting and conferring on a bi-weekly basis or as mutually agreed.
Meetings shall continue until an agreement is reached or impasse is declared by
either party. Those areas where there is no agreement shall be outlined as
areas in dispute. If agreement is reached on all areas, the written agreement
shall be submitted to the board of supervisors as the proposed memorandum of
understanding.
      2.   If either party declares impasse or anytime after the forty-fifth
calendar day after the initial meet and confer meeting, either party may
request a neutral mediator to assist the parties to reach an agreement. The
mediator shall be from the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service or a non-
employee of the county who is mutually agreed upon by the county and the
employee organization.
      3.   Anytime after the sixtieth calendar day after the initial meet and
confer meeting, either party may request the appointment of a fact-finder. The
parties will attempt to mutually agree on a permanent fact-finder for disputes
arising under this section. If the parties cannot agree on a fact-finder, they
will request that the American Arbitration Association appoint a fact-finder.
All issues not previously agreed upon will be submitted to the fact-finder, who
shall issue an advisory opinion to both parties no later than thirty calendar
days after submission of the issue.
      4.   Notwithstanding the time limits listed in this section, by no later
than June 1, all areas of agreement, areas in dispute and areas still under
consideration, along with the recommendation of the fact-finder, shall be
submitted to the board of supervisors for their consideration.
   D.   Final action by the board of supervisors shall constitute the
memorandum of understanding which, after enactment by the board of supervisors,
shall have the binding status of an enactment of the board of supervisors. In
the event there is a conflict between the county's personnel policies, merit
system rules or other rules and regulations and an enacted memorandum of
understanding, the memorandum of understanding shall supersede the personnel
policies and rules and regulations to the extent permitted by law.
Notwithstanding any recommendations or provisions of memorandum of
understanding, the board retains its executive and legislative power and
authority to act unilaterally at any time, whether or not such board action is
consistent with any of the provisions of any such memorandum of understanding,
in any case, the board may accept, reject or modify any such memorandum of
understanding resulting from the meet and confer process in whole or in part,
or may take whatever action it deems appropriate consistent with applicable
laws. All such actions taken by the board that incur cost to the county are
subject to annual appropriation by the board, as it deems appropriate, within
each county budget. Upon recognition of a successor organization under section
2.20.030(D), the predecessor organization's rights and duties under the
memorandum of understanding are automatically assigned to the successor
organization.
   E.   The authorized representative or the county administrator may at any
time make recommendations, communicate with, or report to the board on any work
issue or the status of any discussion within the meet and confer process.
   F.   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the board or county elected or
appointed officials from acting unilaterally in exercising any powers or
fulfilling any duties, responsibilities or deadlines conferred or imposed by
law, including the powers and duties of the county administrator as set forth
in
Chapter 2.12 of this code.
   G.   All activities of and county employees and officials who participate in
the meet and confer process are subject to the requirements of Section
2.12.090 of this code relating to noninterference and board of supervisors
policy number C2.1 relating to code of ethics.
   H.   In the event there is a dispute regarding the interpretation or
exercise of the rights and processes set forth in this chapter, the authorized
employee representative may submit the matter to fact-finding using the process
set forth in Section 2.20.50(C) above. The opinion of the fact-finder shall be
submitted to the board of supervisors for its consideration.
(Ord. 2018-1 § 1 (part), 2018; Ord. 2009-69 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 2008-83 § 1
(part), 2008: Ord. 2007-1 § 1 (part), 2007)
2.20.060   Innovation and quality.
   A.   In addition to the meet and confer process set forth in Section
2.20.050 the county administrator and authorized representative shall meet at
least annually to identify and address departmental and county-wide issues of
mutual concern in an organized and constructive manner that facilitates
employees and management jointly reaching solutions that improve the provision
of high quality services or productivity in order to meet the needs and better
serve the customers, residents and tax payers of the county.
   B.   Quality and performance improvement programs shall be established based
on policies and procedures developed by the county administrator. The
authorized representative and all individual employees, groups of employees,
and employee representative organizations shall be encouraged to participate in
such performance improvement programs to benefit those who receive and those
who pay for county services.
(Ord. 2009-69 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 2008-83 § 1 (part), 2008: Ord. 2007-1 § 1
(part), 2007)
2.20.070   Meet and confer process for certified law enforcement officers.
   A.   An employee organization representing employees who are deputies and
sergeants in the sheriff's department, certified law enforcement officers
except lieutenants and captains, may be recognized in the manner set forth in
Sections
2.20.020 and
2.20.030 above, as the authorized representative of such deputies and sergeants
and certified law enforcement officers except lieutenants and captains.
   B.   Any memorandum of understanding entered into pursuant to Section
2.20.050 above with respect to deputies and sergeants, and county certified law
enforcement officers except lieutenants and captains, shall include the sheriff
as a party, or the sheriff and the authorized representative for the deputies
and sergeants, certified law enforcement officers except lieutenants and
captains, may together establish separate procedures to govern the meet and
confer process with respect to those terms and conditions of employment that
are within the exclusive control of the sheriff as the appointing authority of
deputies and sergeants, and certified law enforcement officers, in the
sheriff's department.
   C.   Nothing herein shall prevent the sheriff from acting unilaterally in
exercising any powers or fulfilling any duties, responsibilities or deadlines
conferred upon or imposed upon the sheriff by the law or the Constitution of
the state of Arizona.
(Ord. 2009-69 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 2008-83 § 1 (part), 2008)
Chapter 2.24
EMPLOYEE MERIT SYSTEM COMMISSION
Sections: 
2.24.010   Title.
2.24.020   Description.
2.24.030   Definitions.
2.24.040   Merit principles.
2.24.050   Merit system commission.
2.24.060   Power and duties of the commission.
2.24.070   Application and exemptions.
2.24.080   Status of present employees.
2.24.090   Compliance required.
2.24.010   Title.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Pima County merit system
chapter.
(Ord. 2000-81, 2000; Ord. 1986-140 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-67 (part), 1985)
2.24.020   Description.
   The merit system shall consist of:
   A.   This chapter;
   B.   A set of merit system rules separately adopted by the board of
supervisors;
   C.   A merit system commission.
(Ord. 2000-81, 2000; Ord. 1986-140 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-67 (part), 1985)
2.24.030   Definitions.
   A.   "Board" means the Pima County board of supervisors.
   B.   "Commission" means the merit system commission.
   C.   "Department director" means an appointing authority or the department
head authorized by an appointing authority to make appointments to county
employment.
(Ord. 2000-81, 2000; Ord. 1986-140 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-67 (part), 1985)
2.24.040   Merit principles.
   The merit system rules shall be based upon the "Standards for a Merit System
of Personnel Administration" issued by the U.S. Office of Personnel Management.
(Ord. 2000-81, 2000; Ord. 1986-140 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-67 (part), 1985)
2.24.050   Merit system commission.
   A.   The merit system commission shall consist of five members, appointed by
the board, each of whom shall hold office for a term of four years and until a
successor is appointed and qualified. Appointment to fill a vacancy caused by
other than expiration of term shall be for the unexpired portion of the term.
   B.   Members of the commission shall be selected from among the qualified
electors of the county. No more than three of such members shall be from the
same political party.
   C.   A member of the commission may be removed by the board for good cause.
   D.   Any one of the following may constitute the resignation of a member of
the commission and may authorize the board to appoint a new member to fill the
unexpired term:
      1.   Absence from three consecutive meetings;
      2.   Becoming a candidate for any elective public office;
      3.   Accepting any appointive office or employment in the service of the
United States (other than in the Armed Forces), state, county, city or town.
   E.   The commission shall elect one of its members as chairperson.
(Ord. 2000-81, 2000; Ord. 1986-140 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-67 (part), 1985)
2.24.060   Power and duties of the commission.
   A.   The commission shall perform such duties and exercise such powers as
are necessary to carry out the provisions of A.R.S. Section 11-351 et seq. In
addition to the duties imposed upon it elsewhere, it shall be the duty of the
commission:
      1.   To prepare such rules as it may find necessary or appropriate to
carry out its duties;
      2.   To advise the board, county administrator, and director of human
resources on problems concerning personnel administration;
      3.   To make such special reports to the board as it considers desirable.
   B.   The commission may recommend to the board of supervisors rules for the
administration of the merit system.
(Ord. 2006-89, 2006; Ord. 2000-81, 2000; Ord. 1986-140 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-
67 (part), 1985)
2.24.070   Application and exemptions.
   The merit system shall apply to all positions and employees of the county
government except the following:
   A.   Persons who perform services for which payment is made on a fee,
contract or claim basis;
   B.   Volunteers;
   C.   Members of boards, commissions and committees appointed by the board;
   D.   Elected officials;
   E.   County administrator;
   F.   Chief deputy county administrator;
   G.   Deputy county administrator;
   H.   Assistant county administrator;
   I.   Chief deputies to elected officials;
   J.   Department directors;
   K.   Deputy department directors not to exceed three in each department;
   L.   Employees in positions allocated as attorney — unclassified or
administrative attorney — unclassified;
   M.   One position in each department that reports directly to the director
or deputy director as designated by the director and deputy director;
   N.   An administrative position declared exempt after August 8, 1985. The
number of positions declared exempt under this paragraph shall not exceed ten
percent of the total number of county appointive officers and employees.
   O.   Employees of the superior court, justice courts and clerk of superior
court who are covered by the judicial merit system and juvenile court who are
covered by the juvenile court merit system;
   P.   Employees of the sheriff's department who are covered by the law
enforcement merit system;
   Q.   Employees hired into unclassified positions on an intermittent or
temporary basis, and designated as Employee Class F or G;
   R.   Employees hired into positions allocated as 7007/Intern - Unclassified.
(Ord. 2021-20 § 1, 2021: Ord. 2017-30 § 1, 2017: Ord. 2010-42, 2010; Ord. 2000-
81, 2000; Ord. 1986-140 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-67 (part), 1985)
2.24.080   Status of present employees.
   All county employees holding positions on the effective date of this chapter
shall be continued in their positions in accordance with merit system rules as
they exist now or are hereafter amended.
(Ord. 2000-81, 2000; Ord. 1986-140 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-67 (part), 1985)
2.24.090   Compliance required.
   All officials and other county employees shall conform to, comply with, and
aid in the administration of the provisions of this chapter and the merit
system rules.
(Ord. 2000-81, 2000; Ord. 1986-140 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-67 (part), 1985)
Chapter 2.28
WORKERS' COMPENSATION
Sections: 
2.28.010   Declaration of policy.
2.28.020   Authorization to sign.
2.28.010   Declaration of policy.
   The county administrator is authorized to maintain a program of self-
insurance for the county by renewing necessary policies. The county
administrator is authorized to contract with the broker of record to purchase
an excess limits workers' compensation policy in the amount of five million
dollars, the retention by the county per occurrence to be two hundred fifty
thousand dollars; to procure a bond satisfactory to the industrial commission
in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars; and to do all other acts
necessary to implement and maintain the workers' compensation self-insurance
program.
(Prior code § 33.08.010)
2.28.020   Authorization to sign.
   A.   The board of supervisors of the county has the authority, under A.R.S.
Sections 11-251(11) and 11-251(14), to settle and allow all accounts legally
chargeable against the county and to control the prosecution and defense of all
actions in which the county is a party.
   B.   From time to time during the course of a fiscal year, certain services
are provided to and by the county under the terms of contracts and other
agreements and certain claims arise against and in favor of the county, and for
the following:
      1.   Matters appropriate for monetary settlement occur during the course
of a fiscal year;
      2.   These contracts, agreements, claims and settlements provide for the
maintenance and operation of the county, funding for which is set forth as line
items in approved departmental budgets;
      3.   In order to expedite the processing of the large number of these
contracts, agreements, claims and settlements it is desirable that the county
administrator be empowered to take certain action to further the prompt
processing of such contracts, agreements, claims and settlements.
   C.   The county administrator or his designate is authorized to sign such
contracts and agreements involving sums which do not exceed ten thousand
dollars to compromise lawful claims against and in favor of the county in sums
which do not exceed ten thousand dollars and to compromise and settle for sums
which do not exceed ten thousand dollars, lawsuits in which the county, the
board of supervisors or any board, commission, agency, officer, agent or other
representative or entity thereof is a party.
   D.   A monthly listing of such contracts, agreements and settlements signed
under the provisions of this chapter shall be presented by the county
administrator or his designee monthly at a regular board meeting for
incorporation into the records and minutes of the board of supervisors.
(Prior code § 33.08.020)
Chapter 2.32
RULEMAKING PROCEDURE
2.32.010   Definitions.
2.32.020   Exceptions.
2.32.030   Public notice and meeting.
2.32.040   Response to public comment.
2.32.050   Rule adoption.
2.32.060   Adoption of emergency and required rules.
2.32.010   Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter:
   A.   "Board" means the county board of supervisors acting in its own
capacity or as the district board of directors.
   B.   "County" means Pima County.
   C.   "District" means the Pima County Regional Flood Control District.
   D.   "Proponent" means any unit of the county or the district proposing a
rule.
   E.   "Rule" means a statement of general applicability that implements,
interprets, or prescribes law or policy, or describes the procedure or practice
requirements of the county or the district. Rule includes prescribing fees or
the amendment or repeal of an existing rule but does not include inter-agency
memoranda that are not delegation agreements.
(Ord. 2015-46 § 1 (part), 2015)
2.32.020   Exceptions.
   This chapter does not apply to:
   A.   Rules adopted under A.R.S. Section 11-251.05, A.R.S. Title 11, Chapter
6, Article 2 (County Zoning), and Article 3 (County Subdivision Regulation),
A.R.S. Title 42 (Taxation), A.R.S. Title 43 (Taxation of Income), or A.R.S.
Title 49, Chapter 3, Article 3 (County Air Pollution Control).
   B.   Rules adopted under Title 11, Chapter 6, Article 1 (County Planning)
provided that the proposed rule is noticed as required by Pima County Code
Title 18,
Chapter 18.89, that the planning and Zoning Commission holds a hearing on the
proposed rule, and that development services responds to public comments in its
written report to the board of supervisors.
   C.   Substantive policy statements, as defined in A.R.S. Section 11-1601.
   D.   Procedural documents that only affect the internal procedures of the
county or district and do not impose additional requirements, conditions, or
penalties on regulated parties.
   E.   Use or adoption of any form or procedures for execution or use of a
form whose contents or substantive requirements are consistent with an
ordinance or statute.
(Ord. 2015-46 § 1 (part), 2015)
2.32.030   Public notice and meeting.
   A.   Before any rulemaking, including the amendment or repeal of any
existing rule, the proponent will file a notice of the proposed action with the
clerk of the board. The notice will include:
      1.   The exact wording of the proposed rule.
      2.   The date and location of scheduled public meetings on the proposed
rule.
      3.   The closing date of the public comment period.
      4.   The address for submission of public comments.
   B.   The clerk of the board will post the notice of proposed action on the
county website.
   C.   The public comment period will begin the date the notice of proposed
action is posted on the county website and will close seven calendar days
following the last public meeting required by A.R.S. Section 11-251.18(B)(1) or
A.R.S. Section 48-3609.02(B)(1).
   D.   Not less than fourteen calendar days following posting of the notice of
proposed action on the county website, the proponent will conduct one or more
public meetings to receive public comment on the proposed rule.
   E.   The proponent may, with fourteen calendar days' notice, schedule
additional public meetings or may extend the public comment period.
   F.   The proponent may meet informally with any interested party for the
purpose of discussing any proposed rule.
(Ord. 2015-46 § 1 (part), 2015)
2.32.040   Response to public comment.
   A.   The proponent will evaluate all public comments received before the
close of the public comment period and will respond, in writing, to all written
comments.
   B.   The proponent may respond to verbal comments received prior to close of
the public comment period.
   C.   Proponent's written response to public comments will be provided to the
board and will be posted on the county website at least seven calendar days
prior to the date of the meeting at which the final text of the proposed rule
is considered by the board.
(Ord. 2015-46 § 1 (part), 2015)
2.32.050   Rule adoption.
   A.   The proponent will provide at least fourteen calendar days' notice on
the county website and other required locations of any meeting at which the
board will consider the final text of a proposed rule.
   B.   If, during consideration of the final text of the proposed rule, the
board determines the proposed rule is adoptable but requires substantial
change, it will issue a supplemental notice of the proposed changes and
establish an additional public comment period.
   C.   Upon closure of the additional comment period, the board may consider
the proposed rule at a subsequent meeting.
   D.   No rule is enforceable without substantial compliance with this
chapter.
(Ord. 2015-46 § 1 (part), 2015)
2.32.060   Adoption of emergency and required rules.
   A.   Notwithstanding this chapter, the board may, upon a finding that an
emergency exists and adoption of the rule is necessary to protect the public
health, safety or welfare, to avoid an imminent budget reduction or to avoid
serious prejudice to the public interest, adopt a rule without complying with
the public notice requirements of this chapter. Within a reasonable time after
adopting an emergency rule, the board shall review the emergency rule to
determine whether the rule should continue in effect or be terminated.
   B.   Notwithstanding this chapter, the board may, upon a finding that a rule
is required by state or federal law or regulation and, provided the requirement
to adopt the rule on an expedited basis is not the result of delay or inaction
by the board, adopt a rule without complying with the public notice
requirements of this chapter.
   C.   Notwithstanding this chapter, the board may adopt, amend, or repeal
rules that do not increase the cost of regulatory compliance or reduce the
procedural rights of regulated parties by complying with A.R.S. Title 38,
Chapter 3, Article 3.1.
(Ord. 2015-46 § 1 (part), 2015)
Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapters: 
   
Chapter 3.04 - RISK MANAGEMENT
   
Chapter 3.05 - MANDATORY SET-ASIDE IN EACH YEAR'S BUDGET
   
Chapter 3.06 - BONDING DISCLOSURE, ACCOUNTABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION
Chapter 3.04
RISK MANAGEMENT
Sections: 
3.04.010   Objectives.
3.04.020   Policy.
3.04.030   Authority of county manager.
3.04.040   Manuals.
3.04.050   Trust fund-Established.
3.04.060   Trust fund-Purpose.
3.04.070   Designation of risk management consultant or insurance
administrator.
3.04.080   Administration of trust.
3.04.090   Trust fund not subject to budget law.
3.04.100   Lapse of trust fund.
3.04.110   Payment of benefits, losses and claims.
3.04.120   Settlement of claims.
3.04.130   Limitation of liability.
3.04.140   Indemnification of officers and employees.
3.04.010   Objectives.
   A.   The objectives of the county risk management program are to maintain
continuity of the various services which the county provides and to maintain
budget integrity. These primary objectives shall be accomplished by:
      1.   Investing in long-term loss reduction through a comprehensive safety
program designed for loss control;
      2.   Providing adequate funds for timely replacement of losses incurred
without distortion of the budget plan;
      3.   Insuring the catastrophic loss potential; and
      4.   Minimizing the net cost of the total program.
   B.   The policy of the board of supervisors is established and implemented
with these objectives in mind.
(Prior code § 33.04.020(A))
3.04.020   Policy.
   A.   Pima County is to be protected against fortuitous loss or losses which,
in the aggregate during any financial period, would significantly affect
personnel, property, the budget or the ability of the board of supervisors to
continue to fulfill its responsibilities to taxpayers and the public. In no
event shall loss of life, major personal injury to employees or members of the
public, or damage to property attributable to county activities be acceptable
to the board of supervisors.
   B.   Pima County will apply to risks of fortuitous loss the risk management
process which includes a systematic and continuous identification of loss
exposures, the analysis of these exposures in terms of frequency and severity
probabilities, the application of sound risk control procedures, and the
financing of risks consistent with the county's financial resources.
   C.   In recognition of its financial resources and the geographical
dispersion of its physical assets. the county will accept retention of
uninsured losses up to the limits that are deemed to be prudent by the board,
in consultation with the staff.
(Prior code § 33.04.020(B))
3.04.030   Authority of county manager.
   The county manager is authorized to establish and maintain the county risk
management program. The county manager is authorized to take all reasonable
steps which are necessary and appropriate to administer the risk management
program.
(Prior code § 33.04.020(C))
3.04.040   Manuals.
   The risk manager shall establish and distribute a risk management manual.
All elected officials. department heads, staff and employees are required to
familiarize themselves with the risk management and safety programs and to
follow the directives contained therein.
(Prior code § 33.04.020(D))
3.04.050   Trust fund-Established.
   There is established the Pima County loss trust fund. The county manager is
directed to segregate all funds previously and hereinafter budgeted for trust
fund purposes as described in this chapter and to maintain the trust fund
separate and apart from the county general fund.
(Prior code § 33.04.030(A))
3.04.060   Trust fund-Purpose.
   The purpose of the trust fund is to provide for the payment of legal
defense, administrative costs, claims adjusting costs, losses, reserves for
anticipated losses and law suits, insurance costs including premiums, external
audit and other expenses related to the operation of the county's self-
insurance program. Each year, the board, upon recommendation from the county
manager, will determine the amount deemed appropriate for these purposes.
(Prior code § 33.04.030(B))
3.04.070   Designation of risk management consultant or insurance
administrator.
   Pursuant to A.R.S. Section 11-981(B)(1), the board will designate a licensed
risk management consultant or insurance administrator licensed pursuant to
A.R.S. Title 20. Chapter 2, Articles 3 or 9, and such license shall be verified
by the board at the time of the designation.
(Prior code § 33.04.030(C))
3.04.080   Administration of trust.
   A.   Trustees. The trust shall be administered by five joint trustees who
shall serve in an advisory capacity at the sole pleasure of the board. The
board shall appoint five trustees, of whom no more than one may be a member of
the board and no more than one may be an employee of the county. A majority of
the trustees shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting business.
   B.   Duties. The trustees shall meet at least once a year and shall make
recommendations thereafter to the board, through the county manager, regarding
the investment and administration of the trust. The trustees shall submit an
annual report to the board through the county manager relating to the status of
the trust fund and making other recommendations that the trustees deem
necessary and appropriate. The risk manager shall coordinate the activities of
the trustees and assist in the facilitation and administration of the trust
fund in whatever manner is appropriate and necessary.
   C.   Bonding Requirements. The trustees shall be bonded in the same manner
and procedure as for county employees.
   D.   Stop Loss Provision. Pursuant to the self insurance provisions of the
county risk management program, only a certain portion of risk exposure will be
self-imposed. Levels of self-insured retention for each particular type of a
risk shall be recommended by staff and established and approved by the board.
   E.   Annual Audit. An annual audit shall be performed by an external auditor
and a copy of the report shall be kept on file in the office of the clerk of
the board of supervisors for a period of not less than five years. The risk
manager shall coordinate this audit.
   F.   Expenditures from Trust Fund. There shall be no expenditures from the
trust fund for any purpose not specified in Title Il, Chapter 7, Article 5, of
the Arizona Revised Statutes.
(Prior code § 33.04.030(D))
3.04.090   Trust fund not subject to budget law.
   Expenditures during the fiscal year from the trust fund and money in the
trust fund at the close of the fiscal year shall not be subject to the
provisions of A.R.S. Sections 42-301 et seq.
(Prior code § 33.04.030(E))
3.04.100   Lapse of trust fund.
   In the event the trust fund is no longer used by the county for the purposes
stated in this chapter and in A.R.S. Section 11-981, the fund shall revert
during that fiscal year to the general fund and account.
(Prior code § 33.04.030(F))
3.04.110   Payment of benefits, losses and claims.
   The county has established and ratifies a program which combines the
purchase of insurance and self-insurance to deal with the various benefits,
losses and claims involving the county. This program includes the provision of:
   A.   Health, accident, life or disability benefits for county employees,
officers and their dependents;
   B.   Payment of any property loss sustained or lawful claim of liability
made against the county or its employees or officers, providing such employees
or officers are acting within the scope of their employment or authority:
   C.   Workers' compensation benefits, subject to
Chapter 2.28 of this code.
(Prior code § 33.04.030(G))
3.04.120   Settlement of claims.
   The civil division of the county attorney's office is authorized to provide
a legal defense, by retainer or otherwise, to the county and any officer or
employee of the county entitled to indemnification as provided in this chapter,
in connection with claims against them. The adjusting and settlement of any
claim up to thirty thousand dollars shall require the approval of the director
of finance and risk management or designee. The settlement of any claim over
thirty thousand dollars and up to fifty thousand dollars shall require the
additional approval of the civil division of the county attorney's office. The
settlement of any claim over fifty thousand dollars and up to one hundred
thousand dollars shall require the written approval of the county administrator
or designee. The settlement of any claim over one hundred thousand dollars
requires approval of the board. The director of finance and risk management
shall submit to the board and county administrator an annual financial report
reflecting, among other things, the number of claims and amount of liability
and other loss claim payments that have been made during that fiscal year.
(Ord. 2022-8, 2022: Ord. 2009-31, 2009: Prior code § 33.04.030(H))
3.04.130   Limitation of liability.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to create liability of the county
where such liability does not exist in the absence of this chapter. This shall
specifically apply to, but not be limited to, any liability which is alleged to
derive from the indemnification of employees and more specifically described in
Section
3.04.140. of this chapter.
(Prior code § 33.04.030(I))
3.04.140   Indemnification of officers and employees.
   A.   Indemnification. The county will defend, hold harmless and indemnify
any officer or employee of the county from and against any and all claims and
civil liability for alleged acts, errors or omissions of any nature occurring
while acting in authorized governmental or proprietary capacities and in the
course and scope of employment or authorization of the county. The county may
fulfill these obligations by insurance, by a program of self-insurance, or by a
combination of these methods.
   B.   Exclusions. The following exclusions shall apply to the indemnification
and other benefits provided in subsection A:
      1.   Claims or losses which are attributable to officers or employees
working for noncounty employers, even when so authorized under the county merit
system rules and personnel policies, except:
         a.   Law enforcement officers who while so employed or while in any
off-duty status, take police action in accordance with departmental rules and
policies.
         b.   The exception of this subparagraph shall be applicable only when
said law enforcement officer has protected himself and the county by use of a
form as follows:
AGREEMENT 
The following agreement is made in consideration of the below-named Deputy
Sheriff agreeing to perform security-related tasks for the below-named employer
or contractor during said Deputies' off-duty hours.
The below-named employer or contractor agrees that he will indemnify, save
harmless, and defend the below-named off duty Deputy Sheriff and Pima County
and all of its agencies, departments, officers and employees from and against
any and all claims by or on behalf of any third person or entity arising out of
any alleged act or omission of said Deputy Sheriff occurring at the direction
of and within the scope of his employment, or authorization by said employer or
contractor.
 
 _____
 Employer or Contractor
 _____
 Off-Duty Deputy Sheriff
 _____

 Date
 
 
Received Pima County
Sheriff Department:
by: _____
Date: _____
 
      2.   Claims or losses that arise out of or are directly attributable to
any act or omission determined by a competent court to be a felony by the
officer or employee.
   C.   Officer and Employee Defined. For the purpose of the indemnification
and other benefits provided by this chapter, each of the following will be
treated as an "officer or employee of the county" for the purposes of this
chapter:
      1.   Any officer, employee or agent of the county and any authorized
volunteer working under the direction of an officer, employee or agent of the
county;
      2.   Any member of boards or commissions of the county;
      3.   The spouse of the above-named individuals where a claim is made on
the spouse for an incident arising solely out of the action of the named
officer or employee;
      4.   No person shall be entitled to indemnification or other benefits
under this chapter if that person has a contractual relationship with the
county which specifically provides otherwise, or which provides that the person
will indemnify. defend, hold harmless and/or insure the county against such
liability.
   D.   Effective Date. The indemnification and other benefits provided by this
chapter are applicable to claims and liability arising from occurrences on or
after the 28th day of September, 1978.
   E.   Duties of Persons Claiming Benefits Under This Chapter. The county
shall have no duty to defend, save harmless, or indemnify any persons unless
and until the person claiming benefits performs the following duties:
      1.   In the event of an occurrence which may reasonably be expected to
give rise to liability or a claim of liability, written notice containing the
particulars shall be forwarded to the county counsel unit of the county
attorney's office on a form provided by the county attorney. The notification
shall contain the identity of the employee or other party claiming benefits and
all reasonably obtainable information with respect to the time, place and
circumstances of the occurrence. It shall include, if available, the name,
address and telephone number of any person who may claim injury, and the names,
addresses and telephone numbers of all potential witnesses. Such communication
shall be confidential, within the purview of the attorney/client privilege.
Such written notification shall be delivered to the county attorney within
three working days. Any occurrence involving death or bodily injury to a third
party shall be reported immediately by telephone to the risk manager during
duty hours.
      2.   If claim is made or suit is brought against an employee or other
party claiming benefits hereunder, the person shall immediately forward to the
county attorney's office every demand, notice, summons or other process
received by him or his representative. The party shall also inform the
appropriate department head. Failure to give timely notice shall relieve the
county of any liability pursuant to this chapter.
      3.   Any employee or other party claiming benefits hereunder shall
cooperate with the county and upon the county's request assist in making
settlements, in the conduct of suits, and in enforcing any right of defense,
contribution or indemnity which may be owing to said employee by any third
person or organization. The employee or other party claiming rights hereunder
shall not make any written or oral statements or agreements before or after an
occurrence which would prejudice his or the county's right to defense,
contribution or indemnification by a third person or organization or which
would prejudice the county's right to subrogation to those rights.
      4.   The employee or other party claiming benefits hereunder shall attend
meetings, hearings and trials and assist in the securing and giving of evidence
and obtaining the attendance of witnesses. The employee shall not, except at
his own cost, voluntarily make any payment, assume obligation, or incur any
expense other than for first aid at the time of the occurrence.
   F.   Subrogation. In the event the county makes any payment or incurs any
expense on behalf of any party claiming benefits hereunder, the county shall be
subrogated to that party's rights of recovery therefor against any third person
or organization. Each party claiming benefits hereunder shall execute and
deliver instruments and papers and do whatever else is necessary to secure such
rights to himself and the county. Each party shall do nothing to prejudice such
rights.
   G.   Actions by Those Claiming Benefits Under This Chapter. No action shall
lie against the county in reliance on this chapter. Furthermore. no action
shall lie against the county in reliance on this chapter until the amount of
the parties' obligation to pay shall have been finally determined either by
judgment against the person claiming benefits hereunder after actual trial and
appeal or by written agreement of the person claiming benefits hereunder, the
claimant and the county.
   H.   Assignment. Through this chapter, the county incurs certain obligations
to its officers and employees and grants them certain rights. These rights are
not assignable, and no right or cause of action is granted to any person other
than officers and employees of the county as defined in subsection C of this
section. Any attempt by an employee to assign or otherwise transfer rights
pursuant to this chapter shall operate to cancel and render null and void such
rights.
   I.   Protection. Any protection which is afforded under this chapter shall
be excess over and above any valid and collectible insurance. It is the
intention of this chapter that the protection provided in this section shall be
secondary and effective only if there is not insurance or other indemnification
covering an alleged claim.
   J.   Limitation of Liability. Nothing in this chapter shall:
      1.   Impose any liability on the county or the departments, agencies,
boards and commissions or any officers, agents or employees of the county
unless such liability otherwise exists;
      2.   Impair any defense the county or the departments, agencies, boards
and commissions or any officers, agents or employees of the county otherwise
may have.
   K.   Reservation of Right to Amend. The board specifically reserves the
right to alter, amend or repeal this chapter.
   L.   Limitation on County Exposure. The county's liability pursuant to this
chapter shall be limited to the sum of one hundred thousand dollars per
occurrence, inclusive of costs and attorney's fees, unless the county has
procured insurance to provide for any liability in excess of that amount and
such coverage is effective with respect to said occurrence.
   M.   Distribution of Claim Documents. The clerk of the board of supervisors
and any other county department, officer or employee who receives claim forms,
complaints, legal process, or other documents relating to liability claims
against the county, shall forward copies of the claims to the civil division of
the county attorney's office, the risk manager, as well as other parties who
normally receive such communications within the normal course of business.
(Prior code § 33.04.040)
Chapter 3.05
MANDATORY SET-ASIDE IN EACH YEAR'S BUDGET
Sections: 
3.05.010   Objectives.
3.05.020   Annual appropriation.
3.05.030   Use of funds.
3.05.031   Funding recommendations.
3.05.040   Administration of funds.
3.05.050   Minimum fiscal year appropriations.
3.05.060   Reporting.
3.05.070   Expenditure limit.
3.05.010   Objectives.
   There is hereby set aside in the annual Pima County budget the following
sums of money for the expansion and improvement of Pima County programs for
children and youth: for fiscal year 1997-98 an amount equal to not less than
0.25 percent (¼ of 1 percent) of the estimated general fund receipts for that
fiscal year; for fiscal year 1998-99 an amount equal to not less than 0.50
percent (½ of 1 percent) of the estimated general fund receipts for that fiscal
year; for fiscal year 1999-2000 an amount equal to not less than 0.75 percent
(¾ of 1 percent) of the estimated general fund receipts for that fiscal year;
for fiscal year 2000-2001 and for each subsequent fiscal year an amount equal
to not less than one percent (1 percent) of the estimated general fund receipts
for that fiscal year.
(Ord. 1997-27 § 1, 1997)
3.05.020   Annual appropriation.
   The funds provided for in Section
3.05.010 shall be subject to annual appropriation by the Pima County board of
supervisors and shall be in addition to the base budget amount for children and
youth established in fiscal year 1996-97 and to all other Pima County
appropriations for programs and activities for children and youth.
(Ord. 1997-27 § 1, 1997)
3.05.030   Use of funds.
   The county shall use funds appropriated by this chapter to provide a safe
and stimulating environment and educational, developmental and recreational
activities for children and youth who are eighteen or less years of age.
Activities provided may include, but are not limited to, school-based, after-
school activities, child care, recreation, life skills, job readiness,
training, education, mentoring, health education and services, social and
behavioral services.
(Ord. 1997-27 § 1, 1997)
3.05.031   Funding recommendations.
   Annually the Outside Agency Review Committee or such other committee
appropriately designated by the board of supervisors shall review proposals and
programs and make recommendations to the board of supervisors regarding
specific programs and uses for funds appropriated by this chapter.
(Ord. 1997-27 § 1, 1997)
3.05.040   Administration of funds.
   Funds appropriated under this chapter shall be administered by the community
resources department or by such other unit as the board of supervisors or the
county administrator shall direct. Activities funded under this ordinance may
be provided directly by the county or may be contracted to community agencies.
(Ord. 1997-27 § 1, 1997)
3.05.050   Minimum fiscal year appropriations.
   In any of the years during which funds are set aside under this chapter,
Pima County shall not reduce the amount of county appropriations for services
for children and youth below the base amount established in fiscal year 1996-
97.
(Ord. 1997-27 § 1, 1997)
3.05.060   Reporting.
   The county shall establish a purpose, budget, annual performance objectives,
and measurable performance benchmarks for each service and activity funded
under this ordinance and shall collect and report quarterly and require all
contractors to collect and report quarterly data which demonstrates the degree
to which the objectives and the benchmarks have been achieved. The county
administrator shall annually report to the board of supervisors the uses and
results of services funded under this ordinance including data regarding the
attainment of benchmarks and expenditures, and information regarding the
effectiveness, efficiency and impact of the program on the community.
(Ord. 1997-27 § 1, 1997)
3.05.070   Expenditure limit.
   No funds appropriated under this chapter shall be expended for any program
or purpose not authorized by law nor for law enforcement, court, probation or
other criminal justice programs nor general government purpose.
(Ord. 1997-27 § 1, 1997)
Chapter 3.06
BONDING DISCLOSURE, ACCOUNTABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION
3.06.010   Intent.
3.06.020   Bond implementation plan.
3.06.030   Advance publication of bond implementation plan.
3.06.040   Pima County bond advisory committee: Capital planning, program and
implementation review.
3.06.050   Conservation acquisition commission.
3.06.060   Monitoring and reporting on sold bonds.
3.06.070   Substantial modification of an adopted bond implementation plan.
3.06.080   Coordination with other capital planning of the county and region,
and applicability to county bond projects implemented by other agencies.
3.06.090   Design, construction, and equipping of county bond projects by other
agencies.
3.06.010   Intent.
   The board of supervisors is authorized by Arizona Revised Statutes § 35-452
to call special elections for the purpose of seeking voter authorization to
incur bonded indebtedness. The board of supervisors desires to provide voters
with complete information on projects, along with their estimated costs, that
will be constructed from proceeds of bonded indebtedness, as well as provide
voters, to the maximum extent practicable, firm assurances that these projects
will be constructed within the estimated costs and time tables established by
the board of supervisors. Because it is not practicable to list on a ballot
question all of the projects and estimated costs that would be constructed from
the sale of authorized bonded indebtedness, the board of supervisors
establishes this chapter setting forth requirements for presenting general
obligation and revenue bond packages to the electorate for approval and for
monitoring utilization of the proceeds from authorized bonds.
(Ord. 2015-26 § 1 (part), 2015: Ord. 1997-25 § 1 (part), 1997)
3.06.020   Bond implementation plan.
   Prior to the start of early voting for a special election called by the
board of supervisors pursuant to A.R.S. § 35-452, the board of supervisors
shall adopt by ordinance a "bond implementation plan," which shall be adopted
for each bond election and question ordered by the board of supervisors
pursuant to A.R.S. § 35-452. The title of the ordinance shall contain the date
of the special bond election. After adoption, the ordinance shall govern the
development or construction of all listed projects, including the approximate
project cost and the proposed construction schedule, unless the ordinance is
amended pursuant to Section
3.06.070. The ordinance shall contain the following information:
   A.   A complete list of all projects to be constructed or acquired by
proceeds from the sale of authorized bonds. The project list shall identify
each project by name and location and provide a short narrative project
description.
      1.   For capital construction projects, the following information shall
also be provided for each project:
         a.   A project scope of work containing a description of the facility
to be constructed, including the size or capacity and whether construction is
for a new facility or an expansion, rehabilitation or reconstruction of an
existing facility, and whether the project is phased and if so which phases are
being funded.
         b.   The purpose and specific benefits to be achieved by construction
of the project.
         c.   A project schedule by major task (i.e. land acquisition,
planning/design, construction), as well as the implementation periods projected
for starting and completing the project. Implementation periods are blocks of
two fiscal years each.
         d.   The agency responsible for future operations and maintenance of
the facility, and the estimated future operating and maintenance costs and
source of funding for those costs if the implementing agency is a governmental
entity.
         e.   The agency responsible for managing project design and
construction.
      2.   For each land acquisition project related to open space, trails or
historic/cultural preservation, the following information shall be provided:
         a.   An estimate of the number of acres to be acquired.
         b.   The desirable location of the property by section, township, and
range, assessor parcel number, or reference to a map that is readily accessible
to the public.
         c.   The benefits to be achieved by the acquisition.
         d.   The estimated future management and security costs, and
identification of the management agency if other than the county.
   B.   The total estimated cost of each project or acquisition, total
estimated costs by major task, a discussion of how estimated costs were
derived, and analysis of the potential for actual costs to increase or decrease
from estimated costs.
   C.   The total estimated amount and source (federal or state aid, local
governments, other county revenues, private sources) of any other revenues that
may be obtained for the project or revenues that are required as cost sharing
from other governmental entities or private parties, including an assessment of
the certainty or uncertainty that other sources will be secured and options
that would be available if the other sources are not secured.
   D.   A detailed strategy for managing the sale of bonds, including
discussion of the factors upon which the county will base decisions on the
timing, size, and terms of bond sales.
   E.   For general obligation bonds, discussion of commitments to manage the
sale of bonds within limits on secondary property tax rates and analysis of how
approval and sale of general obligation bonds could impact actual property
taxes paid for debt service.
   F.   For revenue bonds, a discussion of sources of revenues that will be
used to service bond debt and whether fees will be raised, and by how much, if
revenue bonds are approved and sold.
(Ord. 2015-26 § 1 (part), 2015: Ord. 2004-16 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1997-25 § 1
(part), 1997)
3.06.030   Advance publication of bond implementation plan.
   A bond implementation plan adopted pursuant to this chapter shall be
published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county
prior to the start of early voting for the special bond election. The
publication shall set forth the ordinance containing the bond implementation
plan adopted by the board of supervisors. Upon adoption, the board of
supervisors shall also publish the bond implementation plan on the county's web
site prior to the start of early voting for the special bond election. 
(Ord. 2015-26 § 1 (part), 2015: Ord. 2004-16 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1997-25 § 1
(part), 1997)
3.06.040   Pima County bond advisory committee: Capital planning, program and
implementation review.
   A.   The bond advisory committee shall have a total of twenty-five members,
appointed as follows:
      1.   Fifteen members, three appointed by each member of the board of
supervisors;
      2.   Five members, one appointed by each of the incorporated cities and
towns within the county (if additional cities or towns are incorporated, the
number of committee members will be increased as necessary to permit each
incorporated city or town to have a representative);
      3.   Two members, one appointed by the Tohono O'odham Nation and one
appointed by the Pascua Yaqui Tribe; and
      4.   Three members appointed by the county administrator.
   B.   The Pima County bond advisory committee members shall be appointed to a
term of six years. Upon resignation of any member, the appointing authority
shall appoint another member to begin a new six-year term.
   C.   The committee will meet as often as it deems necessary but in any event
no less frequently than semi-annually.
   D.   Under direction of the county administrator, county staff shall prepare
progress reports and otherwise brief the committee on the status of
implementation of the bond implementation plan, with special attention paid to
major issues impacting implementation of the bond improvement plan.
   E.   The committee shall review and make recommendations to the board of
supervisors on all proposed amendments to the bond implementation plan.
   F.   The committee shall review and approve the semiannual progress reports
on the bond implementation plan prior to it being transmitted to the board of
supervisors and published, as required by Section
3.06.060.
   G.   The committee shall make recommendations to the board of supervisors
about the amount of bond funding and projects to be included in bond
implementation plans for future bond elections.
(Ord. 2015-26 § 1 (part), 2015: Ord. 2004-16 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1997-25 § 1
(part), 1997)
3.06.050   Conservation acquisition commission.
   A.   The board of supervisors hereby establishes the conservation
acquisition commission.
   B.   The conservation acquisition commission shall have a total of eleven
members, appointed as follows:
      1.   Five members, one appointed by each member of the board of
supervisors;
      2.   Two members appointed by land conservation organizations active in
Pima County;
      3.   One member appointed from the Pima County natural resources, parks
and recreation commission;
      4.   One member appointed by the local board of realtors;
      5.   One member appointed by the ranching community; and
      6.   One member appointed by the county administrator.
   C.   Appointments to the commission are for a term of eight years. Upon the
resignation of any member, the appointing authority shall appoint another
member to begin a new eight-year term.
   D.   The duties and responsibilities of the commission are as follows:
      1.   Oversee and monitor all open space bond acquisitions placed before
the board of supervisors for consideration including, but not limited to,
acquisitions funded by general obligation bonds.
      2.   Make recommendations to the board of supervisors and the Pima County
bond advisory committee for priorities in the scheduling of open space
acquisitions and periodic assessment and change in priorities as necessary.
      3.   Make recommendations to the board of supervisors and the Pima County
bond advisory committee on any aspects of open space land management, including
management of lands acquired for open space.
      4.   Make recommendations to the county administrator, and the Pima
County bond advisory committee on any aspect relating to internal county
management of the open space acquisition process.
      5.   Make recommendations to the Pima County bond advisory committee on
the amount of bond funding and location of open space property to include in
bond implementation plans for future bond elections.
   E.   The commission will meet as often as it deems necessary but in any
event no less frequently than semi-annually.
   F.   Under direction of the county administrator, county staff shall prepare
progress reports and otherwise brief the commission on the status of
implementation of the conservation bond program component of the bond
implementation plan, with special attention paid to major issues impacting
implementation of the conservation bond program.
   G.   The commission shall review and make recommendations to the board of
supervisors on all potential amendments to conservation bond program components
of the bond implementation plan.
   H.   The commission shall review and approve the semiannual progress reports
on the conservation bond program component of the bond implementation plan
prior to it being transmitted to the Pima County bond advisory committee as
required by Section
3.06.040.
(Ord. 2015-26 § 1 (part), 2015: Ord. 2004-16 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1997-25 § 1
(part), 1997)
3.06.060   Monitoring and reporting on sold bonds.
   The county administrator shall prepare semiannual reports on the progress of
the bond implementation plan implementation which shall be transmitted to the
board of supervisors for review. Semiannual progress reports shall also be
posted on the county's web site. Progress reports shall be prepared and
transmitted by the county administrator until a bond implementation plan is
determined by the board of supervisors to have been completed. Each progress
report shall contain the following information on the status of every project
or program contained in the plan:
   A.   The project implementation schedule status, including design,
construction, acquisition, and completion.
   B.   Any estimated substantial variances from the project cost and revenue
sources in the adopted bond implementation plan.
   C.   Any major issues that may affect implementation of the bond
implementation plan.
   D.   Plans and options for addressing substantial modifications in costs or
revenue sources or other major issues, including the potential need for
substantial modifications in the bond implementation plan as provided for in
Section
3.06.070.
   E.   A fiscal status report, including discussion of bond sales completed
and projected; interest rates and terms of completed sales; interest rates
received on deposits of bond proceeds; updated projections on conditions in
municipal bond markets; current debt service schedules and updated projections
of secondary property tax rates for debt service; updated projections of
secondary property tax rates with projected future sales of bonds; and analysis
and projection of fiscal impacts of completed and projected sales of revenue
bonds.
(Ord. 2015-26 § 1 (part), 2015: Ord. 2004-16 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1997-25 § 1
(part), 1997)
3.06.070   Substantial modification of an adopted bond implementation plan.
   A.   A substantial modification in the implementation of an adopted bond
implementation plan shall not be made except as provided in this section.
   B.   For purposes of this section, "substantial modification" means any of
the following:
      1.   An increase or decrease in total actual project costs by twenty-five
percent or more.
      2.   An increase or decrease in actual bond costs by twenty-five percent
or more.
      3.   An increase or decrease in actual other revenues by twenty-five
percent or more; for projects with other revenues estimated at zero, a
substantial modification shall be defined as an increase in "other" (non-bond)
revenues of one hundred thousand dollars or more.
      4.   A delay in a project construction or implementation schedule of
twelve months or more.
      5.   A delay in the scheduled years of sale of bonds of twenty-four
months or more caused by changes in municipal bond market conditions or county
financial conditions and necessary to maintain commitments to capping the
secondary property tax rate for debt service.
      6.   Any project that is not constructed.
      7.   Any project that is added to those to be constructed.
      8.   Any increase or decrease in the project scope that alters the
disclosed project benefits.
      9.   If some but not all proposed bond questions are approved at the
special election, the board of supervisors will make any changes to the
projects for the approved questions that are necessary because of the failure
of another question, and these will be considered "substantial modifications."
   C.   Cost estimates may vary, up or down, as a project proceeds through
planning, design, procurement, contract award, and construction, or through
appraisals and negotiations for conservation acquisitions. Variations in cost
estimates do not constitute "substantial modifications." "Substantial
modifications" relating only to cash amounts may occur pursuant to official
action by the board of supervisors, in open session, that establish actual
costs through awards of construction contracts, contract amendments or change
orders, or approval of a contract for acquisition. Such board actions shall be
accompanied by notice that the action will require a bond ordinance amendment.
   D.   Any substantial modification in the implementation of an adopted bond
implementation plan requires a specific amendment to the ordinance that adopted
the plan. The ordinance amendment must be enacted by the board of supervisors
at a public hearing for which at least fifteen days' prior notice was published
in a newspaper of general circulation in the county.
      1.   Bond ordinance amendments shall be scheduled to coincide with
transmittal of the semiannual bond progress reports as required by Section
3.06.060.
      2.   Recommendations for bond ordinance amendments shall be reviewed by
the Pima County bond advisory committee, as required by Section
3.06.040, and for conservation acquisitions by the conservation acquisition
commission, as required by Section
3.06.050.
      3.   Substantial modifications of costs, bond funding, or other funding
ordinance amendments may be scheduled for the next regular transmission of the
semiannual bond progress report, provided the modifications were previously
approved by the board of supervisors.
      4.   All other substantial modifications require amendment of the bond
ordinance prior to the substantial modification.
(Ord. 2015-26 § 1 (part), 2015: Ord. 2004-16 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1997-25 § 1
(part), 1997)
3.06.080   Coordination with other capital planning of the county and region,
and applicability to county bond projects implemented by other agencies.
   A bond implementation plan shall be integrated into a five year capital
improvement plan to be adopted at the time the annual budget of the county is
adopted. The county five-year capital improvement program shall be reported to
the Metropolitan Planning Organization for all necessary coordination and
integration into a regional capital plan. Any project contained within a bond
implementation plan that is being implemented by a political subdivision other
than the county, or by a nonprofit community partner (each an "agency"), shall
conform with the requirements of this chapter. Specific program or project
oversight for the purposes of conforming with this chapter shall remain with
the county.
(Ord. 2015-26 § 1 (part), 2015: Ord. 2004-16 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1997-25 § 1
(part), 1997)
3.06.090   Design, construction, and equipping of county bond projects by other
agencies.
   A.   Pursuant to Pima County Code Section
3.06.080, bond projects authorized by the board of supervisors in a bond
implementation plan for a special bond election to be designed, constructed, or
equipped by another agency using county general obligation bonds to fund a
project in whole or part shall be funded by the county only pursuant to a
binding contract or intergovernmental agreement executed between Pima County
and the implementing agency. Each such project shall be authorized and
implemented with a separate agreement. Neither this code, nor the inclusion of
a project in the bond implementation plan gives an agency any contractual
rights with respect to a project until a binding agreement is duly approved and
executed. The agreement shall authorize the implementing agency to design,
construct, or equip the project, subject to compliance with the terms and
mutual responsibilities of the parties agreed upon in the agreement. Each
agency with an interest in one or more projects in the bond implementation plan
is expected to designate an individual to liaison with the county with respect
to bond program implementation to facilitate the development of project-
specific agreements and other aspects of overall program implementation.
   B.   Unless waived by the board of supervisors as being in the best
interests of the county and warranted by the circumstances of the bond funded
project at issue, the agreement shall include, but not be limited to,
provisions establishing the following:
      1.   That the implementing agency shall operate and maintain the
improvements constructed by county bond funds for a period of not less than
twenty-five years.
      2.   That the implementing agency shall sufficiently fund operations and
maintenance of the facility, and identify the estimated amount and source of
funding for operations and maintenance of the facility.
      3.   That the implementing agency and the county will conduct regular
performance audits to determine if facilities built, operated and maintained by
the implementing agency are being maintained in good working order and are
being used for the appropriate purposes; and that the county may suspend the
allocation of county bond funding for other not-yet-built projects if the
performance audit results in a finding of unsatisfactory and facilities are not
returned to good working order within one hundred twenty days.
      4.   That the implementing agency shall not charge a fee for use of the
constructed improvement that is more than a fee charged by the county for a
similar purpose.
      5.   That the implementing agency agrees to insure the improvements
constructed with county bond funds and will replace same them if they are
damaged or destroyed.
      6.   That the implementing agency agrees to make the improvements
available to all residents of Pima County without restriction or preference to
jurisdiction of residence.
      7.   That the implementing agency agrees to comply with all provisions of
Chapter 3.06 (Bonding Disclosure, Accountability, and Implementation) of the
Pima County Code and will provide all reports to the county in a format and
schedule agreed upon by the parties.
      8.   That the county will only transfer county general obligation bond
proceeds to the implementing agency upon request from the implementing agency,
with full documentation.
      9.   That the implementing agency agrees to a provision requiring
compliance with federal arbitrage regulations.
      10.   That the implementing agency, by action of its governing body at a
public hearing, shall notify the county of events that would require an
amendment of the bond implementation plan ordinance and formally request the
board of supervisors to hold a public hearing on the necessary ordinance
amendment.
      11.   The maximum amount of county bond funds allocated to the specific
project, and what entity will own improvements as they are constructed.
      12.   That the implementing agency will pay for any and all project costs
in excess of the allocated county bond funds.
(Ord. 2015-26 § 1 (part), 2015: Ord. 2004-16 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1997-25 § 1
(part), 1997)
Title 4 INDIGENT HEALTH CARE
Chapters: 
   
Chapter 4.01 - INDIGENT MEDICAL CARE
Chapter 4.01
INDIGENT MEDICAL CARE
Sections: 
4.01.010   Definitions.
4.01.020   Pima County residency.
4.01.030   Authorization to receive affidavits.
4.01.040   Nondiscrimination.
4.01.050   Application process.
4.01.060   Disposition of application.
4.01.070   Redetermination and discontinuance of eligibility.
4.01.080   Appeal hearings.
4.01.090   General care services.
4.01.100   Indigent care at private or university medical facility.
4.01.110   Liens and subrogation rights.
4.01.120   Long-term care.
4.01.010   Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   A.   "AHCCCS" means Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System.
   B.   "AHCCCS Rules" means administrative rules promulgated by the AHCCCS
Director pursuant to legislative directive and occurring in the Arizona
Administrative Code (A.A.C.) at R9-22-101, et seq.
   C.   "ALTCS" means Arizona Long Term Care System.
   D.   "Applicant" means a person or household completing an application for
county subsidized medical care.
   E.   "Application" means a statement made under oath by an applicant or his/
her duly appointed representative for purposes of qualifying for medical care
under A.R.S. 11-297 and 11-293.
   F.   "Application form" means a form(s) prescribed by the Pima County
department of medical assistance for the determination of eligibility for
county subsidized medical care.
   G.   "A.R.S." means Arizona Revised Statutes.
   H.   "Authorized representative" means a person legally authorized by an
individual to act in his/her behalf for purposes of executing a complete and
true application for eligibility, or for purposes of representation in an
appeal hearing.
   I.   "Average annual income" means that which is calculated by multiplying
by four the income for the three months prior to application (A.R.S. 11-
291.01).
   J.   "Categorically eligible" means any public welfare recipient (Aid to
Families with Dependent Children, Supplemental Security Income) and any foster
home child whose care is paid for from state or federal funds, whose membership
in this category makes him/her automatically eligible for medical care.
   K.   "Confidentiality" mean the principle which requires the department of
medical assistance to protect all information accumulated concerning an
applicant and his/her eligibility application.
   L.   "Denial" means formal disapproval of an application for eligibility for
county subsidized medical services.
   M.   "Department" means the Pima County department of medical assistance.
   N.   "Eligibility interviewer" means a person designated and authorized to
perform the eligibility function for the department.
   O.   "Eligibility manual" means the written manual prepared by the director
of the department of medical assistance.
   P.   "General care services" means services provided for a patient other
than long-term care services.
   Q.   "Income" means the gross amount of all consideration received by an
applicant or a household regardless of source or form, less estimated federal
tax, state tax and FICA. Loans with a legal, written obligation for repayment,
portion of grants and scholarships awarded and expended for payment of
education expenses, and if self-employed, the cost of wages (except wages paid
to self and household members), business supplies and materials actually
expended shall not be included in income.
   R.   "Long-term care services" means nursing care institution services,
supervisory care services and adult foster care services.
   S.   "Net average annual income" means that which is calculated from the
gross amount of all consideration received by an applicant or a household
regardless of source or form, less federal tax, state tax and FICA. Net annual
income is computed by multiplying by four the income is computed by multiplying
by four the income for the three months immediately prior to the application
date. Loans with a legal obligation (as defined by the AHCCCS Administration)
for repayment, portion of grants and scholarships awarded and expended for
payment of educational expenses, and, if self-employed, the cost of wages
(except wages paid to self and household members), business supplies and
materials actually expended shall not be included in income. Valid medical
expenses and materials actually expended shall not be included in income. Valid
medical expenses incurred within the past twelve months from the date of the
application decision, for which the applicant is responsible, shall be deducted
from income.
   T.   "Redetermination" means a reevaluation of eligibility. Cases which will
normally result in an applicant's reevaluation include eligibility expirations,
verification disagreements, contested information.
   U.   "Resident" means a person who has established a domicile and is
physically present in Pima County and who can establish by a preponderance of
credible evidence that he/she intends to remain in Pima County for an
indefinite period of time.
   V.   "Right of appeal/right of redetermination" means an applicant's right
to request a redetermination of eligibility.
   W.   "U.S. legal status" means a person qualified pursuant to 42 CFR 435.406
(a).
   X.   "Withdrawal" means the voluntary cancellation of an application by
written or oral request from the applicant.
(Ord. 2025-2 § 1, 2025: Ord. 1993-95 § 1 (part), 1993: Ord. 1991-2 § 1 (part),
1991)
4.01.020   Pima County residency.
   Residency in Pima County is a requirement of county subsidized medical care.
After June 30, 1993, a person must also be of U.S. legal status except for
emergency services as established in A.R.S. 11-297. The following shall be
considered in determining residency:
   A.   Verification Documents. A person who applies for medical assistance in
Pima County has the burden of proving that he/she has established a domicile in
Pima County. The following documents may be considered in determining county
residency:
      1.   An unexpired recent Pima County rent or mortgage receipt or utility
bills in the name of the applicant or head of the applicant's household;
      2.   An unexpired Arizona driver's license showing a current Pima County
address;
      3.   An Arizona vehicle registration showing a current Pima County
address;
      4.   Evidence of recent employment in Pima County;
      5.   Evidence that the applicant is receiving public assistance as a
resident of Pima County;
      6.   Evidence that the applicant has enrolled his/her child(ren) in the
public schools of Pima County during the current school year or for the next
school year if school is not in session;
      7.   Evidence of current registration to vote in Pima County;
      8.   Any other corroborative evidence similar to that listed above,
subject to review by supervisory staff of the department;
      9.   The documents required to demonstrate U.S. legal status are the same
as established by AHCCCS Administration for that purpose.
   B.   In addition to providing one of the residency documents set forth in
subsection A of this section, a person who applies for medical assistance must
sign a county affidavit attesting to residency. The affidavit shall not in
itself establish residency in Pima County. Except for an application for
emergency services, a person who applies for medical assistance must sign an
affidavit attesting to U.S. legal status, specifying the specific ground upon
which that claim of status is based.
   C.   A child is a resident of the county in which he/she resides with the
natural or legally adoptive parent or legal guardian on a permanent basis. A
child may attend school outside of the county and remain eligible as long as
he/she remains in the care and custody of a natural or legally adoptive parent
or legal guardian in Pima County.
   D.   For a family member who is separated from the household solely due to
medical reasons, the residential address of the medical facility shall not be
used to verify the county residency of the household.
(Ord. 1993-95 § 1 (part), 1993: Ord. 1991-2 § 1 (part), 1991)
4.01.030   Authorization to receive affidavits.
   The eligibility staff of the department of medical assistance are hereby
authorized to receive statements under oath required by A.R.S. 11-297 and 11-
293 of all applicants and are further authorized to handle all aspects of the
procedures as described in this chapter.
(Ord. 1991-2 § 1 (part), 1991)
4.01.040   Nondiscrimination.
   A.   No individual will be denied eligibility on the basis of race, color,
religion or sex, nor be denied the right to apply for an eligibility
determination, nor have eligibility determined in a different manner from that
of others. Neither shall any individual be subjected to segregation or separate
treatment in any matter related to eligibility determination on the basis of
race, color, religion or sex. National origin may be considered as a basis for
requiring additional information from applicants for the purpose of
establishing U.S. legal status.
   B.   All aspects of the eligibility determination process shall be conducted
in a manner which protects the privacy of the applicant and enables him/her to
maintain his/her dignity and integrity.
(Ord. 1993-95 § 1 (part), 1993: Ord. 1991-2 § 1 (part), 1991)
4.01.050   Application process.
   A.   Any person who desires county medical care will be given unrestricted
opportunity to apply for eligibility and will be given a courteous interview
during normal business hours.
   B.   Application forms provided by AHCCCS will be used to determine
eligibility for county services. The county reserves the right to supplement
AHCCCS forms with any forms deemed reasonable and necessary.
   C.   Applications shall be made under oath and false statements made in
applications shall subject the person making them to penalties provided by law.
   D.   The eligibility interviewer will assist the applicant in completing the
application form when necessary or required. If a foreign language interpreter
is needed or if other special assistance is needed in completing the
application process, the eligibility staff shall make that help available
within the ability of said staff to procure such help.
   E.   Each applicant will be informed in writing of the procedures and
requirements of the eligibility process, including but not limited to, the
following:
      1.   Confidentiality of information provided;
      2.   Determination and notification process;
      3.   Meaning and significance of the agreement and declaration requiring
his/her sworn oath on the eligibility application;
      4.   Right of appeal;
      5.   Requirements to report changes in income, assets, residency, U.S.
legal status, household size, marital status, or medical coverage;
      6.   Effective date and expiration date of eligibility and the
requirement to apply for a redetermination before expiration for continued care
at county expense.
   F.   For the purpose of establishing eligibility, information shall be
secured from the applicant and collateral sources. The applicant shall be the
principal source of information and is responsible for providing all
information and documentation reasonably required by the eligibility worker for
determination of eligibility. This shall include authorization for any
necessary investigation into the applicant's income, resources, household
composition, residency, U.S. legal status and medical expenses.
   G.   Applicant is responsible for providing necessary information to
complete the application within thirty days of the date of application, unless
a thirty-day extension is agreed upon in writing by the head of household.
   H.   Applicant is responsible for notifying the department of changes in
income, property, resources, household, medical coverage information, U.S.
legal status or residence within ten calendar days of such change.
   I.   Applicant is responsible for reapplying for eligibility prior to
expiration in order to avoid a lapse in coverage. This does not affect
applicant's right to reapply at any time subsequent to lapse of coverage.
   J.   The application process shall be conducted in accordance with the
written eligibility manual prepared by the director of the department of
medical assistance.
(Ord. 1993-95 § 1 (part), 1993: Ord. 1991-2 § 1 (part), 1991)
4.01.060   Disposition of application.
   A.   Eligibility determination will be made within thirty days of
application, unless a thirty-day extension is agreed upon in writing by the
head of household.
   B.   Eligibility will be denied on all applications which are not completed
within thirty days, unless a thirty-day extension is agreed upon in writing by
the head of household.
   C.    When all eligibility requirements have been met, the applicant will be
approved for covered county medical services so long as those services are not
available through another source. Eligibility shall be for a period of six
months from the date of determination and may be approved up to a period of one
year. Eligible resident undocumented persons may be eligible for emergency
services only for a period of time as defined by the AHCCCS Administration. The
following information will be given in writing to an applicant determined
eligible:
      1.   Effective date of eligibility;
      2.   Expiration date of eligibility;
      3.   Restrictions on eligibility;
      4.   The right of appeal.
   D.   When one or more criteria for eligibility is not met, eligibility for
county-subsidized medical care will be denied. In cases of eligibility denial,
the following written information shall be given to the applicant:
      1.   Reason(s) for denial, citing the basis for the denial;
      2.   Right to appeal this decision and how to appeal the denial.
   E.   An applicant may withdraw his/her eligibility application at any time.
      1.   A written voluntary withdrawal of application constitutes forfeiture
of right to appeal on that application.
      2.   A verbal voluntary withdrawal of application will be accepted.
Appeal rights will be granted in the case of a verbal withdrawal.
   F.   All eligibility applications, whether complete, incomplete or
withdrawn, shall become the property of the department, regardless of the
subsequent eligibility determination.
(Ord. 2025-2 § 2, 2025: Ord. 1993-95 § 1 (part), 1993: Ord. 1991-2 § 1 (part),
1991)
4.01.070   Redetermination and discontinuance of eligibility.
   A.   Eligibility status will be redetermined in the following cases:
      1.   At the time the department is notified by the applicant or other
official source of a change or additional information concerning income,
property, resource, medical coverage, residency, U.S. legal status or dependent
status as originally reported by the applicant.
      2.   At the time of reapplication based on the expiration of the
eligibility period.
      3.   At the time of reapplication based upon results indicated by appeals
of the original eligibility determination.
      4.   When there is sufficient proof that the previous application has
been processed incorrectly.
   B.   Eligibility will be discontinued and patient(s) will be fully liable
for medical charges incurred in the following cases:
      1.   Failure of applicant to provide complete income, property,
household, resources, residency, U.S. legal status or medical coverage
information when a reevaluation/redetermination indicates ineligibility or when
a applicant fails to cooperate with the reevaluation/redetermination process.
      2.   Provision of false income, property, household, resources,
residency, U.S. legal status or medical information when a reevaluation/
redetermination indicates ineligibility or when an applicant fails to cooperate
with the reevaluation/redetermination process.
      3.   Failure to notify the department of any changes in income, property,
household, resources, residency, U.S. legal status or medical coverage status
or change in address which could cause a change in eligibility, within ten
calendar days of such change(s).
   C.   An applicant whose eligibility has been discontinued will be afforded
full appeal rights.
(Ord. 1993-95 § 1 (part), 1993: Ord. 1991-2 § 1 (part), 1991)
4.01.080   Appeal hearings.
   A.   Upon a denial, termination, or discontinuance of eligibility, the
applicant shall have the right to a prompt evidentiary hearing. The applicant
shall have fifteen calendar days from the notification of the denial,
termination, or discontinuance in which to request an evidentiary hearing. A
form shall be provided for that purpose and shall be sent with the notice. The
applicant shall fill out the form setting forth a statement of the grounds for
the requested hearing. The request for the hearing shall be delivered or mailed
to the director of the department of medical assistance.
   B.   Within ten business days after receipt of a request for a hearing, the
director of the department of medical assistance shall appoint a hearing
officer. A complete copy of the application together with all relevant
documents shall be given to the hearing officer.
   C.   A hearing shall be scheduled before the hearing officer at the earliest
possible date, but in no event later than fifteen business days after
appointment of the hearing officer.
   D.   Notice of the hearing date shall be mailed to the applicant at least
five business days prior to the hearing, except that the applicant may waive
the time required for the notice of a scheduled hearing.
   E.   The hearing shall be informal. Technical rules of evidence shall not
apply, except that legally privileged communications shall be excluded.
   F.   The applicant may represent himself or may be represented by an
attorney or a representative of his own choosing.
   G.   All parties may examine witnesses and present evidence.
   H.   The applicant shall have the right to examine and copy all documents
and records to be used by the department staff at a reasonable time before the
hearing.
   I.   Upon completion of review of all pertinent evidence or within five
business days of conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall report
his/her recommendation and its basis to the director of the department of
medical assistance.
   J.   The director of the department of medical assistance (or a designee)
shall make a final determination based on the hearing officer's recommendation.
   K.   The director of the department of medical assistance shall mail the
applicant a copy of the hearing officer's recommendation and notify the
applicant, in writing, of the final determination of the department director
within ten business days of receipt of the hearing officer's recommendation.
   L.   The final determination and action taken pursuant thereto shall be
final, subject to a possible right of judicial review in the nature of a
special action pursuant to Arizona law. Notice of this right shall be given to
the applicant with his/her notice of the final determination.
   M.   Members appealing a discontinuance or denial of county benefits within
fifteen days of notice of the discontinuance will remain eligible for county
benefits until a decision on the appeal is rendered.
   N.   Appellants whose benefits continue through the appeal process may be
required to reimburse the county for all costs of medical care received during
the appeal process if the discontinuance or denial decision is upheld by the
county hearing officer and the department director.
(Ord. 1991-2 § 1 (part), 1991)
4.01.090   General care services.
   A.   An applicant for general care service shall be considered indigent if
his/her household:
      1.   Has net average annual income less than or equal to the following
amounts:
Number of Persons Average Monthly Income Annual Income
Number of Persons Average Monthly Income Annual Income
1                 $280                   $3,660
2                 373                    4,476
3                 420                    5,040
4                 466                    5,592
5                 513                    6,156
6                 559                    6,708
7                 606                    7,272
8                 653                    7,836
9                 699                    8,388
10                746                    8,952
11                792                    9,504
12                839                    10,068
 
   Plus $47 per month, $564 per year for each additional household member.
      2.   Does not have a net worth of resources exceeding fifty thousand
dollars including, but not limited to, equity in a house or car with no more
than five thousand cash or other liquid assets. Incurred medical expenses shall
not be used to reduce the value of the household's resources. For an applicant
who is married, any separate property of the applicant's spouse that does not
exceed seventy-five thousand dollars shall not be included in determining the
net worth of resources of the applicant. If the applicant is over sixty years
of age or severely physically or mentally disabled, the value of the dwelling
house is disregarded;
      3.   Has not, within the three years prior to filing an application,
transferred or assigned real or personal property with the intent to render
himself eligible for county assistance.
   B.   Any person who has established current eligibility for Aid to Families
with Dependent Children (AFDC) or Supplemental Security Income (SSI) is
eligible to receive county-subsidized care for services not provided by AHCCCS.
(Ord. 1991-2 § 1 (part), 1991)
4.01.100   Indigent care at private or university medical facility.
   A.   Whenever it is necessary for an indigent to receive care at a private
medical facility or a medical facility operated by a university, the cost of
such care shall be paid only in accordance with A.R.S. 11-297.01 and the
provisions set forth below.
   B.   When an indigent is treated in the emergency room of a private or
university medical facility and is not admitted for inpatient care, the county
shall be liable for costs incurred provided the following conditions are met:
      1.   The patient's medical care is due to an emergency which requires
immediate medical care for the preservation of life or limb; and
      2.   The patient is currently eligible for Pima County Medical
Assistance, or completes a face to face interview for eligibility within thirty
days of care and is determined to have been eligible at the time care was
rendered; and
      3.   The medical facility submits an official notification to the county
within twelve hours of services provided; and
      4.   The medical facility conforms with billing and utilization review
procedures established by Pima County.
   C.   When an indigent is hospitalized for emergency treatment at a private
medical facility or a medical facility operated by a university, the county
shall be liable for costs incurred provided the following conditions are met:
      1.   A physician has determined that an indigent's medical care is due to
an emergency which requires immediate care for the preservation of the
individual's life or limb; and
      2.   The emergent condition of the patient is such that it is deemed
medically inadvisable to transport the patient from the private medical
facility or medical facility operated by a university for further treatment;
and
      3.   The medical facility complies with the following provisions:
         a.   The medical facility through the medical or nursing staff gives
oral or written notice to Pima County within twelve hours after the patient is
admitted for treatment.
         b.   Such notice shall state the location, name, address and condition
of the patient.
         c.   In the event the notice requirements set forth above are not
complied with, the count will reimburse the medical facility for costs incurred
beginning at the time a proper notification is received by the department.
(Ord. 1991-2, § 1 (part), 1991)
4.01.110   Liens and subrogation rights.
   Pursuant to A.R.S. 11-291 and 12-962, Pima County is entitled to a lien and
subrogation rights for charges for hospital and medical care provided to an
injured indigent person. Pima County shall pursue its lien and subrogation
rights against all claims for damages accruing to an injured indigent person or
his/her personal representative on account of injuries giving rise to such
claims and which necessitated such hospital and medical care.
(Ord. 1991-2 § 1 (part), 1991)
4.01.120   Long-term care.
   A.   As of October 1, 1989, pursuant to A.R.S. 11-293, Pima County will
provide long-term care services only for residually eligible members who are
redetermined eligible for county-subsidized long-term care services on an
annual basis.
   B.   Residually eligible members are those indigent persons who were
receiving county-subsidized long-term care services on September 30, 1989 or
who had requested screening by that date, and who either were not determined
eligible for long-term care through ALTCS or those initial ALTCS' eligibility
subsequently has been discontinued for failure to meet the need for
institutional services requirement of A.R.S. 36-2936.
   C.   All redetermination for county-subsidized long-term care will be based
on the applicant's financial and residency status on the date of
redetermination.
   D.   An applicant for redetermination of eligibility for county long-term
care shall be considered indigent if he/she:
      1.   Does not have a gross income prior to deductions which exceeds three
hundred percent of the Supplemental Security Income benefit rate established by
Section 1611(b)(1) of the Social Security Act;
      2.   Has resources of all persons in the household not exceeding fifty
thousand dollars including, but not limited to, equity in a house or car, with
no more than five thousand dollars cash or other liquid assets. However, the
foregoing limit on equity value shall not apply if the applicant is severely
mentally or physically disabled or sixty years of age or older and otherwise
qualified as indigent.
         a.   The applicant's share of the current principal balance of notes,
mortgages and sales contracts will be considered unavailable providing that the
transfer of property resulted in the receipt by the applicant of consideration
amounting to the fair market value of the property transferred.
         b.   Any transfer of property occurring within three years prior to
the date of redetermination will be disregarded if it would have no effect on
eligibility or on the county's lien rights. If the value of the transferred
property would have affected eligibility or county lien rights, county
eligibility will be denied.
      3.   Meets the readmission screening requirements for placement in a
nursing care institution, supervisory care home or with an adult foster care
provider.
   E.   Financial assistance to such indigent persons shall be in an amount not
to exceed the difference between the reasonable cost of the long term care and
the person's income available for the payment of such costs.
   F.   All indigent persons who receive long-term care services pursuant to
this chapter shall be required to contribute towards the costs of such care
their entire income available for the payment of such costs, with the exception
of an amount equal to fifteen percent of the maximum benefit available under
Title XVI of the federal Social Security Act, as amended, pursuant to A.R.S.
11-293(B), which amount is to be retained for the personal use of the person.
   G.   income required for the applicant's spouse or dependents to maintain
the household of the couple or the applicant's dependents, including necessary
living expenses, shall not be deemed available for the payment of costs of
long-term care services within the range and to the extent as follows:
      1.   The amount actually expended for medical care on a monthly basis;
      2.   A standard monthly allowance for food;
      3.   The amounts actually expended on transportation;
      4.   The amount of monthly payments due on nonmedical term payment debts
already established at the time of application.
   In no event shall the allowance for the amounts expended in the foregoing
exceed fifty percent of the amounts set forth in the most current edition of
the "Arizona Statistical Review Urban Family Budget for Maintaining an
Intermediate Living Standard," Metropolitan Tucson, adjusted for inflation. An
additional nineteen percent may be added for each dependent in excess of one.
Any exceptions must be approved by the director of the department of medical
assistance or his/her designee.
      5.   The amount actually expended for maintenance of a residence as
follows:
         a.   In cases when the dwelling is owned, this amount is limited to
the mortgage payment including or in addition to principal, interest, taxes and
insurance; the average monthly gas, electric, water, basic telephone expenses
and garbage.
         b.   In cases where the member and spouse pay rent for housing, this
amount is limited to the amount of monthly rent necessary to maintain the
standard of living of the couple at the time of the redetermination;
         c.   The monthly gas, electric, water, basic telephone expenses and
garbage, when not paid by the landlord.
   In no event shall the allowance for the amounts in a and b of this
subsection exceed the amount set forth in the most current edition of the
"Arizona Statistical Review Urban Family Budget for Maintaining an Intermediate
Living Standard," Metropolitan Tucson, adjusted for inflation.
   H.   In instances when it can be verified that an applicant is expected to
remain in a long-term care facility for greater than ninety days, but less than
one year, the reasonable costs of maintaining the applicant's permanent
residence may be deducted from the payment amount. Property maintenance costs
include rent/mortgage payments and necessary utility costs and may only be
deducted when the residence remains unoccupied.
   I.   At the county's discretion, certain medical insurances may be
maintained by the applicant. Such expenses will be deducted from the
applicant's contribution to the county.
   J.   If a guardian or conservator has been appointed by a court for an
applicant, reasonable, documented expenses that are incurred by a guardian or
conservator in the course of establishing and fulfilling the guardianship or
conservatorship duties shall not be deemed available for the payment of costs
of long-term care services.
   K.   Application, verification and certification procedures shall be the
same as those for general care services to the extent applicable, except that
the duration for eligibility for long-term care shall be one year unless there
is a spouse and/or dependent children, the applicant is living at home at the
time of the redetermination or the applicant is AHCCCS MI/MN eligible. In which
cases the county long term care expiration date will be the same as the AHCCCS
expiration date.
   L.   During the redetermination process, if the member is incapable of
completing the reapplication process for long-term care, and there is no one
else willing or able to complete the process, the department will make every
effort to procure the needed information and complete the redetermination for
the applicant.
   M.   Patients receiving long-term care services pursuant to this section who
are not eligible for AHCCCS medical assistance will be deemed eligible for
county-subsidized medical care. The spouse or dependents of patients receiving
long-term care services are not deemed eligible for county-subsidized medical
care and must apply for such care separately.
   N.   In the event that a person receiving long-term care services at the
county nursing home facility becomes financially ineligible for such services,
the Pima long-term care system shall attempt to transfer the person to another
nursing care institution or other appropriate setting. Should these attempts
prove unsuccessful, the director of Pima health system may allow the person to
remain in residence at the county facility. The person will then be charged for
the cost of long-term care services provided until such time as the patient
again becomes eligible for county payment of these services. If an appropriate
discharge becomes available while the patient is financially ineligible for
these services, the patient will be discharged and placed accordingly.
   O.   Pursuant to A.R.S. 11-293(B) and in accordance with state and federal
law, Pima County may file a claim against a person's estate to recover paid
assistance. The county may also impose liens, in accordance with state and
federal law, on the property, both real and personal, of such persons, within
the following restrictions:
      1.   The applicant must be or have been eligible for county long-term
care services, and must be required to apply personal income to the cost of
care.
      2.   It must have been established that the applicant cannot reasonably
be expected to be discharged or returned home during the remainder of the
applicant's lifetime. This determination may be appealed by the applicant.
      3.   A lien may not be filed against a home if any of the following are
lawfully residing in the home.
         a.   The applicant's spouse;
         b.   The applicant's child who is under age twenty-one or blind or
disabled;
         c.   The applicant's sibling who has an equity interest in the home
and who was residing in the applicant's home for at least one year immediately
before the date the applicant is admitted to the county long-term care system.
   P.   The county may file a lien against a county long-term care patient's
property after the patient or his/her representative is notified of the
following information:
      1.   A lien may be filed against the member's property;
      2.   What is meant by the term lien and its effect;
      3.   That imposing a lien does not mean the member will lose ownership of
property;
      4.   The procedures for appealing the decision that the member is not
expected to leave the facility;
      5.   That the lien will dissolve if the member is discharged from the
facility.
(Ord. 1991-2 § 1 (part), 1991)
Title 5 BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapters: 
   
Chapter 5.04 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
   
Chapter 5.08 - PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS AND JUNK DEALERS
   
Chapter 5.09 - SCRAP METAL DEALERS
Chapter 5.04
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
Sections: 
Article I. - General Regulations
Article II. - System Operations Requirements
Article III. - Administration
Article I. General Regulations
5.04.010   Title.
5.04.020   Purpose.
5.04.030   Definitions.
5.04.040   License—Required.
5.04.050   License—Application, Renewal, Modification.
5.04.060   Standards for granting or denying license.
5.04.070   License agreement.
5.04.010   Title.
   The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be entitled the Pima County
cable communications ordinance.
(Prior code § 19.04.010)
5.04.020   Purpose.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to:
   A.   Authorize the county to grant nonexclusive licenses to operate cable
systems in areas under its jurisdiction;
   B.   Provide for the payment of certain fees and other considerations to the
county;
   C.   Promote the widespread availability of high quality cable
communications service to residents of the county.
(Ord 1997-17 § 1, 1997; Prior code § 19.04.020)
5.04.030   Definitions.
   As used in this chapter:
   A.   "Basic service" means all subscriber services provided by the licensee
covered by the regular monthly charge paid by all subscribers, excluding
optional services for which a separate charge is made, or as specifically
provided in the license agreement.
   B.   "Cable system" means a facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video
programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community,
but such term does not include:
      1.   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of
one or more television broadcast stations;
      2.   A facility that services subscribers without using any public right-
of-way;
      3.   A facility of a common carrier which is subject in whole or in part
to the provisions of TITLE II of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C.
Subsection 201 et seq., except that such facility shall be considered a cable
system (other than for purposes of Section 621(C) to the extent such facility
is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or
      4.   Any facility of any electric utility used solely for operating its
electric utilities systems.
   If there is a connection of any such exempt system to a licensed system,
such exemption shall cease.
   C.   "Channel" means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum
which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television
channel as defined by the FCC.
   D.   "County" means Pima County in the state of Arizona.
   E.   "FCC" or "Federal Communications Commission" means that agency as
presently constituted by the Communications Act of 1934 as amended, or any
successor agency.
   F.   "Gross revenues" means all cash, credits, property of any kind or
nature, or other consideration, less related bad debt not to exceed one and
one-half per cent annually, that is received directly or indirectly by the
cable operator, its affiliates, subsidiaries or parent or any person, firm or
corporation in which the cable operator has a financial interest or that has a
financial interest in the cable operator and that is derived from the cable
operator's operation of its cable system to provide cable service in the area
of jurisdiction. Gross revenues include all revenue from charges for cable
service to subscribers and all charges for installation, removal, connection or
reinstatement of equipment necessary for a subscriber to receive cable service,
and any other receipts from subscribers derived from operating the cable system
to provide cable service, including receipts from forfeited deposits, sale or
rental of equipment to provide cable service, late charges, interest and sale
of program guides. Gross revenues also include all income the cable operator
receives from the lease of its facilities located in the public streets, roads
and alleys, unless services that the lessee provides over the leased facilities
are subject to a transaction privilege tax of the licensing authority. Gross
revenues do not include revenues from commercial advertising on the cable
system, the use or lease of studio facilities of the cable system, the use or
lease of leased access channels or bandwidth, the production of video
programming by the cable operator, the sale, exchange, use or cablecast of any
programming by the cable operator in the area of jurisdiction, sales to the
cable operator's subscribers by programmers of home shopping services,
reimbursements paid by programmers for launch fees or marketing expense,
license fees, taxes or other fees or charges that the cable operator collects
and pays to any governmental authority, any increase in the value of any stock,
security or asset, or any dividends or other distributions made in respect of
any stock or securities.
   G.   "License" means the right and authority granted by this chapter to the
licensee to construct, maintain and operate a cable system through use of the
public streets or other public rights-of-way. The term does not include any
license or permit that may be required by the ordinance codified in this
chapter or other laws, ordinances or regulations of the county for the
privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the county or for
disturbing the surface of any street or public right-of-way.
   H.   "License area" means the particular part of the county for which an
applicant may request a license to provide cable communications services. A
number of such license areas have been designated by the county and are
identified on Exhibit A of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
   I.   "License agreement" means a contract entered into in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter between the county and a licensee that sets
forth the terms and conditions under which the license will be exercised.
   J.   "Licensee" means a person who executes a license agreement with the
county, in accordance with this chapter, for the nonexclusive privilege to
construct, install, operate, maintain or dismantle a cable system in the
county.
   K.   "Person" means any individual, corporation (whether for profit or
nonprofit), joint venture, partnership, or any other business entity who holds
or applies for a license from the county.
   L.   "Private channel" means any channel which is available only to
subscribers who are provided with a special tap, converter or terminal
equipment to receive signals on the channel.
   M.   "Two-way capability" means the ability to receive and transmit signals
of any type from a subscriber terminal to other points in the system.
   N.   "Subscriber" means any person or entity receiving cable services of the
licensee.
   O.   "Subscriber density" means the number of business and residential units
per mile of system. Business and residential units shall be counted when they
are within two hundred fifty feet of any portion of the cable distribution
system, including trunk or feeder cable.
(Ord. 2013-37 § 1, 2013; Ord. 1997-17 § 1, 1997; Prior code § 19.04.030)
5.04.040   License—Required.
   A.   No person shall construct, install, maintain or operate a cable system
within, along, over or under any street in the county, or otherwise use county
right-of-way for cable, unless a license has first been granted pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Any license issued by the county shall be nonexclusive, and the county
specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional licenses
for cable systems that the county deems appropriate.
(Ord 1997-17 § 1, 1997; Ord. 1989-164 § 1, 1989: prior code § 19.04.040)
5.04.050   License—Application, Renewal, Modification.
   A.   Any person desiring to construct, install, maintain or operate a cable
system within the areas under the jurisdiction of the county shall make an
application for license.
      1.   The application shall consist of executed application forms as
prescribed and furnished by the county.
      2.   Failure of any applicant to fully provide all information requested
on the application forms will be sufficient cause for not considering the
application.
      3.   To be accepted for consideration, an application shall be submitted
with any required application fee, be properly executed on the forms prescribed
by the county, and contain information required by any application form, this
ordinance and any applicable requests of the county.
   B.   A licensee may initiate a formal license renewal process in accordance
with Section 626 (A)-(G) of the Federal Telecommunications Act, 47 U.S.C.
Subsection 546 (A)-(G), in which case the county may conduct a formal renewal
process in accordance with the Telecommunications Act or the county may, after
affording the public notice as provided by ARS § 9-507(B) and opportunity for
comment, grant the renewal.
   C.   An application for modification of a license agreement shall include,
at a minimum, the following information:
      1.   The specific modification requested;
      2.   The justification for the requested modification, including the
impact of the requested modification on subscribers and others, and the impact
on the applicant if the modification is not approved;
      3.   A statement whether the modification is sought pursuant to Section
625 of the Telecommunications Act, 47 U.C.S. Subsection 445, and if so a
demonstration that the requested information meets the legal requirements of
the Act; and
      4.   Any other information for the county to make a determination on the
modification request.
   D.   Applications for license, renewal, and modification shall be made to
the county administrator or designee.
(Ord 1997-17 § 1, 1997; Prior code § 19.04.050)
5.04.060   Standards for granting or denying license.
   In making any determination as to an application, the board shall give due
consideration to the following:
   A.   The quality of the service proposed;
   B.   The experience;
   C.   Character;
   D.   Background;
   E.   Financial responsibility of the applicant. If the applicant is a
company or corporation, an audited or reviewed statement must be submitted. If
the applicant is an individual, a reviewed or audited personal financial
statement is required. Financial documents may be subjected to an in-depth
review by Pima County;
   F.   Willingness;
   G.   Ability to abide by the license limitations and requirements; and
   H.   Any other considerations deemed pertinent by the board for safeguarding
the interest of the county and the public.
(Ord 1997-17 § 1, 1997; Ord. 1992-57 § 1 (part), 1992; prior code § 19.04.060)
5.04.070   License agreement.
   A.   Upon granting of a license, modification, or renewal by the county, the
licensee shall execute a license agreement within sixty days.
   B.   The license agreement shall incorporate all terms and provisions of
this chapter wherein a requirement is placed upon the licensee, whether
expressed or implied by this chapter.
   C.   The licensee shall expressly and specifically accept the terms of and
be bound by the terms of this chapter and any amendments thereto.
   D.   The agreement shall be binding upon the licensee, its successors,
lessees or assigns.
   E.   The license shall be nonexclusive and shall be for a period not to
exceed ten years commencing upon the execution of the license agreement between
the county and the licensee. In the event that the license is for a period
exceeding five years, certain terms of the license shall be subject to
renegotiation at the county's sole discretion. These renegotiable terms include
provisions which will accommodate changes in: technology, community needs,
services, public, educational and governmental access (PEG), and franchise or
license fees as permitted by federal law.
   F.   Upon written notice by the licensee, as required by the Federal
Telecommunications Act 47 U.S.C. 546, or in any event, not less than one year
prior to the fourteenth anniversary of the effective date, and after the
holding of a public hearing affording due process, the license may be renewed
for a reasonable term.
(Ord 1997-17 § 1, 1997; Prior code § 19.04.070)
Article II. System Operations Requirements
5.04.080   Generally.
5.04.090   System capability.
5.04.100   Construction method.
5.04.110   Service schedule.
5.04.120   Removal of licensee property.
5.04.130   Local office, records to be maintained.
5.04.140   Service provisions.
5.04.150   Local channel required.
5.04.160   Interconnection capability.
5.04.170   Observance of rights of privacy.
5.04.180   Service to public buildings.
5.04.190   Maintenance.
5.04.200   Fees, deposits and bonds.
5.04.205   Failure to apply for license.
5.04.210   License—Termination.
5.04.220   Revocation.
5.04.230   Appeal of license revocation.
5.04.240   System disposal.
5.04.250   Continuity of service required.
5.04.260   Change of control.
5.04.270   Indemnification of county.
5.04.280   Insurance requirement.
5.04.080   Generally.
   A.   A licensee shall conform to the minimum standards set forth in Sections
5.04.090 through
5.04.190 relative to the construction, operation and maintenance of a cable
system in the county, unless such standards are waived by the county in
writing.
   B.   It is not the intent of this article to prevent any licensee from
providing more than the required minimum to meet the standards listed in
Sections
5.04.090 through
5.04.190.
(Ord 1997-17 § 2, 1997; Prior code § 19.08.010(A), (B) (part))
5.04.090   System capability.
   The cable systems shall be equipped to provide:
   A.   Two-way capability;
   B.   Emergency override of the audio portion of all channels during a
cleared emergency or disaster.
(Ord 1997-17 § 2, 1997; Prior code § 19.08.010(B)(1))
5.04.100   Construction method.
   A.   The cable system shall be constructed, installed, and maintained in
accordance with standard good engineering practices and shall conform when
applicable with the National Electrical Safety Code and the Federal
Communications Commission rules and regulations, as they apply.
   B.   A licensee shall utilize, with the owner's permission, existing poles,
conduits or such other facilities whenever possible. Underground street,
sidewalk and driveway crossings not using existing conduits shall be bored
unless specific county approval is received. Copies of agreements for use of
poles, conduits or other facilities shall be filed with the county upon county
request. A licensee may install its own poles only when approved by the county
and then subject to whatever reasonable terms and conditions the county
requires in the county right-of-way use permit.
   C.   All transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be installed and
located to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable
convenience of the public and property owners. The county may from time-to-time
adopt such reasonable rules and regulations concerning the installation and
maintenance of the cable system installed in the public rights-of-way as may be
consistent with this chapter and state and federal law. In the absence of such
rules and regulations, the Pima County/City of Tucson Standard Specifications
for Public Improvements apply.
   D.   Suitable safety devices and practices as required by county, state and
federal laws, ordinances, regulations and permits shall be used during
construction, maintenance and repair of a cable system.
   E.   A licensee shall remove, replace or modify at its own expense the
installation of any of its facilities within any public right-of-way when
required to do so by the county to allow the county to change, maintain,
repair, improve or eliminate a public right-of-way. Nothing in this section
shall prevent licensee from seeking and obtaining reimbursement from sources
other than the county.
   F.   On streets and roads where electrical and telephone utility wiring are
located underground, either at the time of initial construction or
subsequently, the cable shall also be located underground at the licensee's
expense. Between a street or road and a subscriber's residence, the cable shall
be located underground. If both electrical and telephone utility wiring are
aerial, a licensee may install aerial cable except where a property owner or
resident requests underground installation and agrees to bear the additional
cost over aerial installation.
   G.   A licensee shall obtain any required permits before doing any
excavation or causing disturbance to public rights-of-way or private property
as a result of its construction or operations and shall restore to their former
condition such private property and public rights-of-way, the latter in a
manner consistent with all applicable rules, regulations, resolutions or other
county requirements relative to construction, repair or maintenance of
facilities in the public right-of-way. If such restoration is not
satisfactorily performed within a reasonable time, the county may, after prior
notice to the licensee, cause the repairs to be made at the expense of the
licensee. The county may inspect on-going construction and require a licensee
to halt construction where it finds the construction to create a public hazard
or to be in noncompliance with the requirements of this chapter, the license
agreement, the permit, or other laws.
   H.   Simultaneously with the filing of construction plans with the county
for a permit or otherwise, a licensee shall file a copy of the plans with all
public utilities in the construction area as determined by the Blue Stake
Center or separately to the Blue Stake Center.
   I.   Prior to the commencement of construction, a licensee shall have
complied with the following requirements:
      1.   Have received a permit from the county for construction on public
property or rights-of-way;
      2.   Have received clearance from utilities in the area of construction;
and
      3.   Where construction will be on private property or in public rights-
of-way adjoining private property, have provided no less than seven days prior
written notice by mail or hand delivery to all such property occupants. The
notice shall identify the name and the address of the licensee and provide a
local or toll-free telephone number that the affected person may call for more
information or to lodge a complaint.
   J.   A licensee may trim trees within public rights-of-way at its own
expense as necessary to protect its wires and facilities, subject to approval
by the county and any direction that may be provided by the county. Trees on
private property may be trimmed only with the consent of the property owner.
   K.   At the request of any person holding a valid building moving permit and
upon sufficient notice, the licensee shall temporarily raise, lower or cut its
wires as necessary to facilitate such move upon not less than seventy-two hours
advance notice. The direct expense of such temporary changes, including standby
time, shall be paid by the permit holder and the licensee may require payment
in advance.
(Ord 1997-17 § 2, 1997; Prior code § 19.08.010(B)(2))
5.04.110   Service schedule.
   Unless the license agreement provides otherwise, a licensee shall be
required to extend its cable system pursuant to the following requirements:
   A.   Upon reasonable written request for service by any person located
within the service area, the licensee shall, within sixty days, furnish the
requested service to such person, unless prevented from providing said service
due to factors outside licensee's control such as permit restrictions or
private easement considerations. If such service has not been implemented
within ninety days of written notice from the county, the county may impose
liquidated damages for each day thereafter in accordance with
5.04.350.
   B.   The licensee shall extend and make cable television service available
to every unserved dwelling unit within any area reaching the minimum density of
at least thirty dwelling units per aerial cable mile, or fifty dwelling units
per underground cable mile, except that the licensee shall not be required to
install cable where another authorized licensee has already done so. Upon
request, this density requirement may be modified by the county for a specific
licensee, provided said licensee demonstrates that it would be commercially
impracticable to comply with said requirement. For purposes of this section, a
density requirement may be considered commercially impracticable if licensee's
compliance with said requirement would create a significant adverse impact on
the capital costs of licensee's Pima County cable system.
   C.   The licensee shall prevent unnecessary damage to streets, rights-of-way
and property by installing cables or conduits underground in new subdivisions
at the same time and in the same trench as telephone, electric or similar
services are installed. Given reasonable notice, the licensee shall install
underground cable or conduit in all new subdivisions of six or more dwelling
units within the service area at the same time and in the same trench as
telephone, electric or similar services are installed. Cable need not be
installed and/or activated until the new subdivision meets the criteria
established for line extensions.
   D.   The licensee shall extend and make cable television service available
to any resident requesting connection within the licensee's authorized service
area at the standard connection charge if the connection to the isolated
resident would require no more than a one hundred fifty-foot aerial or
underground drop line.
   E.   With respect to requests for connection requiring an aerial or
underground drop line in excess of one hundred fifty feet, the licensee shall
extend service to such residents at a one-time charge not to exceed the actual
installation costs incurred by the licensee for the distance exceeding one
hundred fifty feet.
(Ord 1997-17 § 2, 1997; Prior code § 19.08.010(B)(3))
5.04.120   Removal of licensee property.
   A.   In the event that licensee property has been installed in a street or
other dedicated public right-of-way without complying with the requirements of
this chapter, or the license has been terminated, revoked or expired, or the
use of any licensee property is discontinued for any reason for a continuous
period of twelve months, the licensee shall at its sole expense, on the demand
of the county, remove promptly from the street all licensee property other than
that which the county may permit to be abandoned in place.
   B.   Upon such removal of licensee property, the licensee shall promptly
restore the street or other public places from which the licensee property was
removed to a condition as near as possible to its prior condition.
   C.   Licensee property no longer in service may be left in place with the
approval of and in a manner prescribed by the county.
   D.   Upon abandonment of licensee property in place, the licensee shall
deliver to the county an instrument transferring ownership of such abandoned
licensee property to the county.
   E.   Any cost arising from compliance with this provision shall be borne by
the licensee.
(Ord 1997-17 § 2, 1997; Prior code § 19.08.010(B)(4))
5.04.130   Local office, records to be maintained.
   A.   The licensee shall maintain an office accessible during all usual
business hours or have a listed telephone and operate so that complaints and
requests for repairs and adjustments may be received.
   B.   The licensee shall maintain a written record listing date of customer
complaints, identifying the subscriber, and describing the nature of the
complaint, and when and what action has been taken by the licensee in response
thereto.
   C.   Such record shall be kept at the licensee's office and shall be
available for inspection during regular business hours without further notice
or demand of the county.
   D.   The licensee shall notify each subscriber at the time of initial
subscription to service of the procedure for reporting and resolving
complaints.
(Ord 1997-17 § 2, 1997; Prior code § 19.08.010(B)(5))
5.04.140   Service provisions.
   A.   The licensee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and
interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible; the
licensee shall be able to demonstrate by instruments and otherwise to
subscribers that a signal of adequate strength and quality is being delivered
to the subscriber's terminal.
   B.   The following minimum requirements for facilities and services apply to
all licenses. The county may require that a licensee exceed these minimum
requirements.
      1.   A cable system shall have a minimum capacity of fifty-four video
channels available for immediate or potential use. Two-way capability shall be
designed into the system. Upon request, this minimum channel capacity
requirement may be modified by the county for a specific licensee, provided
said licensee demonstrates that it would be commercially impracticable to
comply with said requirement. A licensee shall have the burden of
demonstrating, by clear and convincing evidence, that compliance with the
minimum channel capacity would be commercially impracticable for its Pima
County cable system.
      2.   A cable system shall provide leased access channels as required by
federal law.
      3.   Standard installation and basic service to public buildings may be
required without charge as set forth in the license agreement.
      4.   A licensee shall design its system to allow the county to interrupt
the audio portion of the cable service in an emergency to deliver information
to subscribers.
      5.   A licensee shall provide standby power for the head end so as to be
able to operate some channels during a power outage for a minimum of six hours.
   C.   For purposes of customer service and customer complaint procedure,
licensee shall maintain a business office open during normal business hours
with a listed local or toll-free telephone number and employ a sufficient
number of telephone lines to allow reasonable access by subscribers and members
of the public. Unless a waiver is granted by the county, said office shall be
located in the county. When the business office is closed, an answering machine
or service capable of receiving service complaints and inquiries shall be
employed.
      1.   A licensee shall have available at all times personnel, equipment
and procedures capable of locating and correcting major system malfunctions.
System outages and major system malfunctions shall be corrected without delay.
Corrective action for all other service problems shall be initiated as provided
for in the license agreement.
      2.   A cable system shall be operated in a manner consistent with the
principles of fairness and equal accessibility of facilities, equipment,
channels, studios and other services to all residences, businesses, public
agencies or other entities having a legitimate use of the system, and no one
shall be arbitrarily excluded from its use. A licensee shall not discriminate
in terms of rates, terms of service, or extension of service on the basis of
age, race, creed, color, religion, national origin, sex or marital status. Nor
shall a licensee fail to extend service to any part of the county within its
licensed service area on the basis of the income of the residents.
      3.   A licensee shall establish procedures for the investigation and
resolution of all complaints, including, but not limited to, those regarding
the quality of service and equipment malfunction. A copy of such procedures
shall be provided to the county upon request.
      4.   A licensee shall provide each subscriber, at the time cable service
is installed, written instruction for placing a service call, filing a
complaint, or requesting an adjustment. The name, address, and telephone number
of the county office responsible for supervision of cable operations shall be
listed. Each subscriber shall also be provided with a schedule of the
subscriber's rates and charges, a copy of the service contract, delinquent
subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures, and a description of any other
of the licensee's applicable policies in connection with its subscribers.
      5.   A licensee may interrupt service on the cable system only for good
cause and for the shortest time possible and, except in emergency situations,
only after prior notice to subscribers and the county of the anticipated
service interruption, provided, however, no prior subscriber or county notice
shall be required for the performance of system maintenance work requiring a
maximum of one-hour duration during the hours of 6:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight
or four-hours duration during the hours of 12:00 midnight until 6:00 a.m.
      6.   A licensee shall maintain a complete record of service complaints
received and action taken. These records shall be open to the county for
inspection during normal business hours. A summary of such records shall be
submitted to the county upon its request. Such records shall be retained for
not less than one year.
      7.   Upon termination of service to a subscriber and at the subscriber's
request, a licensee shall promptly remove all its facilities and equipment from
the subscriber's premises. Where removal is impractical, such as with buried
cable or internal wiring, facilities and equipment may be disconnected and
abandoned rather than removed.
   D.   The county may waive minimum requirements for licenses where the
applicant demonstrates that such waiver is in the public interest.
(Ord 1997-17 § 2, 1997; Prior code § 19.08.010(B)(6))
5.04.150   Local channel required.
   A.   Each cable system shall carry as part of the basic service, local
channels broadcast in its area as required and defined in current FCC
regulations.
   B.   In this regard, those parts of 47 C.F.R. Part 76 relating to carriage
of local channel signals as existing, or as may be amended, shall apply and are
incorporated in this section by reference.
   C.   In the event the FCC deletes the requirement referred to in this
section, or ceases to exercise jurisdiction in this area, the requirement shall
continue to apply to this chapter as it existed on the date immediately
preceding such federal action.
(Ord 1997-17 § 2, 1997; Prior code § 19.08.010(B)(7))
5.04.160   Interconnection capability.
   A.   Each cable system shall be designed and operated so as to facilitate
interconnection to any or all other cable systems within the county and the
city of Tucson.
   B.   The cost of such interconnection links shall be equally shared by the
two connecting cable systems.
   C.   A licensee may be required to interconnect its cable system with any or
all other systems located in the county upon the request of the county, where
economically and technically feasible as determined by the county.
(Ord 1997-17 § 2, 1997; Ord. 1992-57, § 1 (part), 1992; prior code § 19.08.010
(B)(8))
5.04.170   Observance of rights of privacy.
   The licensee shall strictly observe and protect the rights of privacy and
property rights of subscribers and users at all times.
   A.   Individual subscriber preferences of any kind, viewing habits,
political, social or economic philosophies, beliefs, creeds, religions or
names, addresses or telephone numbers shall not be revealed to any person,
governmental unit, police department or investigating agency unless upon the
authority of a court of law or upon prior voluntary valid authorization of the
subscriber.
   B.   Such authorization shall not in any event be required as a condition of
receiving service.
   C.   Exclusive of signals useful only for the control or measurement of
cable system performance, licensees shall not permit the transmission of any
signal, including "polling" or monitoring of channel selection from the
subscribers' premises without first obtaining written permission from the
subscribers.
(Ord 1997-17 § 2, 1997; Prior code § 19.08.010(B)(9))
5.04.180   Service to public buildings.
   The licensee shall make available, at no cost, one service outlet to a
conveniently accessible point in each public, private and parochial school,
nonprofit college or university, police station, fire station or other facility
or building located within the license area and used for public purposes, as
may be designated by the county as long as the connection would require no more
than a 500-foot aerial or underground drop line. When connection to a public
building requires more than a 500-foot aerial or underground drop line, there
will be a one time connection charge not to exceed the actual installation
costs incurred by the licensee. There shall be a minimum monthly charge at
those locations.
(Ord 1997-17 § 2, 1997; Prior code § 19.08.010(B)(10))
5.04.190   Maintenance.
   The cable system shall be maintained in accordance with the highest accepted
standards of the industry.
   A.   Each cable system shall be maintained so as to comply with all
applicable technical standards and regulations as promulgated by the FCC. In
this regard, 47 C.F.R. Section 76-061 et seq., relating to technical standards
(including, but not limited to, performance monitoring and measurements), as
existing or as may be amended, shall apply in full and are incorporated in this
section by reference.
   B.   In the event the FCC deletes the technical standards referred to in
subsection A, or ceases to exercise jurisdiction in this area of technical
standards, the standards shall continue to apply to this chapter as they
existed on the date immediately preceding such federal action.
(Ord 1997-17 § 2, 1997; Prior code § 19.08.010(B)(11))
5.04.200   Fees, deposits and bonds.
   The following fees are required for each license granted under the authority
of this chapter:
   A.   Application Fee. Each application for the granting, renewal or
modification of a license under the authority of this chapter shall be
accompanied by a filing fee in an amount set from time to time by county
ordinance.
   B.   License Fee.
      1.   Each licensee shall pay to the county an amount equal to five
percent of the licensee's annual gross revenues as defined in Section
5.04.030 of this chapter.
      2.   The payment shall be computed quarterly, for the preceding quarter,
as of March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 of each year. Each
quarterly payment shall be due and payable no later than thirty days after the
relevant computation date. Each payment shall be accompanied by a financial
report certified by the chief financial officer of licensee, showing in detail
the gross revenues of the licensee related to that quarter. The payment
required pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any other tax or
payment owed to the county pursuant to any other applicable ordinance,
regulation or law of the county, the state of Arizona or other jurisdiction.
      3.   The licensee may identify as a separate line item on each regular
bill for each subscriber the amount of the total bill assessed as a license fee
and the identity of the license authority to which the fee is paid.
   C.   Performance Bond.
      1.   Within thirty days after the execution of the license agreement, the
licensee shall file with the county a performance bond for the benefit of the
county in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000).
      2.   In the event that the licensee fails to comply with any provision of
this chapter or the license agreement, then there shall be recoverable jointly
and severally from the principal and surety any and all damages or costs
suffered by the county.
      3.   The damages or costs shall include, but not be limited to,
attorney's fees and cost of any action or proceeding and including the full
amount of any compensation, indemnification, cost of removal or abandonment of
any property or costs due and owing the county up to the full amount of such
bond.
      4.   The bond shall be maintained in full as a continuing obligation
during the entire term of the license agreement and for six months following
the termination of the agreement.
      5.   The bond shall be issued by a surety company authorized to do
business in the state and shall be in a form approved by the county attorney.
(Ord. 2004-19 § 3, 2004; Ord 1997-17 § 2, 1997; Prior code § 19.08.020)
5.04.205   Failure to apply for license.
   In the event that any cable system facilities are installed in Pima County
right-of-way without a license first being obtained therefore as required by
this chapter, the installer or current owner of such facilities shall be
required to promptly apply for such a license, and shall pay twice the normal
filing fee. In the event that the application is not ultimately approved, the
installer or owner of the facilities will remove them immediately upon receipt
of notification from Pima County, in accordance with Section
5.04.120.
(Ord. 2004-19 § 4, 2004)
5.04.210   License—Termination.
   The license shall terminate upon the expiration of the term thereof, unless
renewal is applied for as per Section
5.04.070 of this chapter.
(Prior code § 19.08.030(A))
5.04.220   Revocation.
   Sufficient cause for revocation shall exist when the licensee:
   A.   Fails to comply with any provisions of this chapter or the license
agreement;
   B.   Makes willful false or misleading statements in any application;
   C.   Engages in the practice of any fraud or deceit upon the county or
subscribers;
   D.   Fails to abide by the privacy provision of this chapter;
   E.   Fails to make timely payment of any moneys due the county pursuant to
this chapter;
   F.   Fails to commence construction in the license area within six months
and to commence basic service within eighteen months from the effective date of
the license agreement.
(Ord 1997-17 § 2, 1997; Prior code § 19.08.030(B))
5.04.230   Appeal of license revocation.
   The county shall deliver to the licensee written notice of intent to revoke,
setting forth causes for revocation. A public hearing on this revocation shall
be held by the board of supervisors no less than thirty days after issuance of
the notice.
(Prior code § 19.08.030(C))
5.04.240   System disposal.
   In the event of termination or revocation of a license, the licensee
involved shall offer to sell the cable system, at the fair market value, to
another licensee or applicant for a license.
   A.   The fair market value shall be determined in accordance with generally
accepted appraisal procedures.
   B.   The original cost of all tangible and intangible property, as well as
salvage value, book value, replacement cost, cash flow, and other factors will
be considered.
   C.   Under no circumstances shall any valuation be made for any right or
privilege granted by license.
   D.   Should the licensee fail to negotiate a sale, as described in this
section, the county may purchase the system at the fair market value for
superpose of leasing to a qualified operator until a buyer can be found.
(Ord 1997-17 § 2, 1997; Prior code § 19.08.030(D))
5.04.250   Continuity of service required.
   A.   The licensee shall provide continuous service for the entire term of
the license agreement to all subscribers and users in return for payment of the
established rates, fees and charges.
   B.   If the licensee seeks to sell or transfer, or if the county revokes or
fails to renew the license, the licensee shall continue to operate the system
as trustee for its successor in interest until an orderly and lawful change of
operation is effected.
   This period of operation shall not exceed six months from the occurrence of
any of the events described in this section.
(Ord 1997-17 § 2, 1997; Prior code § 19.08.030(E))
5.04.260   Change of control.
   A.   The licensee shall not sell, transfer, assign, exchange or release, or
permit the sale, transfer, assignment, exchange or release of more than five
percent of the cumulative ownership of the cable system without prior written
authorization from the county.
   B.   For purposes of this section, a merger or consolidation shall be deemed
a transfer or assignment.
   C.   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit a pledge or
hypothecation or mortgage or similar instrument transferring condition
ownership of the system's assets to a lender or creditor in the ordinary course
of business, unless such interest shall exceed seventy-five percent of the
original cost or the fair market value, whichever is higher.
(Ord 1997-17 § 2, 1997; Prior code § 19.08/040)
5.04.270   Indemnification of county.
   Each licensee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless
and defend the county, its officials, boards, commissions, agents and
employees, by providing immediate defense with counsel approved by the county,
against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings and judgments
for damages arising out of construction, maintenance or operation of the cable
system.
(Ord 1997-17 § 2, 1997; Prior code § 19.08.050(A))
5.04.280   Insurance requirement.
   Each licensee, within thirty days after written notice of the granting of a
license, shall provide the county with and maintain in full force throughout
the term of the license agreement, insurance issued by a company duly
authorized to do business in the state of Arizona, insuring with respect to the
installation, construction, operation and maintenance of the cable system as
follows:
   A.   Liability, comprehensive general and automobile liability coverage
including, but not limited to, blanket contractual liability, completed
operations liability, broad form property damage, including, but not limited
to, coverage for explosion, collapse and underground hazard, and automobile
nonownership liability. This insurance shall be written in the following
minimum amounts:
      1.   For bodily injury, including death, five hundred thousand dollars
combined single limit,
      2.   Property damage, five hundred thousand dollars combined single
limit,
      3.   Comprehensive automobile liability, bodily injury, five hundred
thousand dollars combined single limit,
      4.   Excess umbrella liability in the minimum amount of five million
dollars;
   B.   Workers' compensation coverage as required by the law and regulations
of the state;
   C.   All insurance policies required in this section shall include Pima
County as a named insured party;
   D.   The licensee shall be solely responsible for all premiums due and
payable for insurance required in this section;
   E.   All insurance policies required in this section shall be in a form
approved by the county risk manager and shall include a sixty-day notice of
cancellation endorsement.
(Ord 1997-17 § 2, 1997; Prior code § 19.08.050(B))
Article III. Administration
5.04.290   County Administration.
5.04.300   Licensee rules and regulations.
5.04.310   Subscriber rights.
5.04.320   Compliance with laws and codes required.
5.04.330   Cumulative rights and remedies.
5.04.340   Rights reserved to the county.
5.04.350   Liquidated damages
5.04.360   Effect upon existing licenses.
5.04.290   County Administration.
   A.   The county administrator shall administer cable communications
operations within the county as governed by this chapter and applicable license
agreements. The county administrator or designee may take all administrative
action on behalf of the county except for those actions specified herein which
are reserved for the board of supervisors. The board of supervisors has the
sole authority to: grant licenses, modify license agreements, renew licenses,
revoke licenses, and authorize the transfer of licenses.
   B.   The county reserves the right during the term of the license agreement
and during normal business hours and upon the giving of reasonable notice to
examine, audit, review and obtain copies of the licensee's contracts,
engineering plans, accounting, financial data, and service records relating to
the property and operations of the licensee and to all other records required
to be kept pursuant to this chapter.
   C.   The county expressly reserves the right to regulate a licensee's rates
and charges to the extent permitted by law at any time it deems it to be
desirable or in the public interest. If the county decides to exercise any such
authority it may have, it shall develop regulations which shall govern the
procedure pursuant to which a licensee may seek authority for rate increases.
(Ord 1997-17 § 3, 1997; Prior code § 19.12.010(A))
5.04.300   Licensee rules and regulations.
   Copies of rules, regulations, terms and conditions adopted by the licensee
for the conduct of its business shall be filed with the county and remain a
public record therein.
(Ord 1997-17 § 3, 1997; Prior code § 19.12.010(B))
5.04.310   Subscriber rights.
   A.   A licensee shall not deny service, access, or otherwise discriminate
against subscribers, users, or residents of the county. A licensee shall comply
at all times with all applicable federal, state and county laws, rules and
regulations, executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination
and equal employment opportunity requirements. A licensee shall strictly adhere
to the equal employment opportunity requirements of the FCC, state statutes and
local regulations, and as the same may be amended from time to time.
   B.   A licensee shall at all times comply with the subscriber privacy
provisions of Section 631 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. Subsection 551.
   C.   No equipment shall be installed by the licensee for subscriber service
without first securing a service request from the owner or resident of any
private property involved.
   D.   A licensee shall not originate or knowingly permit subliminal
transmission at any time for any purpose whatsoever.
   E.   A licensee shall establish and conform to the following policy
regarding refunds to subscribers and users:
      1.   If the licensee collects a deposit or advance charge on any service
or equipment requested by a subscriber or user, the licensee shall provide such
service or equipment within thirty days of the collection of the deposit or
charge or it shall refund such deposit or charge within five days thereafter
upon request of the subscriber or user. The subscriber shall be advised of this
right of refund at the time the order is placed.
      2.   If any subscriber or user terminates any monthly service during the
first twelve months of said service because of the failure of the licensee to
render satisfactory service in terms of signal quality in accordance with the
standards set forth in the license agreement, the licensee shall refund, on a
pro-rata basis, to such subscriber or user an amount equal to the installation
or reconnection charges paid by the subscriber or user for the period of
unsatisfactory service.
      3.   In the event that a subscriber or user makes an annual or other
payment in advance, the appropriate pro-rata portion of said payment shall be
refunded by the licensee.
   F.   The following requirements shall apply to disconnection:
      1.   There shall be no charge for disconnection of any installation or
outlet unless such charge was disclosed at the time the subscriber ordered
service. All cable communications equipment shall be removed within a
reasonable time from a subscriber's property at the subscriber's request, such
time not to exceed thirty days from the date of the request.
      2.   If any subscriber fails to pay a properly due monthly subscriber's
fee or other charge, the licensee may disconnect the subscriber's service
outlet; provided, however, that such disconnection shall not be effected until
thirty days after the due date of the charges and shall include a prior written
notice to the subscriber of the intent to disconnect. After disconnection, upon
payment in full of all proper fees or charges, including the payment of any
reconnection charge, the licensee shall promptly reinstate the service.
(Ord 1997-17 § 3, 1997; Prior code § 19.12.020(A))
5.04.320   Compliance with laws and codes required.
   Each licensee shall comply fully with all applicable local, county, state
and federal laws, codes, rules and regulations.
(Prior code § 19.12.020(B))
5.04.330   Cumulative rights and remedies.
   All rights and remedies of the county in this chapter are cumulative and may
be exercised singly or cumulatively at the discretion of the county.
(Ord 1997-17 § 3, 1997; Prior code § 19.12.020(D))
5.04.340   Rights reserved to the county.
   A.   Without limitation upon the rights which the county may otherwise have,
the county expressly reserves the right to amend any section or provision of
this chapter for any reason determined to be desirable by the county including,
but not limited to:
      1.   New developments in the state of technology of cable communications
systems;
      2.   Any changes in federal or state laws, rules or regulations.
   B.   The county reserves the right to require the designation or use of
channel capacity, equipment, facilities, and services for public, educational
or governmental use under Section 611 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. Subsection
531.
(Ord 1997-17 § 3, 1997; Prior code § 19.12.030)
5.04.350   Liquidated damages
   A.   The county may impose liquidated damages as set forth in this section
and the license agreement.
   B.   All license agreements executed subsequent to the adoption of this
Ordinance shall contain a provision for liquidated damages, in amounts as
mutually agreed upon between the county and the licensee, for the licensee's
failure to comply with various requirements of this chapter and the license
agreement in amounts not to exceed those specified below:
      1.   For failure to substantially complete system construction or line
extensions as required, unless the county specifically approves a delay caused
by the occurrence of conditions beyond the licensee's control, the licensee
shall pay five hundred dollars ($500) per day for each day, or part thereof,
the deficiency continues.
      2.   For material failure to provide data, documents, reports and
information in a timely manner as required, the licensee shall pay one hundred
dollars ($100) per day, or part thereof, that each violation occurs or
continues.
      3.   For substantial failure to remedy any other violation of this
ordinance or the license agreement within fifteen days of receipt of notice of
each violation, the licensee shall pay three hundred dollars ($300) per day for
each day, or part thereof, that the violation continues.
      4.   For failure to substantially comply with reasonable orders of the
county, the licensee shall pay fifty dollars ($50) per day for each day, or
part thereof, that noncompliance continues.
   C.   Liquidated damages will not be imposed if the county finds that the
failure of the licensee resulted from conditions beyond the licensee's control.
Liquidated damages may be reduced or eliminated by the county if it finds that
the failure of the licensee resulted from excusable neglect. The licensee shall
bear the burden of proof in establishing the existence of such conditions.
   D.   Prior to assessing any of the liquidated damages set forth in this
section, the county shall give licensee thirty days written notice of its
intention to assess such damages. In said notice(s), the county shall set
forth, at a minimum, the following:
      1.   The amount to be assessed;
      2.   The factual basis for such assessment; and
      3.   The specific provision of this chapter or the license alleged to
have been violated.
   Following receipt of the notice set forth in this section, licensee shall
have a thirty-day period during which time licensee and the county shall make
reasonable efforts to resolve the dispute in question.
   E.   The imposition and collection of liquidated damages shall not prevent
the county from pursuing other remedies for violations of this ordinance or the
license agreement.
(Ord. 1997-17 § 3, 1997)
5.04.360   Effect upon existing licenses.
   It is the intent of this chapter that all licenses in force at the time of
enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall remain valid for the
full term thereof, subject to the following conditions:
   A.   Each licensee holding such a license shall, within a period of one
hundred eighty (180) days following the enactment of the ordinance codified in
this chapter, execute a license agreement binding the licensee to conform to
all provisions, requirements, and obligations of this chapter.
   B.   The license shall become valid immediately upon execution of the
license agreement.
(Ord 1997-17 § 3, 1997; Prior code § 19.12.040)
EXHIBIT A Legal Description of License Areas 
   Note that the descriptions begin at the northwest corner of the license area
and proceed in a clockwise direction. All incorporated jurisdictions within the
areas as described below are also excluded from the license area.
   License area "A" encompasses all of the unincorporated lands lying within
the area bordered to the north by the Maricopa County line; to the east by the
Tohono O'Odham Indian Reservation; to the south by the Organ Pipe Cactus
National Monument; and to the west by the United States Air Force Bombing
Range.
   License area "B" encompasses all of the unincorporated lands lying within
the area bordered to the north by the Pinal County line; to the east by the
Coronado National Forest, the Saguaro National Park, and the Cochise County
line; to the south by the Santa Cruz County line, the Coronado National Forest,
the Santa Rita Experimental Range and the Mexican Border; and to the west by
the Tohono O'Odham Indian Reservation.
   License area "C" encompasses all of the unincorporated lands lying within
the area of the Coronado National Forest known as Summerhaven.
   License area "D" encompasses all of the unincorporated lands lying within
the area bordered to the north by the Pinal County line; to the east by the
Graham County line and the Cochise County line; and to the south and west by
the Coronado National Forest.
Chapter 5.08
PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS AND JUNK DEALERS
Sections: 
5.08.010   Definitions.
5.08.020   Report to sheriff—Required when.
5.08.030   Report to sheriff—Information to be shown.
5.08.040   Report to sheriff—Failure deemed violation.
5.08.050   Report to sheriff—Form—Delivery.
5.08.060   Articles not to be sold for fifteen days—Inspection.
5.08.070   Register to be kept—Inspection.
5.08.080   Dealing with minors, habitual drunkards.
5.08.090   Notification of sheriff in case of doubt of ownership of pledged
articles.
5.08.100   Violation—Penalty.
5.08.010   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter:
   A.   "Junk collector" means a person who goes from house to house or from
place to place, gathering, collecting, buying, selling or otherwise dealing in
any old rags, sacks, bottles, cans, papers, metals or other articles commonly
known as "junk."
   B.   "Junk dealer" means a person engaged in conducting, managing or
carrying on the business of buying, selling or otherwise dealing in, either at
wholesale or retail, old rags, sacks, bottles, cans, papers, metal or other
articles commonly known as "junk."
   C.   "Pawnbroker" means every person who keeps a place of business where
money is loaned or advanced upon a pledge or deposit of personal property or
pretended sale of goods, wares and merchandise conditioned that the seller may
rebuy such goods, wares and merchandise at an advanced price, within a limited
time.
   D.   "Pawnshop" means any room, store or place in which such business is
engaged in, carried on or conducted.
   E.   "Secondhand dealer" means a person engaged in conducting, managing or
carrying on the business of buying selling or otherwise dealing in secondhand
goods, wares, merchandise or other articles, whether such business is the
principal or sole business so carried on, managed or conducted, or is merely
incidental to, in connection with or a branch or department of, some other
business.
(Prior code § 41.16.010)
5.08.020   Report to sheriff—Required when.
   It is unlawful for any pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, junk dealer, junk
collector or any employee or agent of any such pawnbroker, secondhand dealer,
junk dealer or junk collector within the county to fail, neglect or refuse to
make out and deliver to the sheriff within twenty-four hours after the receipt
thereof, a full, true and complete report of all goods, wares, merchandise or
other articles received on deposit, in pawn or pledge, or by purchase or
otherwise.
(Prior code § 41.16.020)
5.08.030   Report to sheriff—Information to be shown.
   The report required by the preceding section shall show the hour of the day
and the date when such goods, wares, merchandise or other articles were so
received; the true name and address of the person from whom received as nearly
as the same is known to, or can be ascertained by, such pawnbroker, secondhand
dealer, junk dealer, junk collector or any agent or employee thereof; a
description of such person, which description shall state the nationality,
height, age, sex, complexion, color of hair, style of dress, prominent scars
and any other distinguishing features together with the color of the mustache
or beard, or both, if worn, and if not worn, such fact shall be noted. Such
report shall also show the number of pawn ticket issued, the amount loaned or
paid thereon; the quantity of each item received and a complete description
thereof, including all distinguishing marks. When any watch, gun, fan or any
other article bearing identification numbers or marks is received, the name of
the maker thereof and its number, works number and case number shall be entered
on such report. When any jewelry or gold and silver of any kind is received,
all letters or marks thereon shall be entered on such report.
(Prior code § 41.16.030)
5.08.040   Report to sheriff—Failure deemed violation.
   Each failure, neglect or refusal to make out and deliver to the sheriff the
report required by Section
5.08.020 to be so made out and delivered within the time required, and each
defacement, alteration, change, destruction, parting with, concealment, gift,
sale or disposition of any goods, wares, merchandise or other articles before
or until fifteen days after making out and delivery of such report shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
(Prior code § 41.16.040)
5.08.050   Report to sheriff—Form—Delivery.
   All reports required by Section
5.08.020 to be made out and delivered to the sheriff shall be written or
printed in the English language in a clear and legible manner, and shall be
delivered to the sheriff every day before the hour of twelve noon.
(Prior code § 41.16.050)
5.08.060   Articles not to be sold for fifteen days—Inspection.
   It is unlawful for any pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, junk dealer or junk
collector to deface, alter, change, destroy, part with, conceal, give away,
sell or dispose of any goods, wares, merchandise or other articles received on
deposit in pawn or pledge, by purchase or otherwise, before and until fifteen
days after making out and delivering to the sheriff the report provided to be
made and delivered under the provisions of Section
5.08.020, and any such goods, wares, merchandise or other articles shall be
made available for inspection by the sheriff or by any of his deputies
designated by the sheriff.
(Prior code § 41.16.060)
5.08.070   Register to be kept—Inspection.
   Every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, junk dealer or junk collector within
the county shall keep a well-bound book at his place of business, in which book
a complete record of all transactions had by them shall be entered in the
English language in a clear and legible manner and at the time when the
transaction takes place, such book shall contain all the information required
to be reported to the sheriff under the provisions of Section
5.08.020 and shall be available at all times for inspection by the sheriff or
any officer designated by the sheriff. For state law as to refusal of
pawnbrokers to allow inspection of register by law enforcement officials, see
A.R.S. Section 44-1623.
(Prior code § 41.16.070)
5.08.080   Dealing with minors, habitual drunkards.
   No pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, junk dealer or junk collector, or any
employee or agent thereof shall receive any goods, wares, merchandise or other
articles, whether on deposit, in pawn or pledge, or by purchase or otherwise,
from any person under the age of sixteen years, or from any person who is at
the time intoxicated, or knowingly take by purchase or otherwise from any
servant, employee or apprentice any goods, wares, merchandise or other
articles, without first ascertaining that such goods, wares, merchandise or
other articles are the property of the person offering to deposit, pawn, pledge
or sell the same. For state law as to purchasing junk from minors, see A.R.S.
Section 44-1627.
(Prior code § 41.16.080)
5.08.090   Notification of sheriff in case of doubt of ownership of pledged
articles.
   When any goods, wares, merchandise or other articles are offered to any
pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, junk dealer or junk collector, or any employee
or agent thereof, by any person for deposit, in pawn or pledge, for purchase or
otherwise, the person to whom the offer is made shall, in the event he has any
doubt as to the ownership thereof, forthwith notify the sheriff by telephone or
in person, of such offer and all the circumstances connected therewith.
(Prior code § 41.16.090)
5.08.100   Violation—Penalty.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor.
(Prior code § 41.16.100)
Chapter 5.09
SCRAP METAL DEALERS
Sections: 
5.09.010   Definitions.
5.09.020   Restrictions on transactions.
5.09.030   Record keeping and reporting.
5.09.040   Duty to notify sheriff.
5.09.050   Law enforcement hold on property.
5.09.060   Licensing; requirements.
5.09.070   License fee and suspension.
5.09.080   Violation; penalty.
5.09.010   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter:
   A.   "Reportable transaction" means any transaction conducted by a scrap
metal dealer, in which merchandise is received through pawn, purchase, trade or
consignment.
   B.   "Scrap Metal" includes any ferrous or nonferrous metals as defined in
Section 44-1641 of the Arizona Revised Statutes, any insulated or uninsulated
metallic cable, and any other materials known as "scrap metal" including iron,
copper, brass lead, zinc, tin, steel, aluminum, titanium, metallic cables and
wires, and other like materials.
   C.   "Scrap Metal Dealer" means a person or business entity including all
employees of the person or business entity whose primary business is
dismantling, selling or disposing of parts or accessories of motor vehicles,
engaged in the business of purchasing, trading, bartering or otherwise
receiving secondhand or cast-off material of any kind, except used beverage
containers, which is defined in this section or commonly known as scrap metal.
This term includes automotive recyclers as defined and licensed pursuant to
title 28 of the Arizona Revised Statutes when such recycler engages in the
activity defined in this subsection.
   D.   "Scrap Metal Dealership" means any room, store, place or facility in
which such business is engaged in, carried on or conducted.
(Ord. 2006-44 § 1, 2006)
5.09.020   Restrictions on transactions.
   A.   Prohibited Activities:
      1.   A scrap metal dealer shall not enter into a good faith outright
purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, scrap metal or other articles with a
person who is less than eighteen years of age.
      2.   A scrap metal dealer shall not enter into a good faith outright
purchase of any goods, wares, merchandise, scrap meta] or other articles that
has a manufacturer's serial number that has been removed, altered or
obliterated.
      3.   No scrap metal dealer or any employee or agent thereof shall receive
any goods, wares, scrap metals, merchandise or other articles, whether on
deposit, in pawn or pledge, or by purchase or otherwise, from any who appears
to be at the time intoxicated or obviously impaired by any drug or alcoholic
beverage.
   B.   Before entering into a good faith outright purchase of goods, wares,
merchandise, scrap metal or other articles, a scrap metal dealer shall require
the seller to identify himself with an identification document sufficient to
verify the information required pursuant to 44-1625 of Ariwna Revised Statutes.
   C.   The scrap metal dealer shall retain any property obtained by good faith
outright purchase in its original form for seven (7) days after the original
transaction date at the place of business or other storage location approved by
the local law enforcement agency.
(Ord. 2006-44 § 1, 2006)
5.09.030   Record keeping and reporting.
   A.   Every scrap metal dealer within the county shall keep a well-bound book
at his place of business, in which book a complete record of all transactions
had by them shall be entered in the English language in a clear and legible
manner and at the time when the transaction takes place, such book shall
contain all the information required to be reported to the sheriff under the
provisions of Paragraph B of this Section, as well as an index fingerprint of
such person described in Paragraph C of this Section, and shall be available at
all times for inspection by the sheriff or any officer designated by the
sheriff. A failure to comply with this Section shall be deemed as a violation.
   B.   It is unlawful for any scrap metal dealer or any employee or agent of
any such scrap metal dealer within the county to fail, neglect or refuse to
make out and deliver to the sheriff within twenty-four hours after the receipt
thereof, a full, true and complete report of all goods, wares, merchandise or
other articles received on deposit, in pawn or pledge, or by purchase or
otherwise.
   C.   The report required by the preceding section shall show:
      1.   The hour of the day and the date of the original transaction when
such goods, wares, merchandise, scrap metal or other articles were so received;
      2.   The true name and address of the person from whom received as nearly
as the same is known to, or can be ascertained by, such scrap metal dealer or
any agent or employee thereof;
      3.   A description of such person, which description shall state the
nationality, height, age, sex complexion, color of hair, style of dress, index
fingerprint, prominent scars and any other distinguishing features together
with the color of the mustache or beard, or both, if worn, and if not worn, and
vehicle license plate number;
      4.   The number of the receipt issued;
      5.   The amount loaned or paid thereon;
      6.   The quantity of each item received and a complete description
thereof, including all distinguishing marks.
   D.   When any watch, gun, fan or any other article bearing identification
numbers or marks is received, the name of the maker thereof and its number,
works number and case number shall be entered on such report.
   E.   When any jewelry or gold and silver of any kind is received, all
letters or marks thereon shall be entered on such report.
   F.   When any scrap metal is received, all letters or marks thereon,
composition, dimension, configuration, weight and alloy shall be entered into
the report.
   G.   All reports required by Section
5.09.030 to be made out and delivered to the sheriff shall be written or
printed in the English language in a clear and legible manner, and shall be
delivered electronically to the sheriff every day before the hour of twelve
noon.
   H.   Each failure, neglect or refusal to make out and deliver to the sheriff
the report required by Section
5.09.030 shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2006-44 § 1, 2006)
5.09.040   Duty to notify sheriff.
   When any goods, wares, merchandise, scrap metals or other articles are
offered to any scrap metal dealer, or any employee or agent thereof, by any
person for deposit, in pawn or pledge, for purchase or otherwise, or good faith
outright purchase, the person to whom the offer is made shall, in the event he
has any doubt as to the ownership thereof, forthwith notify the sheriff by
telephone or in person, of such offer and all the circumstances connected
therewith.
(Ord. 2006-44 § 1, 2006)
5.09.050   Law enforcement hold on property.
   Whenever a peace officer has probable cause to believe that the property in
possession of a scrap metal dealer is stolen or is evidence of a crime, the law
enforcement officer may place a hold on the property for a period not to exceed
ninety days.
(Ord. 2006-44 § 1, 2006)
5.09.060   Licensing; requirements.
   A.   A person shall not operate as a scrap metal dealer until licensed by
the sheriff.
   B.   A scrap metal dealer shall obtain a separate license for each scrap
metal dealership owned by that scrap metal dealer.
   C.   A scrap metal dealer license shall not be sold or transferred without
the approval of the sheriff or the sheriff's designee.
   D.   A scrap metal dealer shall not conduct business at a location other
than a licensed location.
   E.   The sheriff or sheriff's designee shall require any person, other than
a bank or licensed lending institution, having any interest, directly or
indirectly, in a scrap metal dealership to submit to a full set of
fingerprints, together with the applicable fingerprint processing fee, to the
sheriff. The sheriff shall submit the fingerprints to the department of public
safety for the purpose of obtaining a state and federal criminal records check
pursuant to section 41-1750 of Arizona Revised Statutes and Departments of
State, Justice, and Commerce, the Judiciary, and Related Agencies Appropriation
Act, 1973 (Public Law 92-544). The department of public safety may exchange
this fingerprint data with the federal bureau of investigation. The sheriff
shall forward the fee to the department of public safety.
   F.   The sheriff shall not issue a license to a person who, within one year
before the application, has violated any provision of a previously issued
pawnbroker license, or has had a license revoked pursuant to Title 44 Chapter
11 Article 3, Pawnbrokers and/or Article 3.1 Scrap Metal Dealers of Arizona
Revised Statutes, or any violation of this subsection.
   G.   The sheriff shall not issue to or renew a license of a person who,
within five years before the application, has been convicted of a felony
involving trafficking stolen property, fraudulent schemes, forgery, theft,
extortion or conspiracy to defraud.
   H.   The sheriff shall not issue to or renew a license of a person or
corporation what has knowingly made any false statements or material
misrepresentations in the license application.
(Ord. 2006-44 § 1, 2006)
5.09.070   License fee and suspension.
   A.   A person applying for a new scrap metal dealer license shall pay an
application fee of five hundred dollars to the sheriff or his designee.
   B.   Each licensed scrap metal dealer shall pay an annual renewal fee of two
hundred fifty dollars annually to the sheriff or his designee. The annual
renewal fee is due no later than January 31.
   C.   A licensee who fails to renew his license within thirty days after the
payment of the license is due is subject to a penalty often percent of the
license fee which is payable with the license fee.
   D.   A licensee who is found to be in violation of this Chapter shall have
his license suspended for a period of no less than thirty days. Upon completion
of the suspension period and reapplication for license, a scrap metal dealer
may be granted a new license. All new dealer application fees apply.
(Ord. 2006-44 § 1, 2006)
5.09.080   Violation; penalty.
   A.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a Class 1 Misdemeanor punishable by:
      1.   No less than a fine of five hundred dollars, not to exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars for the first offense.
      2.   No less than one thousand dollars, not to exceed two thousand five
hundred dollars for any subsequent offense.
      3.   No judge may impose probation in lieu of, or otherwise suspend, the
imposition of the minimum fine prescribed herein.
   B.   A subsequent offense shall be deemed as any second or subsequent
violation of this chapter by any pawnbroker, scrap metal dealer, secondhand
dealer, junk dealer or junk collector within any 24 month period.
(Ord. 2006-44 § 1, 2006)
Title 6 ANIMALS
Chapters: 
   
Chapter 6.04 - ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS
   
Chapter 6.05 - REGULATIONS CONCERNING CANINE-WILD ANIMAL HYBRIDS
   
Chapter 6.06 - BEAR REGULATIONS
   
Chapter 6.08 - ANIMAL CONTROL ENFORCEMENT RULES OF PROCEDURE
Chapter 6.04
ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS
Sections: 
6.04.010   Applicability.
6.04.020   Definitions.
6.04.030   Dogs and canine-wild animal hybrids at large
prohibited—Penalty—Exceptions. Dog and canine-wild animal hybrid waste removal
required—Exceptions—Penalty.
6.04.035   Authority to remove and impound—Bites—Rabies exposures.
6.04.040   Impoundment of dogs and canine-wild animal hybrids at large. Micro
chipping of impounded animals. Reclaiming of animals.
6.04.050   Enforcement authority—Disposition of fines.
6.04.060   Shelter and veterinary care fees.
6.04.070   Dog vaccinating, licensing and permitting procedure and fees within
county limits.
6.04.080   Duty to produce—Penalty.
6.04.090   Mandatory spay/neuter program for dogs and cats.
6.04.100   Advisory committee—Established—Powers and duties.
6.04.110   Cruelty and neglect of animals.
6.04.120   Vicious or destructive animals.
6.04.130   Authority to remove and impound.
6.04.140   Procedures to remove and forfeit animals; notice; order to show
cause hearing; appeal.
6.04.150   Dangerous animals.
6.04.160   Excessive noise caused by animals or birds.
6.04.170   Sale of animals at swap meets and public property
prohibited—Exceptions—Penalty.
6.04.180   Disposition of animals.
6.04.010   Applicability.
   This chapter shall not apply to any incorporated city, town or Indian
reservation. It shall apply only within the unincorporated areas of the county.
(Prior code § 15.04.010)
6.04.020   Definitions.
   The following definitions shall apply throughout this chapter.
   A.   "At large" means being neither confined by an enclosure nor physically
restrained by a leash.
   B.   "Owner" means any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring,
maintaining, having custody, or otherwise having control of an animal within
the county.
   C.   "Person" means a corporation, company, partnership, firm, association
or society, as well as a natural person.
   D.   "Animal" means any fowl, reptile, amphibian or mammal, except for human
beings.
   E.   "Fowl" means a bird of any kind.
   F.   "Wild animal" means any animal which is now or historically has been
found in the wild, or in the wild state. Wild state means living in its
original, natural condition; not domesticated.
(Ord. 2006-57 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 2004-17 § 1 (part), 2004; 1998-46 § 1
(part), 1998; prior code § 15.04.020)
6.04.030   Dogs and canine-wild animal hybrids at large
prohibited—Penalty—Exceptions. Dog and canine-wild animal hybrid waste removal
required—Exceptions—Penalty.
   A.   The owner of a dog or canine-wild animal hybrid that is found at large
upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys, or public property is guilty of a Class 2
misdemeanor.
   B.   The owner of a dog or canine-wild animal hybrid that is found at large
upon the premises of the owner or upon the private premises of any other person
is guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor.
   C.   Dogs or canine-wild animal hybrids may be at large as an exception to
subsections A and B of this section as follows:
      1.   While participating in field trials, obedience classes, or kennel
club events where such trials, classes or events have been approved by the
county animal care center;
      2.   While being used or trained for legal hunting or for control of
livestock;
      3.   While assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties;
or
      4.   Guide dogs while assisting blind, deaf or physically handicapped
persons, so long as such dogs are under direct and effective voice control of
such individuals to assure that they do not violate any other provisions of
law.
   D.   Penalty. A violation of any provision of this section is punishable by
a fine of not less than one hundred dollars nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars, four months in jail, two years' probation, or any combination thereof.
No judge may grant probation in lieu of, or otherwise suspend, the imposition
of the minimum fine prescribed herein.
   E.   It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having custody of any dog
or canine-wild animal hybrid to fail immediately to remove and dispose of in a
sanitary manner any solid waste deposited by such dog or canine-wild animal
hybrid on public property or deposited on private property without the consent
of the person in control of the property. This provision does not give the
owner of the dog or canine-wild animal hybrid permission to enter private
property without the consent of the person in control of the property.
   F.   Penalties. A person convicted of the offense prohibited by subsection
(E) of this section is guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor, which is punishable by
a fine of not less than one hundred dollars nor more than five hundred dollars,
thirty days in jail, one year probation, or any combination thereof. No judge
may grant probation in lieu of, or otherwise suspend, the imposition of the
minimum fine prescribed herein.
   G.   Exceptions. Subsection (E) of this section shall not apply to blind
persons, persons with mobility disabilities, or law enforcement officers
accompanied by police dogs while on duty.
(Ord. 2011-70 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2004-17 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 2002-80 § 1
(part), 2002; Ord. 1991-66 § 1, 1991; Ord. 1989-159 § 1 (part), 1989; prior
code § 15.04.030)
6.04.035   Authority to remove and impound—Bites—Rabies exposures.
   A peace officer or a Pima Animal Care officer, in addition to the provisions
of Arizona Revised Statute 11-1014, may manage rabies exposure, to include
removing and impounding any animal the owner fails to quarantine, as required
by Arizona Administrative Code Title 9, Chapter 6, Article 5.
(Ord. 2011-71 § 1, 2011)
6.04.040   Impoundment of dogs and canine-wild animal hybrids at large. Micro
chipping of impounded animals. Reclaiming of animals.
   A.   Pima Animal Care may, in addition to the procedures prescribed in
Section
6.04.050, impound any dog or canine-wild animal hybrid at large.
   B.   Pima Animal Care may microchip any animal impounded or reclaimed
pursuant to Pima County Code Title 6 or Arizona Revised Statutes.
   C.   The owner of any animal impounded pursuant to Pima County Code Title 6
or Arizona Revised Statutes shall be charged with the costs of pick-up,
impoundment, micro chipping, and any other costs related to impoundment of the
animal or of complying with the provisions of Pima County Code Title 6 or
APR.S. Sections 11-1001 through 11-1012, pursuant to the schedule of fees in
Section
6.04.060 of this chapter.
   D.   The owner of any animal may reclaim the animal unless the animal has
been forfeited by law, the animal has been ordered to be euthanized by a judge,
or forfeiture proceedings are pending, in accordance with and after complying
with the provisions of Pima County Code Title 6 and A.R.S. Sections 11-1001
through 11-1012.
(Ord. 2017-19 § 1 (part), 2017; Ord. 2011-72 § 1, 2011: Ord. 2005-45 § 1
(part), 2005; Ord. 2004-17 § 1 (part), 2004; prior code § 15.04.040)
6.04.050   Enforcement authority—Disposition of fines.
   A.   The animal care enforcement officers are authorized to enforce the
provisions of this chapter and to issue citations for violations of this
chapter.
   B.   Fines received for such violations shall be deposited in a special
permanent, nonlapsing and nonreverting fund to be used for the operation of the
county shelter.
(Ord. 2017-19 § 1 (part), 2017; Ord. 2016-6, § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 2004-17 § 1
(part), 2004; Ord. 1987-111 § 2, 1987; Ord. 1986-176 § 2, 1986; prior code §
15.04.050)
6.04.060   Shelter and veterinary care fees.
   The Pima Animal Care Center may charge shelter and veterinary care fees
pursuant to the following schedule:
   A.   Impoundment fee.
      1.   Unaltered dog, cat or canine-wild animal hybrid, one hundred twenty-
five dollars for the first impoundment and two hundred dollars for every
impoundment thereafter within any twelve-month period,
      2.   Altered dog, cat, or canine-wild animal hybrid; puppy or kitten
under three months of age; canine-wild animal hybrid under the age of five
months; and all other animals seventy-five dollars for the first impoundment,
one hundred twenty-five dollars for the second impoundment and two hundred
dollars for every impoundment thereafter within any twelve-month period.
      3.   No impoundment fee is charged if the animal is brought to the Pima
Animal Care Center by the owner.
   B.   Boarding for day or part of day.
      1.   Fifteen dollars for the following:
         a.   Licensed altered dogs,
         b.   Unlicensed altered dogs not required to be licensed,
         c.   Puppies under three months of age,
         d.   Altered cats,
         e.   Kittens under three months of age,
         f.   Permitted altered canine-wild animal hybrids,
         g.   Permitted unaltered canine-wild animal hybrids not required to be
altered,
         h.   Non-permitted altered canine-wild animal hybrids not required to
be permitted,
         i.   Non-permitted unaltered canine-wild animal hybrids not required
to be permitted or altered,
      2.   Thirty-five dollars for the following:
         a.   Licensed unaltered dogs,
         b.   Unaltered cats three months of age or over.
      3.   Forty dollars for the following:
         a.   Unlicensed altered dogs required to be licensed,
         b.   Non-permitted altered canine-wild animal hybrids required to be
permitted,
         c.   Non-permitted unaltered canine-wild animal hybrids required to be
permitted but not, required to be altered.
      4.   Sixty dollars for the following:
         a.   Unlicensed unaltered dogs required to be licensed,
         b.   Non-permitted unaltered canine-wild animal hybrids required to be
permitted and altered.
      5.   All other animals, fifteen dollars.
   C.   Fees for an animal from a jurisdiction that does not have an animal
services agreement with the county or from an agent or contractor of that
jurisdiction:
      1.   Animal sheltering, sixty dollars per day.
      2.   Veterinary care fee, one hundred twenty dollars per hour.
      3.   Euthanasia, one hundred twenty dollars.
   D.   Adoption fee for:
      1.   Adult dogs, eighty-five dollars.
      2.   Puppies, one hundred dollars.
      3.   Special needs adoptable dogs, forty-five dollars.
      4.   Adult cats, eighty-five dollars.
      5.   Kittens, one hundred dollars.
      6.   Special needs adoptable cats, forty-five dollars.
      7.   Exotic birds, seventy-five dollars.
      8.   Other birds, mammals, reptiles, ten dollars.
   E.   Persons aged sixty-five or older will receive a ten percent reduction
of adoption fees.
   F.   An owner redeeming an unaltered pet must pay a recovery fee of two
hundred fifty dollars.
   G.   Redemption fee for an altered dog, seventy-five dollars.
   H.   Redemption fee for an altered cat, twenty-five dollars.
   I.   Vaccination, fifteen dollars.
   J.   Rabies titer, seventy-five dollars.
   K.   Amputation, two hundred fifty dollars.
   L.   Removal of a mass, seventy-five dollars.
   M.   Medication, two hundred dollars.
   N.   Miscellaneous surgical or medical procedure not specifically listed in
this section, two hundred fifty dollars.
   O.   Euthanasia processing fee, twenty dollars.
   P.   Euthanasia fee, fifteen dollars.
   Q.   Pick-up/delivery per trip, seventy dollars. Each additional animal
exceeding total of one, five dollars.
   R.   Microchip, fifteen dollars.
   S.   Animal infectious disease test, thirty dollars.
   T.   Fecal test, twenty-five dollars.
   U.   Brief blood work, forty-three dollars.
   V.   Complete blood work, fifty-five dollars.
   W.   Teeth cleaning, one hundred dollars.
   X.   Skin scrape, fifteen dollars.
   Y.   Bath (no grooming):
      1.   Small dogs, twenty pounds and under, twenty-five dollars.
      2.   Medium dogs, twenty-one to fifty pounds, forty-two dollars.
      3.   Large dogs, fifty-one pounds and above, forty-seven dollars.
   Z.   Umbilical hernia repair, thirty dollars.
   AA.   Inguinal hernia repair, one hundred fifteen dollars.
   BB.   Eye surgery, one hundred dollars per eye.
   CC.   Ear treatment, twenty dollars,
   DD.   Flea or tick treatment, fifteen dollars.
   EE.   Novelties including identification tags, leashes, collars, t-shirts
and pet carriers, up to one hundred dollars.
   FF.   Rescue alters, forty-five dollars.
   GG.   Redemption alters, one hundred dollars.
   HH.   Dangerous dog alters, one hundred twenty dollars.
   II.   Dangerous dog tattoo, fifty-five dollars.
   JJ.   Privately owned pet dog alters, seventy-five dollars.
   KK.   Privately owned pet female cat alters, fifty-five dollars.
   LL.   Privately owned pet male cat alters, thirty dollars.
   MM.   Pima Animal Care Center may waive any or all shelter or veterinary
care fees.
(Ord. 2017-19 § 1 (part), 2017; Ord. 2016-6, § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 2011-68 §
1, 2011: Ord. 2009-27 § 3, 2009: Ord. 2007-17 § 1 (part), 2007; Ord. 2005-45 §
1 (part), 2005; Ord. 2004-17 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 2002-80 § 1 (part), 2002;
Ord. 1999-68 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1997-18 § 1 (part), 1997; Ord. 1992-10 § 1,
1992; Ord. 1989-173 § 1, 1989; Ord. 1987-93, 1987; Ord. 1985-108, 1985; Ord.
1984-211, 1985; prior code § 15.04.060)
6.04.070   Dog vaccinating, licensing and permitting procedure and fees within
county limits.
   A.   An owner shall have dogs three months of age or over vaccinated against
rabies and licensed. Upon moving to Pima County, an owner must comply with
these vaccinating and licensing requirements within thirty days or arrival. The
vaccination shall be in accordance with the current Arizona State Department of
Health Service's Arizona Manual for Rabies Control and Bite Management.
Exception: Animals with a current license from any Arizona jurisdiction are not
required to be licensed in Pima County.
   B.   The licensing fees for dogs three months of age or over which are kept
within the boundaries of the county for at least thirty consecutive days are as
follows:
      1.   Regular, unaltered dog—sixty dollars.
      2.   Regular, altered dog—fifteen dollars.
      3.   Dogs declared dangerous or vicious—one hundred dollars.
      4.   Person aged sixty-five or older/disabled citizen owner, altered dog
(limit four discounted dog licenses per household)—ten dollars.
      5.   Upon showing a veterinarian's certificate stating that a dog cannot
be altered for health reasons — the regular, altered dog fee will apply.
      6.   A dog owner with a household income below the federal poverty level
is eligible for an eight dollar dog licensing fee per altered dog (limit four
discounted dog licenses per household).
      7.   A service animal, or a dog training to be a service animal, as
defined by Arizona Revised Statute Section 11-1024 may be licensed under this
section without payment of a fee. An applicant for a license fee waiver for a
service animal must sign a written certification that the dog is a service
animal, or is in training to be a service animal, as defined in A.R.S. Section
11-1024. The written certification must be in substantially the same language
as in A.R.S. Section 11-1008(F)(2). A person who makes a false certification
under this section is guilty of a petty offense and subject to a fine that does
not exceed fifty dollars.
      8.   An active working dog belonging to a law enforcement agency, or an
altered retired law enforcement working dog, may be licensed under this section
without payment of a fee.
      9.   Processing/postage fee per license, one dollar.
   C.   Licenses shall be issued on a staggered basis. Licenses shall be valid
for up to one year, and shall expire on the anniversary date of a current
vaccination, as defined by the current Arizona Manual for Rabies Control and
Bite Management, at the time of applying for the license.
   D.   A ten-dollar late penalty will be charged on payments made after thirty
days from the expiration date of the license. If the license is obtained one
year but no more than two years from the date on which the dog is required to
be licensed, an additional penalty fee of twenty-two dollars shall be paid. If
the license is obtained two or more years from the date on which the dog is
required to be licensed, an additional penalty fee of thirty-six dollars shall
be paid.
   E.   Owners of altered dogs wanting to pay lower license fees shall be
required to present to the Pima Animal Care Center a certificate from a
licensed veterinarian stating that a dog has been altered.
   F.   Duplicate licenses will be furnished upon request by the owners for a
fee of ten dollars.
   G.   Licenses may be transferred from one owner to another upon change of
ownership of a dog for a fee of ten dollars.
   H.   Effective July 1, 2015, fees authorized in subsections (B)(1) through
(B)(7) of this section will increase on July 1 of each year by one dollar per
year through July 1, 2019.
   I.   Any person who has paid the license fee provided in this section who
subsequently presents to the Pima Animal Care Center a certificate from a
veterinarian that a dog has been altered since licensing shall be entitled to a
rebate equal to the difference between the unaltered and the altered dog
license fees. Rebates shall only be provided to owners for a current license
for an unaltered dog.
   J.   Penalty. The owner of any dog who fails to vaccinate and license or
permit such dog pursuant to this section is guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor,
which is punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred fifty dollars nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars, four months in jail, two years'
probation, or any combination thereof. No judge may grant probation in lieu of,
or otherwise suspend, the imposition of the minimum fine prescribed herein;
provided however that where a violation of this section is charged, the fine
shall be reduced to seventy-five dollars upon a showing to the court of proof
of vaccination and licensing or permitting, as is required for such dog, within
fifteen days of issuance of the complaint.
   K.   A person operating a kennel shall obtain a kennel permit issued by the
Pima Animal Care Center except if each individual dog is licensed. The animal
fee for the kennel permit is four hundred dollars or seventy-five percent of
the total cost of licensing all the animals individually, whichever is greater.
A one hundred dollar late penalty will be charged on permits obtained more than
thirty days after the expiration date of the previous permit. A two hundred
dollar late penalty will be charged on permits obtained one year or more, but
less than two years, after the expiration date of the previous permit. A four
hundred dollar late penalty will be charged on permits obtained two or more
years after the expiration date of the previous permit. A person who has
licensed his/her animals under a kennel permit is subject to inspections by the
county enforcement agent. Such inspections may be initiated by the enforcement
agent at any time Monday through Sunday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. The county
shall deny a kennel permit to or revoke an existing permit from any person who:
      1.   Denies entry to the property for such inspection; or
      2.   Pursuant to any state, county, municipal or federal law or
regulation, criminal or civil, has been convicted of or found responsible for
neglect or mistreatment of an animal or any other offense relating to animals;
or
      3.   Has, within the past ten years, been convicted of a felony; or
      4.   Has ever forfeited a specific animal pursuant to Pima County Code
Section
6.04.140 or any other state, county, municipal or federal proceeding or law; or
      5.   Has ever been denied, pursuant to any legal proceeding or law, all
ownership, possession, or having control of animals in general.
   L.   All dogs which are not required to be licensed under subsection K of
this section must be vaccinated against rabies pursuant to Arizona Revised
Statutes Sections 11-1001(13), 11-1001(14), and the current Arizona State
Department of Health Service's Arizona Manual for Rabies Control and Bite
Management.
   M.   Before a license or kennel permit is issued, the owner must present a
rabies vaccination certificate signed by a veterinarian stating the owner's
name and address and giving each dog's description, date of vaccination, type,
manufacturer, the serial number of the vaccine and the date revaccination is
due.
   N.   The Pima Animal Care Center may apprehend and impound, or cause to be
impounded, any dog, required to be licensed, which is found without a license
tag for the current year.
   O.   As a condition for the issuance of a kennel permit, all dogs over the
age of three months shall have a micro-chip implanted prior to the issuance of
said permit. Each dog that reaches the age of three months during the permit
period must be micro-chipped within thirty days of reaching said age. Upon
receiving an application for the issuance of a kennel permit, the county
enforcement agent may scan all dogs in the kennel to verify the implanted
micro-chips and rabies vaccinations.
   P.   Canine-wild animal hybrids defined by
Chapter 6.05 of this code, are not required to be licensed pursuant to this
section.
(Ord. 2016-6, § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 2015-22 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2011-69 § 1, 2011;
Ord. 2009-27 § 1, 2009: Ord. 2008-62 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2007-17 § 1 (part), 2007;
Ord. 2006-57 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 2006-10 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2005-45 § 1 (part),
2005; Ord. 2004-17 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 2002-80 § 1 (part), 2002; Ord. 1999-
68 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1998-33 § 1, 1998; Ord. 1997-18 § 1, 1997; Ord. 1993-
76 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1989-174 § 1, 1989; Ord. 1989-159 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord.
1987-86 § 1, 1987; Ord. 1984-188 (part), 1984; prior code 15.04.070(A))
6.04.080   Duty to produce—Penalty.
   A.   An owner of an animal charged with a violation of Section
6.04.110,
6.04.120 or
6.04.150 shall produce that animal for inspection or impoundment upon the
request of Pima Animal Care. All owners shall be responsible for any and all
applicable impoundment and boarding fees in connection therewith.
   B.   A violation of this section is a Class 2 misdemeanor and shall be
punishable by imprisonment for not less than twenty-four hours nor more than
four months and by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars. No judge may grant probation in lieu of, or
otherwise suspend, the imposition of the minimum fine prescribed herein.
   C.   This section shall not apply where an animal has bitten a member of the
owner's household.
(Ord. 2004-17 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1989-159 § 1 (part), 1989)
6.04.090   Mandatory spay/neuter program for dogs and cats.
   The following standards are approved for the adoption of any unclaimed dog
or cat:
   A.   Any dog or cat held by the Pima Animal Care Center for the period
required by law and not reclaimed by its owner may be released for adoption
subject to the following conditions:
      1.   The adopting owner must pay a fee pursuant to Section
6.04.060. A transportation fee of no more than six dollars per dog or cat may
also be charged to adoption owners.
      2.   Pima Animal Care Center will insure that all such animals are spayed
or neutered and microchipped prior to release to the adopting owner unless the
veterinarian determines that the animal has medical contraindications that
would prevent or require postponement of surgery.
      3.   If the veterinarian determines that medical contraindications for
surgery exist that would require postponement of surgery, a spay/neuter
certificate will authorize postponement of the surgery until such time that the
veterinarian determines that surgery can be performed in a safe, humane manner.
      4.   If the veterinarian determines the animal is permanently
disqualified for surgery and would be capable of reproduction the animal will
be returned to Pima Animal Care Center, the adoption will be cancelled, and the
adopting owner will be refunded all applicable fees.
      5.   The adopting party shall reclaim the animal following surgery as
directed by the veterinarian. Failure to comply will result in a charge for
extra board. Unclaimed animals may be declared abandoned.
   B.   The agreement to adopt an animal from Pima Animal Care Center shall
require the adopting party to agree to hold harmless and defend the county, its
officers and employees for loss, injury or damages arising out of or in
connection with services of this program.
(Ord. 2009-27 § 2 (part), 2009; Ord. 2005-45 § 1 (part), 2005; Ord. 2004-17 § 1
(part), 2004; Ord. 1994-129 § 1, 1994; prior code § 15.04.080)
6.04.100   Advisory committee—Established—Powers and duties.
   A.   An advisory committee known as the Pima County animal care advisory
committee is established by the board of supervisors. The purpose of this
committee is to:
      1.   Serve in an advisory capacity to the board of supervisors and to the
manager of the Pima Animal Care Center;
      2.   Review and evaluate the general operations of the center in order to
make recommendations to the board of supervisors for the purpose of assuring
that:
         a.   The center's operations promote the public health and safety; and
         b.   The center safeguards the health and well-being of dogs and cats
and is consistent with best practices and procedures of animal control and
welfare; and
         c.   Establish by-laws that govern procedures for meetings and
official correspondence.
   B.   Membership of this committee consists of the following:
      1.   Community Organizations and Partners:
         a.   Each of the following organizations or associations appoints one
committee member: The Pima County board of Health; the Southern Arizona
Veterinary Medical Association appoint a practicing community veterinarian;
Pima Animal Care Center Partners, which is comprised of one representative of
each of the jurisdictions that have an intergovernmental agreement with Pima
County; Friends of Pima Animal Care Center, the nonprofit fundraising arm of
PACC; and the registered volunteers with Pima Animal Care Center.
         b.   The term of appointment for committee members appointed pursuant
to subsection (B)(1)(a) begins July 1, 2016.
         c.   At the first advisory committee meeting following July 1, 2016,
the committee members appointed by organizational partners as delineated in
subsection (B)(1)(a) shall, through random selection, identify two members to
serve four year terms through June 30, 2020 and three members to serve two year
terms through June 30, 2018.
      2.   Board of Supervisors Appointees:
         a.   Each member of the board of supervisors of Pima County appoints
one individual to serve as a member of the advisory committee.
         b.   The term of appointment for committee members appointed pursuant
to subsection (B)(2)(a) begins July 1, 2016.
         i.   At the first advisory committee meeting following July 1, 2016,
the committee members appointed by members of the board of supervisors shall,
through random selection, identify three members to serve four year terms
through June 30, 2020 and two members to serve two year terms through June 30,
2018.
         ii.   Each subsequent appointment, other than for the purposes of
filling the remainder of an unexpired term, is for four years.
      3.   County Administrator Appointees: The county administrator appoints
one staff member and one community member to serve as members of the advisory
committee.
         a.   The staff member appointed by the county administrator pursuant
to subsection (B)(3) serves a four year term and will serve as a non-voting
member.
         b.   The initial community committee member appointed by the county
administrator pursuant to subsection (B)(3) serves a two year term beginning
July 1, 2016.
         c.   Each subsequent appointment, other than for the purposes of
filling the remainder of an unexpired term, is for four years.
   C.   Existing Members. The terms of any committee members serving at the
time this section is adopted expire June 30, 2016.
   D.   Responsibilities of Each Committee Member:
      1.   Attend all meetings; and
      2.   Be informed about the Pima Animal Care Center's mission, services,
policies and programs.
(Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 2016: Ord. 2015-18 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2012-33 § 1, 2012: Ord.
2011-74 § 1, 2011: Ord. 2004-17 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 2002-80 § 1 (part),
2002; Ord. 1998-55 § 1, 1998; Ord. 1998-15 § 1, 1998; Ord. 1988-12 § 1, 1988;
prior code § 15.04.090)
6.04.110   Cruelty and neglect of animals.
   A.   Cruelty.
      1.   Whoever:
         a.   Overdrives, overloads, overworks, tortures, torments, cruelly
beats, mutilates or unlawfully kills an animal; or
         b.   Causes or procures an animal to be so overdriven, overloaded,
overworked, tortured, tormented, cruelly beaten, mutilated or killed; or
         c.   Gives or administers anabolic steroids as defined in the united
states code and the relevant sections of the Code of Federal Regulations, to
any greyhound dog in training for or being used for racing within the state of
Arizona, in order to artificially enhance performance or suppress estrus.
   Shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
      2.   Whoever, having charge or custody of an animal, either as owner or
otherwise:
         a.   Inflicts unnecessary cruelty upon it, cruelly drives or works it
when unfit for labor, or cruelly abandons it; or
         b.   Carries it or causes it to be carried in or upon a vehicle or
otherwise, in an unnecessarily cruel or inhumane manner; or
         c.   Knowingly and willfully authorizes or permits it to be subjected
to unreasonable or unnecessary torture, suffering or cruelty of any kind; or
         d.   Gives or administers, or allows to be given or administered,
anabolic steroids as defined in the United States Code and the relevant
sections of the Code of Federal Regulations, to any greyhound dog in training
for or being used for racing within the state of Arizona, in order to
artificially enhance performance or suppress estrus.
   Shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
   B.   Neglect. The purpose of this subsection is to guarantee that animals
under human custody or control are housed in healthy environments and are
provided with proper food, water, shelter, medical care, exercise space and
ventilation. Any person owning or having care, control or custody of any animal
shall provide:
      1.   That the animal receives daily, food that is free from contamination
and is of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to maintain the animal in
good health;
      2.   That potable water is accessible to the animal at all times, either
free-flowing or in a clean receptacle;
      3.   That, except for livestock, all animals have convenient access to
natural or artificial shelter throughout the year. Any such artificial shelter
shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair to protect the animal
from injury and from the elements, and of sufficient size to permit the animal
to enter, stand, turn around and lie down in a natural manner. Any shelter
which does not protect the animal from temperature extremes or precipitation,
or which does not provide adequate ventilation or drainage, shall not comply
with this section. Any shelter, all bedding and any spaces accessible to the
animal shall be maintained in a manner which minimizes the risk of the animal
contracting disease, being injured, or becoming infested with parasites;
      4.   That the animal receives care and medical treatment for debilitating
injuries, parasites and diseases, sufficient to maintain the animal in good
health and minimize suffering;
      5.   That the animal is given adequate exercise space within an enclosure
that shall be constructed of material, and in a manner, to minimize the risk of
injury to the animal, and shall encompass sufficient usable space to keep the
animal in good condition. With the exception of temporary tethering of horses,
the use of tie-outs such as chains, leashes, wires, cables, ropes, or similar
restraining devices for the purpose of animal confinement is hereby prohibited.
      6.   That the animal has access to adequate ventilation and is protected
from temperature extremes at all times. In this connection, it is unlawful for
any person to keep any animal in a vehicle or other enclosed space in which the
temperature is either so high or so low, or the ventilation is so inadequate,
as to endanger the animal's life or health. Any peace officer or Pima Animal
Care officer is authorized to use whatever force is reasonable and necessary to
remove any animal from a vehicle or other enclosed space whenever it appears
that the animal's life or health is endangered by extreme temperatures or lack
of ventilation within the vehicle or other enclosed space.
   No peace officer or Pima Animal Care officer shall be liable for damages to
property caused by the use of reasonable force to remove an animal from such a
vehicle or other enclosed space under such circumstances.
   C.   Subsection B paragraphs 1 and 2 of this section may be waived by any
peace officer or Pima Animal Care officer if dictated by treatment under the
direction of a licensed veterinarian.
   D.   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of
a Class 1 misdemeanor.
   E.   Penalties. A violation of any provision of this section is punishable
by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars nor more than two thousand five
hundred dollars, six months in jail, three years probation, or any combination
thereof. No judge may grant probation in lieu of, or otherwise suspend, the
imposition of the minimum fine prescribed herein. The justice of the peace may
order that the owner shall not be permitted to own or control any animal for a
period of up to three years, and the justice of the peace shall order that the
animal(s) which are the subject of this action be forfeited to the Pima Animal
Care Center to be placed by adoption in a suitable home or humanely destroyed.
This shall not be construed to affect, in any way, the imposition of any
mandatory minimum penalties provided herein.
(Ord. 2013-1 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2004-17 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1998-46 § 1 (part),
1998; Ord. 1997-26 § 1, 1997; Ord. 1989-159 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 1987-111 § 1
(part), 1987; Ord. 1986-176 § 1 (part), 1986)
6.04.120   Vicious or destructive animals.
   A.   Definitions. In this section, unless the context otherwise requires:
      1.   "Bite" means any penetration of the skin by the teeth of any animal.
      2.   "Destructive animal" means any animal that has a propensity to
destroy, damage or cause damage to the property of a person other than the
animal's owner.
      3.   "Owner" is defined in Section
6.04.020B.
      4.   "Vicious animal" means any animal that bites, attempts to bite,
endangers or otherwise injures or causes to be injured human beings or other
animals, except as provided in Section
6.04.120D or one that has been declared vicious pursuant to this section.
      5.   "Police dog" means any dog belonging to any law enforcement agency
service dog unit.
      6.   "Provocation" means any behavior toward an animal or its owner which
is likely to cause a defensive reaction by the animal.
   B.   Prohibited activity.
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to keep, control, harbor or otherwise
have under control any animal which is vicious or destructive. This section
shall not apply to zoos, wild animal parks or animal shelters, or to persons
who are in compliance with an order of a justice of the peace issued pursuit to
this section.
      2.   The owner of any animal that bites, attempts to bite, endangers or
otherwise injures or causes injury to human beings or other animals is guilty
of a Class 1 misdemeanor, except as provided in Section
6.04.120D.
      3.   The owner of any animal that destroys, damages or causes damage to
the property of another person is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
      4.   It is unlawful for any person to fail to comply with an order of a
justice of the peace regarding a vicious or destructive animal. It is a
separate offense for each day that such person fails to comply with the justice
of the peace's order.
   C.   Penalty. A violation of any provision of this section is punishable by
a fine of not less than two hundred dollars nor more than two thousand five
hundred dollars, six months in jail, three years probation, or any combination
thereof. No judge may grant probation in lieu of, or otherwise suspend, the
imposition of the minimum fine prescribed. In addition, unless the animal has
been previously forfeited or destroyed, upon the declaration of an animal as
vicious or destructive, a justice of the peace shall order the owner to do one
or more of the following:
      1.   Comply with the provisions of subsection
6.04.150D and be subject to subsections E and F; or
      2.   That the animal be banished from the county limits of Pima County
after first being spayed or neutered, microchipped and tattooed by a licensed
veterinarian at the owner's expense. The owner shall provide a certificate of
spaying or neutering and microchipping and tattooing from a licensed
veterinarian to the Pima Animal Care Center within the time given by the court
to ensure the spaying or neutering and microchipping and tattooing of the
animal before banishment; or
      3.   That the animal be humanely destroyed. The animal may be forfeited
to the Pima Animal Care Center to ensure the humane destruction of the animal.
Subsections C1, C2, and C3 of this section shall not be construed to affect, in
any way, the imposition of any mandatory minimum penalties provided herein.
   D.   Defenses. It shall be an affirmative defense to the provisions of this
section if the animal is:
      1.   Not at large and there is provocation; or
      2.   A police dog under the command of its trainer.
   E.   Authority and procedures to remove and impound. The authority and
procedures to remove and impound an animal shall be pursuant to those described
in Sections
6.04.130 and
6.04.140 of this code.
(Ord. 2009-27 § 2 (part), 2009; Ord. 2005-45 § 1 (part), 2005; Ord. 2004-17 § 1
(part), 2004; Ord. 1998-46 § 1 (part), 1998; Ord. 1988-13 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1987-
111 § 1 (part), 1987; Ord. 1986-176 § 1 (part), 1986)
6.04.130   Authority to remove and impound.
   A.   A peace officer or a Pima Animal Care officer is hereby authorized and
empowered to remove and impound any animal in plain view, or pursuant to a
valid search warrant if the officer has probable cause to believe any of the
following:
      1.   That an animal is in distress caused by mistreatment, tieout,
exposure to the elements, extremes of temperature, lack of adequate ventilation
or drainage, lack of sanitation, deprivation of proper food or potable water,
restraint, restriction of movement, confinement, lack of sufficient exercise
space, constrictive gear, injury, illness, physical impairment or parasites; or
      2.   That an animal's well-being is threatened by a dangerous condition
or circumstance; and if the officer has reason to believe either:
         a.   That the distress of the animal or the dangerous condition or
circumstance was caused or allowed to be caused by the willful act or omission
or negligence of the owner; or
         b.   That it is likely the animal would be in distress from any cause,
or its well-being would be threatened by any dangerous condition or
circumstance if the owner retains ownership of the animal.
      3.   That an animal is vicious or destructive or may be a danger to the
safety of any person or other animal.
      4.   An animal is deemed to be in distress and subject to removal and
impoundment if it is on a tieout.
(Ord. 2004-17 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1998-46 § 1 (part), 1998; Ord. 1987-111 §
1 (part), 1987: Ord. 1986-176 § 1 (part), 1986)
6.04.140   Procedures to remove and forfeit animals; notice; order to show
cause hearing; appeal.
   The following procedures shall be followed by the peace officer or Pima
Animal Care officer when any animal is removed or impounded pursuant to
Sections
6.04.120 and
6.04.130. In addition, Section
6.04.140 shall be followed when the peace officer or Pima Animal Care Officer
removes or impounds any animal pursuant to
6.05.040 E.
   A.   If the owner is known, and unless the owner signs a statement
permanently relinquishing ownership of the animal to the Pima Animal Care
Center, the owner shall be provided with a written notice of the county's
intent to file, within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice, a written
request with the justice of the peace for a hearing to determine if the animal
should be returned to the owner or forfeited to the Pima Animal Care Center. If
the owner's whereabouts cannot be determined, notice shall be mailed to the
owner at the owner's last-known address by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested. The notice shall include the bond amount required pursuant
to Section
6.04.140 (G). If not posted within ten days of the notice, the animal shall be
deemed forfeited.
   B.   If the county files a written request for a hearing before the justice
of the peace, the hearing shall be set for a date not less than ten (10) days
nor more than fifteen (15) working days after the request has been filed with
Justice Court.
   C.   If the owner fails to appear at the hearing, the justice of the peace
shall order the animal forfeited to the Pima Animal Care Center to be placed by
adoption in a suitable home or humanely destroyed.
   D.   At the hearing, if the justice of the peace finds from a preponderance
of the evidence either:
      1.   That an animal was in distress caused by mistreatment, tieout,
exposure to the elements, extremes of temperature, lack of adequate ventilation
or drainage, lack of sanitation, deprivation of proper food or potable water,
restraint, restriction of movement, confinement, lack of sufficient exercise
space, constrictive gear, injury, illness, physical impairment or parasites; or
      2.   That the well-being of the animal was threatened by a dangerous
condition or circumstance; and either:
         a.   That the distress of the animal or dangerous condition or
circumstance was caused or allowed to be caused by the willful act or omission
or negligence of the owner; or
         b.   That it is likely the animal would be in distress from any cause,
or its well-being would be threatened by any dangerous condition or
circumstance if the owner retains ownership of the animal, the justice of the
peace shall order the animal to be forfeited to the Pima Animal Care Center to
be placed by adoption in a suitable home or humanely destroyed.
   E.   At the hearing, if the justice of the peace finds that the animal is
dangerous or vicious or destructive, or is a danger to the safety of any person
or other animal, then the justice of the peace shall order the owner to do one
(1) or more of the following:
      1.   Comply with the provisions of subsection
6.04.150D and be subject to subsections E and F; or
      2.   That the animal be banished from the county limits of Pima County
after first being spayed or neutered, microchipped and tattooed by a licensed
veterinarian at the owner's expense. The owner shall provide a certificate of
spaying or neutering, microchipping and tattooing from a licensed veterinarian
to the Pima Animal Care Center within the time given by the court, to ensure
the spaying or neutering, microchipping and tattooing of the animal before
banishment; or
      3.   That the animal be humanely destroyed. The animal may be forfeited
to the Pima Animal Care Center to ensure the humane destruction of the animal.
   F.   Nothing in this section nor in Section
6.04.130 shall be construed as precluding or requiring the use of any other
remedies, civil or criminal; the remedies provided herein are not punitive and
are cumulative with and not exclusive of any other remedies provided for by
law. Nothing in this section shall be construed to estop the prosecution of the
owner for violations of Chapter 6 of the Pima County Code or A.R.S. Section 13-
2910. Nothing in this section shall be construed as precluding the humane
destruction of any animal, which destruction is otherwise authorized by law,
nor shall anything in this section be construed as precluding the spaying or
neutering of any animal. If any provision of this section is in conflict with
any other provisions of this code, the provisions of this section shall be
controlling.
   G.   Upon seizure pursuant to this section, the owner must post fifteen (15)
days of impoundment fees in advance as a bond to defray some of the cost of
boarding, impoundment and any veterinary care needed. This sum shall be listed
on the notice provided to the owner pursuant to Section
6.04.140.(A). If the bond is not posted within ten (10) days of the notice, the
animal shall be deemed forfeited to the Pima Animal Care Center to be placed by
adoption in a suitable home or humanely destroyed.
   H.   If a defendant testifies at a hearing held pursuant to this section,
the defendant does not, by so testifying, waive the right to remain silent
during the trial; and if the defendant does testify at the hearing, neither
this fact nor the defendant's testimony at the hearing shall be mentioned at
the trial unless the defendant testifies at the trial concerning the same
matters.
   I.   Appeal of the decision of the justice of the peace shall be by way of
special action to the superior court on the record of the hearing. If either
party claims the record to be incomplete or lost, and the justice of the peace
who conducted the hearing so certifies, a new hearing shall be conducted before
that justice of the peace. The owner must post a bond equivalent to sixty (60)
days of impoundment costs in order to perfect the appeal. Notice of the amount
due shall be given to the owner by the justice of the peace at the time of the
order to show cause hearing if forfeiture is ordered. The appealing party shall
bear the cost of preparing the record of the hearing on appeal. No appeal shall
be taken later than ten (10) days after the decision.
   J.   Unless good cause is shown, the owner shall be liable for all
veterinary, impound and board fees resulting from the animal's impoundment
until a final decision by the justice of the peace including the pendency of an
appeal. No justice of the peace may waive or reduce any veterinary, impound or
board fees resulting from the animal's impoundment unless the owner prevails at
the hearing.
(Ord. 2006-57 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 2005-45 § 1 (part), 2005; Ord. 2004-17 § 1
(part), 2004; Ord. 1998-46 § 1 (part), 1998; Ord. 1997-26 § 1, 1997; Ord. 1987-
111 § 1 (part), 1987; Ord. 1986-176 § 1 (part), 1986)
6.04.150   Dangerous animals.
   A.   Definitions.
      1.   "Dangerous animal" means one which:
         a.   Has been declared to be vicious or destructive pursuant to
Section
6.04.120, or dangerous or vicious or destructive or a danger to the safety of
any person or other animal pursuant to Section
6.04.140 of this chapter; or
         b.   Displays a tendency, disposition or propensity, as determined by
Pima Animal Care, pursuant to guidelines developed for that purpose, to:
            1)   Injure, bite, attack, chase or charge without provocation, or
attempt to injure, bite, attack, chase or charge without provocation a person
or domestic animal in a manner which poses a threat to public safety; or
         c.   Is owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of
fighting or has been trained for fighting;
         d.   A dangerous animal does not include an animal used in law
enforcement, or animals in the custody of zoos, wild animal parks or animal
shelters, or animals under the care of veterinarians.
      2.   "Provocation" means any behavior toward an animal, its owner, or
other persons or animals which is likely to cause a defensive reaction by the
animal.
   B.   Declaring an animal dangerous.
      1.   Whenever Pima Animal Care has reason to believe an animal may be
dangerous, an evaluation of the animal shall be conducted pursuant to
guidelines developed by Pima Animal Care. These guidelines provide for an
evaluation of the animal's behavior both on and off of the premises of the
owner, its behavior in and out of the owner's presence and its interactions
with other persons and animals.
      2.   If Pima Animal Care declares that an animal is dangerous, the owner,
as defined in Section
6.04.020 of this chapter, shall be notified and issued an order of compliance.
Once an animal is declared dangerous the animal is dangerous until a hearing
officer or judge determines otherwise. If the owner is known, he shall be
provided with a written notice of his right to file, within five (5) days of
receipt of the notice, a written request with Pima Animal Care for a hearing to
determine if the animal is dangerous. If the owner's whereabouts cannot be
determined or the animal poses a threat to public safety or domestic animals,
the animal shall be impounded and notice shall be posted on the property or
mailed forthwith to him at his last known address by registered or certified
mail, return receipt requested. The owner is responsible for payment of any and
all impound costs and fees.
   C.   Hearing—Burden of proof—Appeal.
      1.   The owner of the animal may request a hearing to contest the
declaration of dangerousness under subsection (A)(1)(b) of this section, but
not under subsection (A)(1)(a) of this section, or contest the confinement
conditions ordered by the Pima animal care officer under subsection (D)(1) of
this section.
      2.   If the owner of an impounded animal fails to contact Pima Animal
Care within ten (10) days of receipt of Notice of Impoundment in order to
arrange for an evaluation of the animal, the animal shall be forfeited to Pima
Animal Care to be placed by adoption in a suitable home or humanely destroyed.
      3.   If the owner of an impounded animal fails to appear at a hearing or
fails to request a hearing, the animal shall be forfeited to the Pima Animal
Care upon the expiration of the time provided by the order of compliance if the
owner does not demonstrate obedience with the order of compliance. An animal
forfeited to Pima Animal Care shall be humanely destroyed.
      4.   An impounded animal, as described in subsections (C)(2) and (C)(3)
of this section, shall not, under any circumstances, be returned to its owner
until any order of compliance issued has been obeyed.
      5.   If the owner of a nonimpounded animal fails to appear at a hearing
or fails to request a hearing, the animal is declared to be dangerous and the
order of compliance shall remain in effect.
      6.   After a request for a hearing, Pima Animal Care shall set a hearing
date within five (5) working days at a time and place designated by Pima Animal
Care. The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer selected by Pima
Animal Care.
         a.   The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner without
adherence to the rules of evidence required in judicial proceedings. Any
evidence offered may be admitted subject to a determination by the hearing
officer that the evidence offered is relevant and material and has some
probative value to the facts at issue. A record thereof shall be made by
stenographic transcription or by electronic tape recording.
         b.   It is the burden of Pima Animal Care to establish by a
preponderance of the evidence that the animal is dangerous. All parties may be
represented by counsel and present witnesses at their cost.
         c.   The hearing officer shall make a written decision within five (5)
working days of the hearing and notify the owner of the animal of the decision.
            1)   If the declaration of dangerousness is sustained by the
hearing officer, the owner of the animal shall obey the order of compliance
issued by the Pima animal care officer within the time given by the order of
compliance or ten (10) days, whichever is more.
            ii.   If the animal is found not to be dangerous, the order of
compliance is null and void. The finding that an animal is not dangerous does
not prevent the Pima Animal Care from declaring an animal dangerous again if a
Pima animal care officer has additional reasons, which arise after the hearing,
to believe the animal is dangerous after a new evaluation of the animal is
conducted.
         d.   Appeal of the decision of the hearing officer shall be by way of
special action to the superior court on the record of the hearing. If either
party claims the record to be incomplete or lost, and the hearing officer who
conducted the hearing so certifies, a new hearing shall be conducted before
that officer. The appealing party shall bear the cost of preparing the record
of the bearing on appeal.
   D.   Order of Compliance—Provisions. When an animal is declared dangerous,
Pima Animal Care shall issue an order of compliance requiring the owner within
thirty days to:
      1.   Confine the animal sufficiently to prevent the animal's escape as
follows:
         a.   Pima Animal Care shall determine the appropriate fencing
requirements for the size and nature of the animal, which may require: A fence
including gates to be up to six feet in height; the fence, from five feet in
height to six feet in height to incline to the inside of the confinement area
at a forty-five degree angle from the vertical; or that the confinement area be
wholly covered by a material strong enough to keep the animal from escaping.
         b.   Pima Animal Care may require the bottom of the confinement area
to be of concrete, cement or asphalt, or of blocks or bricks set in concrete or
cement or if such bottom is not provided, then a footing of such material shall
be placed along the whole perimeter of the confinement area to a depth of one
foot below ground level or deeper, if required by Pima Animal Care.
         c.   The gates to the confinement area shall be locked at all times
with a padlock except while entering or exiting.
         d.   Pima Animal Care may require temporary confinement measures until
the order of compliance has been obeyed or the hearing officer determines that
the animal is not dangerous. If the owner does not immediately comply with the
temporary confinement requirements, the animal shall be impounded.
      2.   Restrain the animal outside of the confinement area with a leash,
chain, rope or similar device not more than six feet in length sufficient to
restrain the animal. When outside the confinement area, the animal must be
under the control of a person capable of preventing the animal from engaging in
any prohibited activity. Pima Animal Care may require that the dog be muzzled
when outside of the confinement area.
      3.   Post a sign on every gate or entry way to the confinement area
stating: "Beware of dangerous animal. Per Pima County Code Section
6.04.150." The sign shall be provided by Pima Animal Care.
      4.   Obtain and maintain liability insurance in a single incident amount
of fifty thousand dollars, or post bond in that amount of either cash or
property, unless the animal has been declared to be vicious or destructive
pursuant to Section
6.04.120 of this chapter, in which case the amount of insurance or bond shall
be no less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars, to cover any damage or
injury that may be caused by the dangerous animal. Pima Animal Care shall
maintain a registry of dangerous animals, owners and the insurance carrier or
bonding agent for each dangerous animal.
      5.   Owner must license the animal at the declared dangerous or vicious
rate as indicated in subsection
6.04.070, have the animal spayed or neutered, microchipped and tattooed with an
identification number, by the Pima Animal Care Center or a licensed
veterinarian, at their own expense. Pima County Animal Care shall maintain a
registry of tattoo and microchip numbers and the owners of the animals. If a
licensed veterinarian performs these procedures outside of the Pima Animal Care
Center, a written certification must be obtained.
   E.   Owner's consent to inspection; failure to obey order of
compliance—Penalties.
      1.   By continuing to own an animal declared dangerous, an owner gives
consent to Pima Animal Care Officers or any law enforcement officer to inspect
the animal declared dangerous, the premises where the animal is kept and the
liability insurance or bond documents required for the animal(s), and the
veterinarian's certification of spaying or neutering, microchipping and
tattooing for the animal(s).
      2.   Pima Animal Care may seize and impound the dangerous animal if the
owner fails to obey the order of compliance. Pima Animal Care shall humanely
destroy the impounded animal, unless the owner demonstrates obedience to the
order of compliance or judicial proceedings are pending. The owner of the
animal is responsible for any impound costs and fees. If the owner of the
animal demonstrates proof that the order of compliance has been obeyed then the
animal will be returned to the owner after payment of impound costs and fees.
Any action taken under this section shall be in addition to any criminal
penalties set out in subsection (G) of this section.
   F.   Required acts—Prohibited activities.
      1.   An owner of an animal declared dangerous shall obey the order of
compliance.
      2.   An owner of an animal declared dangerous shall not sell, give away,
abandon or otherwise dispose of the animal without notifying Pima Animal Care
in writing in advance.
      3.   An owner of an animal declared dangerous shall provide proof of
licensure at the rate indicated in subsection
6.04.070, proof of liability insurance or bonding, and the veterinarian's
certificate of spaying or neutering, microchipping and tattooing to the Pima
Animal Care officer upon demand.
      4.   An owner of an animal declared dangerous shall not prevent or try to
prevent inspection of the animal or the premises where the animal is kept.
      5.   When the owner of an animal is notified that Pima Animal Care is
evaluating an animal or wishes to evaluate an animal to determine if the animal
is dangerous, the owner of the animal shall make the animal available for
evaluation at its usual place of abode within twenty-four hours of a request by
Pima Animal Care. The owner shall not sell, give away, hide or otherwise
prevent Pima Animal Care from making an evaluation of the animal.
      6.   The owner of an animal declared dangerous shall prevent the animal
from running at large as defined in Section
6.04.030 of this chapter.
      7.   The owner of an animal declared dangerous shall prevent the animal
from biting, injuring or attacking any person or domestic animal outside of the
confinement area.
   G.   Penalties—Mandatory minimum.
      1.   A person convicted for the first time of any offense prohibited by
subsections (F)(1) through (F)(6) of this section, in addition may be punished
by imprisonment for not less than twenty-four hours nor more than four months
and shall pay a fine of not less than one hundred dollars nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars. A person convicted of a second or subsequent offense
prohibited by subsections (F)(1) through (F)(6) of this section shall be
punished by imprisonment for not less than ten days nor more than four months
and by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars. No judge may grant probation in lieu of, or otherwise suspend,
the imposition of a minimum jail sentence or fine prescribed herein upon a
conviction of any offense prohibited in subsections (F)(1) through (F)(6) of
this section. In addition, a person convicted of any offense prohibited in
subsections (F)(1) through (F)(6) may be placed on probation for not more than
two years and the dangerous animal may be ordered humanely destroyed or
banished from the county after first being microchipped, tattooed and spayed or
neutered by a licensed veterinarian at the owner's expense. If the animal is
not microchipped, tattooed and spayed or neutered within the time given by the
court, the animal shall be forfeited to Pima Animal Care to be humanely
destroyed. This shall not be construed to affect, in any way, the imposition of
any mandatory minimum penalties provided herein.
      2.   A person convicted of violating subsection (F)(7) of this section
may be punished by imprisonment for not less than thirty days nor more than
four months and shall pay a fine of not less than five hundred dollars nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars. No judge may grant probation in lieu of, or
otherwise suspend, the imposition of the minimum fine prescribed herein upon a
person convicted of violating subsection (F)(7) of this section. In addition, a
person convicted of violating subsection (F)(7) may be placed on probation for
not more than two years and the dangerous animal shall be ordered humanely
destroyed. This shall not be construed to affect, in any way, the imposition of
the mandatory minimum fine provided herein.
      3.   Wherever in this section any act is prohibited or declared to be
unlawful, the violation of such provision of this section is a misdemeanor
punishable (except for the penalties already set forth in subsection (F) of
this section) by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars and not more than
seven hundred fifty dollars and/or by imprisonment of not more than four
months. No judge may grant probation in lieu of, or otherwise suspend, the
imposition of the minimum fine prescribed herein. In addition, a person may be
placed on probation for not more than two years. This shall not be construed to
affect, in any way, the imposition of the mandatory minimum penalties provided
herein.
      4.   Each day any violation continues or occurs shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. 2009-27 § 2 (part), 2009; Ord. 2005-45 § 1 (part), 2005; Ord. 2004-17 § 1
(part), 2004; Ord. 1990-13 §§ 1, 2, 1990; Ord. 1988-164 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1988-13
§ 2, 1988)
6.04.160   Excessive noise caused by animals or birds.
   A.   Definitions. In this section, unless the context otherwise requires:
      1.   "Property line" means the line which represents the legal limits of
property (including an apartment, condominium, room or other dwelling unit)
owned, leased or otherwise occupied by a person, business, corporation or
institution. In cases involving sound from an activity on a public street or
other public right-of-way, the "property line" shall be the nearest boundary of
the public right-of-way.
   B.   Prohibited Activity.
      1.   The following activities are prohibited if they produce clearly
audible sound beyond the property line of the property on which they are
conducted and they disturb the public peace and quiet or comfort of the
neighboring inhabitants.
         a.   Owning, possessing, harboring or controlling any animal or
animals or bird or birds which frequently or for continuous duration howls,
barks, meows, squawks or makes other sounds.
   C.   Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced and
administered by Pima Animal Care and appropriate local law enforcement.
   D.   Penalty.
      1.   A violation of any provision of this section is a civil infraction
and will be adjudicated by a hearing officer, as set forth in Section
6.04.160(F), and the written rules of procedure for hearings adopted by the
board of supervisors. If an owner is found responsible for two violations, any
subsequent violation shall be filed in Pima County Justice Court. Citations,
using a uniform traffic ticket and complaint for civil traffic cases, and court
proceedings shall follow the rules of procedure in civil traffic cases adopted
by the Arizona Supreme Court, modified as applicable.
      2.   If the owner of the animals or birds which have engaged in an
activity prohibited by this section cannot be determined, the owner, lessee or
occupant of the property on which the activity is located shall be deemed
responsible for the violation.
      3.   Each day's continuance of a violation under this section shall be
deemed a separate offense.
      4.   A fine of no less than fifty dollars and no more than five hundred
dollars shall be imposed for each violation. Monies collected for civil
penalties shall be deposited in the Pima Animal Care Center financial center of
the county general fund. The justice of the peace may also grant injunctive
relief and such other and further relief as appropriate against a party found
responsible for a violation of this article to prevent future violations.
   E.   Exemptions. Persons wishing to continue activities which constitute a
violation of this section but were commenced prior to the enactment of the
ordinance codified in this section may seek an exemption from the hearing
officer. Such an exemption may be granted if the hearing officer finds that
strict application of this section would cause undue hardship and that there is
no reasonable or productive alternative method of engaging in the activity.
   F.   Hearing Officer.
      1.   Scope. The hearing officer hears and decides appeals of violations
under this section.
      2.   Powers and Duties. The hearing officer performs the following
duties:
         a.   Hearing and deciding complaints alleging civil violations of this
section;
         b.   Administration of oaths;
         c.   The issuance of subpoenas and summonses ordering appearance
before the hearing officer;
         d.   The making of any other order necessary for the determination and
resolution of violations under this section.
      3.   Establishment.
         a.   Appointment. The hearing officer shall be appointed by the board
of supervisors;
         b.   Qualifications.
            1)   The hearing officer shall have training, experience or
familiarity with administrative hearings and this section;
            2)   The hearing officer may be an employee of the county, except
that the hearing officer shall not be a Pima animal care officer;
            3)   Annual Review. The board of supervisors shall conduct an
annual review of the hearing officer;
            4)   Removal. The board of supervisors has the authority to remove
the hearing officer, by majority vote, for neglect of duty, inefficiency or
misconduct in office.
      4.   Transaction of Business. The hearing officer shall follow the
written rules of procedures for hearings on civil violations of the Animal
Control Ordinance,
Chapter 6.04 of the Pima County Code, as adopted by the board of supervisors.
   G.   Judicial Review. The final decision of the hearing officer may be
reviewed by the superior court in accordance with Title 12, Chapter 7, Article
6 of the Arizona Revised Statutes.
   H.   Additional Remedies. In addition to other remedies provided by law, the
board of supervisors, the county attorney, Pima animal care or a private
individual or other entity that is specially damaged by a violation of an
animal statute or ordinance may institute an injunction, mandamus, abatement or
other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent or abate the violation.
(Ord. 2011-76 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2010-19 § 1, 2010; Ord. 2004-17 § 1 (part), 2004;
Ord. 1989-40 § 1, 1989)
6.04.170   Sale of animals at swap meets and public property
prohibited—Exceptions—Penalty.
   A.   No animal including birds or reptiles shall be offered for sale, gift
or other transfer of ownership, and no animals including birds or reptiles
shall be sold, given away or otherwise transferred, on or from any public
street, roadway, right-of-way, sidewalk, park or swap meet. A "swap meet" is
defined for the purpose of this section as a place of commercial activity
popularly known as a swap meet, flea market or park-and-swap, which is open to
the general public and composed of enclosed, semi-enclosed or outdoor stalls,
stands or spaces rented or leased to persons on a temporary basis for the
purpose of display and sale, barter or exchange of new or used merchandise.
   B.   Exceptions. Subsection A of this section shall not prohibit the sale,
gift, or other transfer of ownership of animals at county fairs, animal
exhibitions or shows, 4-H activities, and other activities or events that are
regulated by other state or county agencies. Subsection A of this section shall
not prohibit the use of off-site signs or advertising.
   C.   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of
a Class 2 misdemeanor.
   D.   Penalties. A violation of any provision of this section is punishable
by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars for any person. Each day such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 1993-168 § 1, 1993)
6.04.180   Disposition of animals.
   A.   Any animal forfeited, abandoned, ownerless or unclaimed, and any other
animals to be disposed of by the county enforcement agent, shall be:
      1.   Placed by adoption in a suitable home; or
      2.   Humanely destroyed; or
      3.   Transferred to a duly incorporated humane society or other nonprofit
corporate animal-welfare organization devoted to the welfare, protection and
humane treatment of animals. Transferred animals shall be placed by adoption in
a suitable home after first being sterilized; humanely destroyed; or released
as part of a community cat program.
   B.   As a condition of any transfer of animals under subsection (A)(3), the
Pima Animal Care Center shall verify that any organization that receives
animals is organized for the pursuit of animal welfare activities, is actively
engaged in those activities, does not breed nor release unsterilized animals,
releases animals only through community cat programs or through adoption into
suitable homes after first being sterilized, and complies with the
sterilization, placement, and all other applicable provisions of this section,
this chapter, this title, and other applicable laws. Such verification shall
include announced and unannounced inspections of the organization's facilities
and records. The Pima Animal Care Center may repossess any animals and their
offspring from any organization that is not in compliance with these
conditions, and shall repossess these animals if the organization is not in
compliance with the mandates set forth in subsection (A)(3), or if the
organization or its personnel violate a cruelty law. Any organization wishing
to receive animals must agree in writing to the terms of this subsection.
   C.   For the purposes of this section, a "community cat program" means a
program in which healthy, free-roaming cats are humanely trapped or otherwise
humanely captured, sterilized, vaccinated against rabies, ear-tipped, and
returned to the location where they were found.
(Ord. 2014-36, § 1, 2014: Ord. 1998-46 § 1 (part), 1998)
Chapter 6.05
REGULATIONS CONCERNING CANINE-WILD ANIMAL HYBRIDS
Sections: 
6.05.010   Definitions.
6.05.020   Permit required.
6.05.030   Permit fee—Permit nontransferable.
6.05.040   Enforcement—Fines—Impoundment—Procedures.
6.05.050   Consent to inspection
6.05.060   Compliance with other Sections
6.05.010   Definitions.
   A.   "Alter" means to permanently surgically sterilize animals of either
gender.
   B.   "Canine-wild animal hybrid" means any animal that is part dog and part
wolf or coyote; wolf-dogs and coyote dogs, also called wolf hybrids and coyote
hybrids.
   C.   "Permanent identification" means unique identifiable markings that have
been permanently implanted or affixed by a licensed veterinarian, such as a
microchip or a tattoo.
   D.   "Owner" means any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring,
maintaining, having custody, or otherwise having control of an animal within
Pima County.
(Ord. 2006-57 § 2 (part), 2006)
6.05.020   Permit required.
   A.   Any person who owns, keeps, possesses, harbors, or maintains a canine-
wild animal hybrid within the unincorporated county limits for more than thirty
cumulative days must have a valid permit issued by Pima County Animal Care for
each animal.
   B.   Canine-wild animal hybrid permits shall not be issued unless the
following conditions are met:
      1)   The applicant must be at least eighteen years of age.
      2)   The applicant must provide proof that the animal has permanent
identification.
      3)   The applicant must have a secure fenced or walled yard that is
accessible to and usable by the animal that will prevent the animal from
escaping. Apartments without private yards are not acceptable. If, after
obtaining a permit, the owner no longer has the required yard, the permit will
be invalid.
      4)   The applicant must provide proof that the animal has been altered by
a licensed veterinarian if the animal is five months of age or older. If the
animal is less than five months of age and is unaltered, the applicant may be
issued a temporary permit that will expire on the day the animal reaches the
age of five months.
      5)   The applicant has not been convicted of or found responsible for
neglect or mistreatment of an animal and has not within the past ten years been
convicted of a felony.
      6)   The applicant is not subject to a court order requiring the
forfeiture of a canine-wild animal hybrid or prohibiting the ownership or
possession of such an animal.
   C.   If ownership of the animal is transferred, the releasing owner, before
the transfer occurs, must notify animal care in writing of the new owner's
name, address and telephone number; together with the animal's description; the
permit number, if any; and the tattoo or microchip number, if any. The new
owner must obtain a new permit.
   D.   Permits must include the name, address and telephone number of the
permit holder and the address where the canine-wild animal hybrid will be kept.
   E.   If a rabies vaccination for canine-wild animal hybrids receives
approval of the Arizona State veterinarian, the owners of these hybrids shall
have them vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian, and shall keep
the vaccination current.
(Ord. 2006-57 § 2 (part), 2006)
6.05.030   Permit fee—Permit nontransferable.
   A temporary permit issued in accordance with this chapter requires no
payment. A standard permit issued in accordance with this chapter requires
payment of a fifteen-dollar fee and must be renewed annually. Permits issued in
accordance with this chapter may not be transferred. The permit terminates upon
transfer to another owner. A duplicate permit will be furnished to a canine-
wild animal hybrid owner, upon request by the owner, for a fee of ten dollars.
(Ord. 2009-27 § 4, 2009: Ord. 2008-62 § 2, 2008: Ord. 2006-57 § 2 (part), 2006)
6.05.040   Enforcement—Fines—Impoundment—Procedures.
   A.   Any animal represented by its owner to be a canine-wild animal hybrid
shall be deemed to be such for the purposes of this chapter.
   B.   When a Pima County Animal Care officer or peace officer has reason to
believe, based on the physical or behavioral characteristics of an animal, that
the animal is a canine-wild animal hybrid, the animal will be presumed to be
such unless the presumption is rebutted by the animal's owner. Nothing in this
Section shall require Pima County to do DNA testing to determine whether an
animal is a canine-wild animal hybrid.
   C.   Any Pima County Animal Care Officer or peace officer may issue
citations to the owner of a canine-wild animal hybrid for failure to have a
valid permit as required by Section
6.05.020, or for failure to comply with any other applicable provisions of
Section
6.05.020. Failure to comply with any provision of Section
6.05.020 is a civil infraction, punishable by a fine of not less than one
hundred dollars or more than five hundred dollars.
   D.   When a Pima County Animal Care officer or peace officer discovers or
has knowledge of an unaltered canine-wild animal hybrid that has been owned,
kept, possessed, harbored or maintained within the unincorporated county limits
for more than thirty cumulative days, and if the animal is five months of age
or older, the officer shall give notice to the owner that in order to avoid the
animal's impoundment and forfeiture proceedings, the owner has fourteen days in
which to provide proof to the Pima County Animal Care Center that the animal
has been altered by a licensed veterinarian.
   E.   If, after receiving notice as provided in subsection D of this section,
the owner fails to provide the proof of alteration as required by subsection D,
the animal may be impounded. If the animal is impounded, a Pima County Animal
Care officer or peace officer must provide the owner with the notice as
described in Section
6.04.140 A, and the Animal Care Center shall follow the hearing procedures and
the other applicable procedures as described in Section
6.04.140.
   F.   At the hearing, if the Justice of the Peace finds by a preponderance of
the evidence that the owner has willfully and without good cause failed to have
the animal altered as required by Subsection D, the Justice of the Peace shall
order that the animal be forfeited to Pima County Animal Care. This procedure
is remedial and not punitive.
   G.   Any canine-wild animal hybrid forfeited, abandoned, ownerless or
unclaimed, and any other animals to be disposed of by the County enforcement
agent, shall be placed by adoption in a suitable home or humanely destroyed.
(Ord. 2006-57 § 2 (part), 2006)
6.05.050   Consent to inspection
   By owning or having custody of a permitted canine-wild animal hybrid, an
owner or custodian gives consent to Pima County Animal Care or any peace
officer to inspect the animal, the premises where the animal is kept, and any
documents or records relating to the animal.
(Ord. 2006-57 § 2 (part), 2006)
6.05.060   Compliance with other Sections
   Compliance with the provisions of this Chapter does not relieve the owner
from compliance with all other applicable Sections of Title 6 of the Pima
County Code.
(Ord. 2006-57 § 2 (part), 2006)
Chapter 6.06
BEAR REGULATIONS
Sections: 
6.06.010   Feeding or attracting bears prohibited.
6.06.020   Definitions.
6.06.030   Applicability.
6.06.040   Exceptions.
6.06.050   Enforcement.
6.06.060   Separate offenses.
6.06.070   Penalty.
6.06.010   Feeding or attracting bears prohibited.
   It is unlawful for any person to intentionally feed a bear or bears, or to
attract bears by intentionally, negligently or recklessly placing water,
garbage, refuse, human or animal food, or edibles in a place that is physically
accessible to bears.
(Ord. 1997-19 § 1, 1997)
6.06.020   Definitions.
   A.   "Feeding" is defined as the intentional provisions of water, animal or
human food, or edibles to a bear or bears.
   B.   "Attracting" is defined as placing water, animal or human food,
edibles, garbage or refuse in an area where a reasonable person would be aware
of the potential presence of bears.
(Ord. 1997-19 § 1, 1997)
6.06.030   Applicability.
   This section applies within all unincorporated areas of Pima County,
including, but not limited to, those areas within any national forest or state
or national park that lie within the geographical boundaries of unincorporated
Pima County.
(Ord. 1997-19 § 1, 1997)
6.06.040   Exceptions.
   This ordinance does not apply to:
   A.   Public employees acting within the scope of their authority for public
safety or wildlife management purposes.
   B.   Feeding or attracting bears as permitted by Arizona law and the Arizona
Game and Fish Commission.
   C.   Food or edibles that are being transported, consumed, or prepared for
consumption.
   D.   Garbage or refuse that is being transported.
   E.   Water, food, edibles, garbage or refuse located in a residence, sealed
vehicle or storage building, or in a camping unit that is constructed of solid,
nonpliable material.
   F.   Food, edibles, garbage or refuse suspended at least ten feet above the
ground and four feet horizontally from a post, tree trunk or other object.
   G.   Food, edibles, garbage or refuse stored in a covered and locked
container made of sturdy, nonpliable material.
   H.   Municipal and commercial zoos.
   I.   Provision of feed for livestock, horses, swine, poultry or fowl.
(Ord. 1997-19 § 1, 1997)
6.06.050   Enforcement.
   An animal care officer and any state certified peace officer may issue a
citation for the violation of this ordinance.
(Ord. 2004-17 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1997-19 § 1, 1997)
6.06.060   Separate offenses.
   Each violation pursuant to this section shall constitute a separate offense
and each day a violation remains unabated may constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 1997-19 § 1, 1997)
6.06.070   Penalty.
   A violation of this section constitutes a Class I misdemeanor and is
punishable by a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $2,500, 6 months in
jail, 3 years of probation, or any combination thereof.
(Ord. 1997-19 § 1, 1997)
Chapter 6.08
ANIMAL CONTROL ENFORCEMENT RULES OF PROCEDURE
Sections: 
6.08.010   Scope of rules.
6.08.020   Definitions.
6.08.030   Commencement of action.
6.08.040   Hearing on violations—Notice.
6.08.050   Appearance and entry of plea.
6.08.060   Notice of counsel or other designated representative.
6.08.070   Representative of the county or the complainant.
6.08.080   Discovery.
6.08.090   Continuance.
6.08.100   Oath.
6.08.110   Questioning of witnesses.
6.08.120   Rules of evidence.
6.08.130   Witnesses.
6.08.140   Order of proceedings.
6.08.150   Record of proceedings.
6.08.160   Default by county.
6.08.170   Findings and written judgment.
6.08.180   Default by defendant.
6.08.190   Setting aside default judgment.
6.08.200   Review by superior court.
6.08.010   Scope of rules.
   These rules shall apply in all cases involving the adjudication of civil
animal control violations before a hearing officer, as established pursuant to
Chapter 6.04 of the Pima County Code.
(Ord. 2004-17 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1989-40 § 1 Rule 1, 1989)
6.08.020   Definitions.
   A.   "Animal care officer" means the administrator of Pima Animal Care or
his representative.
   B.   "Chairman of the board of supervisors" means the chairman or, in the
absence of the chairman, the person acting as chairman.
   C.   "Citation" means a uniform traffic ticket and complaint for civil
traffic cases, pursuant to the Rules of Procedure in Civil Traffic Violation
Cases adopted by the Supreme Court, modified as applicable.
   D.   "Complainant" means the person(s) on whose behalf a citation is issued
to a defendant for a violation of this section.
   E.   "Counsel" means an attorney licensed to practice law in the state of
Arizona.
   F.   "County" means Pima County.
   G.   "Other designated representative" means a person over eighteen years of
age, other than an attorney, authorized in writing by the defendant to
represent the defendant in proceedings before the hearing officer. The written
authorization shall be in a form sufficient to satisfy the hearing officer that
the person has in fact been authorized to act on defendant's behalf and that
defendant understands and agrees to be bound by actions taken by the designated
representative in proceedings before the hearing officer.
   H.   "Parties" means the defendant and the county.
(Ord. 1989-40 § 1 Rule 2, 1989)
6.08.030   Commencement of action.
   Every action or proceeding brought before the hearing officer for a
violation of a county animal control ordinance shall be commenced by the filing
of a citation by the animal care officer.
(Ord. 2004-17 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1989-40 § 1 Rule 3, 1989)
6.08.040   Hearing on violations—Notice.
   The hearing officer shall hold a hearing on each violation reported by the
animal care officer. Notice of the hearing shall be served personally on the
defendant at least ten days before the hearing.
(Ord. 2004-17 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1989-40 § 1 Rule 4, 1989)
6.08.050   Appearance and entry of plea.
   A.   The defendant may admit responsibility by appearing in person or by
submitting to the hearing officer a short statement signed by the defendant
admitting the allegations of the complaint. Upon receipt of the admission of
responsibility, or upon the defendant's appearance and admission, the hearing
officer shall set a time and place for the determination of the civil sanction
for the violation and shall mail notice of same to defendant and to the animal
care officer. At the hearing for the determination of sanctions, the defendant
and the animal care officer or the complainant shall each be given an
opportunity to state his position on the amount of the sanction to be imposed
by the hearing officer.
   B.   The defendant may deny responsibility by appearing in person or by
submitting to the hearing officer a denial signed by the defendant. Upon
receipt of said denial, or upon the defendant's appearance and denial, the
hearing officer shall set the matter for hearing and notify the defendant, at
the address set forth on the citation, or any different address provided by the
defendant, of the date, time and place of the hearing.
(Ord. 2004-17 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1989-40 § 1 Rule 5, 1989)
6.08.060   Notice of counsel or other designated representative.
   A.   If a defendant denies the allegations contained in the citation, the
hearing officer shall promptly provide the defendant written notice that his
right to be represented by counsel or by other designated representative is
waived unless he notifies the hearing officer in writing at least five days
prior to the hearing date of his election to be represented by counsel or by
other designated representative. Such notice to defendant shall specify the
appropriate place and manner for filing his notice of counsel or of other
designated representative.
   B.   Absent extraordinary circumstances, failure of a defendant to timely
notify the hearing officer of an election to be represented by counsel or other
designated representative constitutes a waiver of the right to counsel or other
designated representative.
(Ord. 1989-40 § 1 Rule 6, 1989)
6.08.070   Representative of the county or the complainant.
   The county or complainant need not be represented by counsel at the hearing.
Absent extraordinary circumstances, the county's or complainant's right to be
represented by counsel or other designated representative is waived unless, at
least five days prior to the hearing date, the county or complainant notifies
the hearing officer and the defendant, at the address set forth on the
complaint or any different address provided by the defendant, of the county's
or complainant's election to be represented by counsel or other designated
representative.
(Ord. 1989-40 § 1 Rule 7, 1989)
6.08.080   Discovery.
   A.   No pre-trial discovery shall be permitted absent extraordinary
circumstances.
   B.   Immediately prior to the hearing, each party shall produce for
inspection by the opposing party any prepared exhibits and written or recorded
statements of any witness which may be offered at the hearing. Failure to
comply with this rule may result, in the hearing officer's discretion, in the
granting of a recess or a continuance to permit such inspection or in the
denial of admission of the evidence not so exchanged.
(Ord. 1989-40 § 1 Rule 8, 1989)
6.08.090   Continuance.
   A.   The hearing officer may, upon any motion of any party or on his own
motion, continue the hearing for a period not exceeding thirty days, if it
appears that the interests of justice so require.
   B.   Absent extraordinary circumstances, no hearing shall be continued by
the hearing officer without notice to all parties.
   C.   The hearing officer shall notify all parties in writing of the new
hearing date.
(Ord. 1989-40 § 1 Rule 9, 1989)
6.08.100   Oath.
   All testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation.
(Ord. 1989-40 § 1 Rule 10, 1989)
6.08.110   Questioning of witnesses.
   A.   The hearing officer may, on his own motion, call and examine witnesses,
including the defendant.
   B.   No person may be examined at a hearing except by the hearing officer,
the defendant, the defendant's attorney or designated representative, the
animal care officer, the county attorney, or the complainant.
(Ord. 2004-17 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1989-40 § 1 Rule 11, 1989)
6.08.120   Rules of evidence.
   The Arizona Rules of Evidence shall not apply before the hearing officer.
Any evidence offered may be admitted subject to a determination by the hearing
officer that the offered evidence is relevant and material and has some
probative value to a fact at issue. Nothing in this rule is to be construed as
abrogating any statutory provisions relating to privileged communications.
(Ord. 1989-40 § 1 Rule 12, 1989)
6.08.130   Witnesses.
   All witnesses for the county's case in chief, other than the defendant,
shall be required to testify prior to the defendant being required to testify
or to produce any evidence. However, a witness not called to testify in the
county's case in chief may be called in rebuttal to testify to an issue raised
by the defense.
(Ord. 1989-40 § 1 Rule 13, 1989)
6.08.140   Order of proceedings.
   The order of proceedings shall be as follows:
   A.   Testimony of county's witnesses;
   B.   Testimony of defendant's witnesses;
   C.   Testimony of county's rebuttal witnesses, if any;
   D.   Testimony of defendant's surrebuttal witnesses, if any;
   E.   Argument of the parties, if permitted by the hearing officer;
   F.   Ruling by the hearing officer. The ruling may include the findings,
conclusions and opinion of the hearing officer.
(Ord. 1989-40 § 1 Rule 14, 1989)
6.08.150   Record of proceedings.
   A record of the proceedings shall be made by audiotape. In addition, a
record of the proceedings may be made by a court reporter, if provided by the
defendant at his own expense.
(Ord. 1989-40 § 1 Rule 15, 1989)
6.08.160   Default by county.
   If no witness for the county, excluding defendant, appears at the time set
for hearing, the hearing officer shall dismiss the citation unless the hearing
officer, for good cause shown, continues the hearing to another date.
(Ord. 1989-40 § 1 Rule 16, 1989)
6.08.170   Findings and written judgment.
   If the defendant, after hearing, is found by a preponderance of the evidence
to have violated an animal care ordinance, the hearing officer shall enter
judgment for the county and impose a civil sanction in an amount no less than
fifty dollars and no more than five hundred dollars for each violation.
Otherwise, the hearing officer shall enter judgment for the defendant. Written
judgment shall be rendered not later than five days after the conclusion of the
hearing. Nothing in these rules shall prohibit the animal care officer from
issuing a citation to the defendant based on subsequent violations of this
chapter.
(Ord. 1989-40 § 1 Rule 17, 1989)
6.08.180   Default by defendant.
   A.   If the defendant fails to appear as provided by these rules, the
allegations of the citation shall be deemed admitted, and the hearing officer
shall enter judgment for the county and impose a civil sanction and report such
judgment to the animal care officer.
   B.   If it appears from the face of the citation that the defendant was in
the active military service, no default judgment may be entered. In such case,
the hearing officer may notify the defendant's commanding officer, if known, of
the defendant's failure to appear.
(Ord. 1989-40 § 1 Rule 18, 1989)
6.08.190   Setting aside default judgment.
   A.   For good cause shown, and upon terms the hearing officer deems just,
the hearing officer may set aside a judgment entered upon a failure to appear.
A motion to set aside the judgment shall be made in writing within thirty days
after entry of judgment.
   B.   At any time the hearing officer shall set aside a judgment entered upon
a failure to appear if it appears to the hearing officer that the named
defendant was not served a copy of the citation or for any other reason where
necessary to prevent a manifest injustice.
(Ord. 1989-40 § 1 Rule 19, 1989)
6.08.200   Review by superior court.
   Judicial review of the final decision of the hearing officer shall be
pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes Title 12, Chapter 7, Article 6 (A.R.S. §
12-901 et seq.).
(Ord. 1989-40 § 1 Rule 20.1989)
Title 7 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY
Chapters: 
   
Chapter 7.03 - GENERAL DEFINITIONS
   
Chapter 7.05 - (RESERVED)
   
Chapter 7.09 - HAZARDOUS WASTE GENERATORS
   
Chapter 7.13 - (RESERVED)
   
Chapter 7.17 - ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARD MITIGATION FUND
   
Chapter 7.21 - LIQUID WASTE
   
Chapter 7.25 - WASTE COLLECTION
   
Chapter 7.29 - SOLID WASTE
   
Chapter 7.31 - MANAGEMENT OF USED OIL
   
Chapter 7.33 - REMOVAL OF RUBBISH, TRASH, WEEDS, FILTH AND DEBRIS*
   
Chapter 7.37 - WATER POTABILITY
   
Chapter 7.41 - POLLEN CONTROL
   
Chapter 7.45 - ENVIRONMENTAL NUISANCES
Chapter 7.03
GENERAL DEFINITIONS
Sections: 
7.03.010   General usage.
7.03.020   Definitions.
7.03.030   Certificate of approval to construct.
7.03.040   Application for approval.
7.03.050   Plan approval required.
7.03.060   Plans to be submitted.
7.03.070   Design report.
7.03.080   Plans to be prepared by registered engineer and/or architect.
7.03.090   Construction in compliance with approved plans.
7.03.100   Access to construction sites for inspection.
7.03.110   Notification required for final inspection.
7.03.120   Reserved.
7.03.125   Water and wastewater fees.
7.03.130   Operating permit requirements and fees.
7.03.140   Appeals and hearing procedure.
7.03.145   Effect of other laws.
7.03.150   Violation—Penalty.
7.03.010   General usage.
   A.   When parts of the Arizona Revised Statutes are adopted by reference or
referred to in this title, the abbreviation A.R.S. will be used.
   B.   When parts of the Arizona Administrative Code are adopted by reference
or referred to in this title, the abbreviation A.A.C. or the abbreviation
A.C.R.R. will be used.
   C.   References to the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations refer sequentially
to title, Code of Federal Regulations, part, section and paragraph (e.g., 40
CFR 52.01(a) means Title 40, code of Federal Regulations, Part 52, Section .01,
Paragraph (a)).
   D.   Any adoptions by reference supersede other portions of this title which
may conflict with the adoption by reference.
   E.   Copies of all materials adopted by reference in this title and of the
delegation agreement are on file and available for review by the general public
at the department's offices located at 130 W. Congress Street, Tucson, AZ
85701.
   F.   The word shall is mandatory and not directory.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 1, 1996: Ord. 1990-39 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.03.020   Definitions.
      1.   "A.A.C." means the Arizona Administrative Code.
      2.   "A.C.R.R." has the same meaning as the Arizona Administrative Code
(A.A.C.).
      3.   "ADEQ" means the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality.
      4.   "Approved" or "approval" means acceptable to the department.
      5.   "CFR" means the Code of Federal Regulations, as amended from time to
time.
      6.   "Commercial waste" means any solid or liquid waste generated by
conditionally exempt small quantity generators that is accepted at the HHWCP
pursuant to Title 13 of the Pima County Code.
      7.   "Department" means the Pima County department of environmental
quality.
      8.   "Director" means the director of the Pima County department of
environmental quality, or the designated representative of the director.
      9.   "Environment" means navigable waters, any other surface waters,
groundwater, drinking water supply, land surface or subsurface strata or
ambient air, within or bordering on this state.
      10.   "Environmental officer" means an authorized representative of the
department.
      11.   "EPA" means the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
      12.   "Hearing officer" means any individual or individuals approved by
the director to perform the duties of a hearing officer at any administrative
hearing held pursuant to this title.
      13.   "HHWCP" means the household hazardous waste collection program
jointly administered and funded by the city of Tucson and Pima County.
      14.   "Industrial waste" means the liquid, gaseous or solid waste
produced as a result of industrial or commercial operations, and is distinct
from sewage, commercial waste and hazardous waste.
      15.   "Person" means an individual, employee, officer, managing body,
trust, firm, joint stock company, consortium, public or private corporation,
including a government corporation, partnership, association, state, a
political subdivision of this state, or commission of the United States
government or a federal facility, interstate body or other entity.
      16.   "State" means the state of Arizona.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 2, 1996: Ord. 1994-33 § 1, 1994: Ord. 1991-137 § 1, 1991: Ord.
1990-39 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.03.030   Certificate of approval to construct.
   Reserved.
7.03.040   Application for approval.
   Reserved.
7.03.050   Plan approval required.
   Reserved.
7.03.060   Plans to be submitted.
   Reserved.
7.03.070   Design report.
   Reserved.
7.03.080   Plans to be prepared by registered engineer and/or architect.
   Reserved.
7.03.090   Construction in compliance with approved plans.
   Reserved.
7.03.100   Access to construction sites for inspection.
   Reserved.
7.03.110   Notification required for final inspection.
   Reserved.
7.03.120   Reserved.
(Ord. 2003-33 § 1, 2003)
7.03.125   Water and wastewater fees.
   A.   The department shall assess and collect fees for the review and
approval of plans for potable water systems, wastewater collection systems, or
on-site disposal systems. The fees are required when an application is
submitted, and are not refundable.
   B.   The department shall assess a flat rate fee for the following services:
      1.   Site plan review and approval required pursuant to ARS § 45-596 for
notice of intention to drill a well, twenty-five dollars; with site visit, one
hundred fifty dollars.
      2.   Approval of Sanitary Facilities for Subdivisions. Approvals are
granted in phases of 150 lots or less.
         a.   Sewage treatment and disposal is provided outside the boundaries
of the individual lots, 150 lots or less, three hundred dollars;
         b.   Sewage treatment and disposal will be located within the boundary
of the lot, 40 lots or less, five hundred dollars; 41 to 150 lots, one thousand
dollars;
         c.   The appropriate fee(s) specified in B.2.a. and B.2.b. applies to
each phase if a subdivision includes more than 150 lots.
      3.   Public Water Systems; Approval To Construct/Approval Of
Construction.
         a.   Approval to construct/approval of construction fees established
in Table 1 plus any of the following:
            i.   A site visit to verify a construction deviation, one hundred
fifty dollars per site visit.
            ii.   A site visit to conduct sampling, one hundred fifty dollars
per visit.
            iii.   A site visit to witness a pressure test, one hundred fifty
dollars per visit.
         b.   If a water project includes elements from more than one fee
category in Table 1, the applicant shall pay the sum of the fees established in
Table 1 and any additional fee specified in subsections B.3.a.i., B.3.a.ii. and
B.4.a.iii.
         c.   Issuance of plan review exemption letter, fifty dollars.
      4.   Wastewater Collection System/ On-site Disposal System; Verification
of Conformance with General Permit.
         a.   New permit and expansion fees established in Table 1 plus any of
the following:
            i.   A request for an alternative design, installation, or
operational feature, seventy-five dollars per change.
            ii.   A design requiring an interceptor, one hundred dollars per
interceptor.
            iii.   A site visit.
               a.)   To verify a construction deviation, one hundred fifty
dollars per site visit.
               b.)   To verify soil evaluation/site plan, one hundred fifty
dollars per visit.
               c.)   To perform a final inspection, one hundred thirty dollars
per site visit.
         b.   If an on-site wastewater treatment system is based on a design
that combines elements from more than one type 4 general permit, the applicant
shall pay the fee established in Table 1 for the appropriate type 4 general
permit plus one hundred dollars for each additional general permit used in the
design, and any additional fee specified in subsections B.4.a.i., B.4.a.ii.,
and B.4.a.iii.
         c.   Presale inspection and transfer of ownership, fifty dollars per
transfer for an on-site disposal system operating under a type 1 or type 4
general permit.
         d.   Septic system location, ten dollars per request.
         e.   Issuance of a plan review exemption letter, fifty dollars.
   C.   In addition to the fees established by this section, any other site
visit, one hundred fifty dollars.
   D.   If inspection determines violations have occurred, an investigation fee
of up to one thousand dollars may be assessed to recoup costs of additional
inspection and compliance activities.
   E.   The department shall not review a request for a plan review if the
initial fee established has not been paid.
Table 1 
Water and Wastewater Fees 
Service Permit Description Permit Fee
Service                        Permit Description                  Permit Fee
                               All Line Extensions                 $500.00
Public Water Systems           New Water Source (Wells)            $1,000.00
                               Pump/Booster Stations               $1,000.00
                               Reservoir/Storage Tanks             $1,000.00
                               Sewer with Manholes Serving:
Wastewater Collections Systems a. 50 or fewer connections          $500.00
                               b. 51 to 300 connections            $1,000.00
                               c. 301 or more connections          $1,500.00
                               Systems less than 3000 gpd:
                               a. Septic tank/conventional on-site $270.00
                               disposal
                               b. Alternative on-site disposal     $500.00
                               system
                               New Systems greater than 3000 gdp:  $1,000.00
On-site Disposal Systems       Septic tank/conventional on-site    $100.00
                               disposal (tank only)
                               Leach field replacement only (tank
                               must be adequate)
                               a. Records of system                $150.00
                               b. No records of existing system    $270.00
                               Request for waiver                  $25.00
 
(Ord. 2003-33 § 2, 2003)
7.03.130   Operating permit requirements and fees.
   A.   No person shall conduct an operation for which a permit is required by
subsection E of this section or by specific section in other chapters of this
title without holding the necessary and valid permit issued by the
environmental officer.
   B.   Permit applications shall be made on forms provided by the department
and shall be completed in all pertinent details.
   C.   Before a permit will be issued the applicant shall have complied with
all pertinent state, county and city or town health and environmental
regulations, ordinances and statutes.
   D.   Permits are valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance,
unless suspended or revoked by the department for violation of a pertinent
statute, ordinance or regulation. A suspended permit may be reinstated for the
remainder of the permit period at the discretion of the environmental officer
without penalty. A revoked permit may be reissued in the same manner as a new
permit. No permit is transferable from person to person or place to place.
   E.   A permit shall be required of the following:
      1.   Public and private landfills and other approved methods of solid
waste disposal;
      2.   Collection and transportation of liquid waste;
      3.   Water systems with fifteen or more service connections or serving an
average of at least twenty-five persons daily for at least sixty days a year;
      4.   Collection and transportation of solid waste.
   F.   Annual Permit Fee.
      1.   There shall be an annual permit fee for operating permits issued by
the department. The permit fee is due on the date the permit expires. For fees
thirty days in arrears, a late fee of thirty dollars will be assessed. Failure
to pay all fees including late fees within sixty days may result in suspension
of the operating permit.
      2.   Fee schedule:
         a.   Public and private landfills, thirty-six dollars;
         b.   Collection and transportation of liquid waste:
            i)   Operating permit, ninety dollars,
            ii)   Vehicle license, forty-six dollars per vehicle;
         c.   Water systems:
            i)   Each water system shall pay a two hundred dollar water supply
source fee per source. Each individual well, spring, reservoir or other water
supply source is a separate source for the purpose of calculating fees
            ii)   In addition to the water supply source fee, each water system
shall pay a fee based upon the number of persons served on the system as
follows:
Water Systems:
Persons Annual Fee effective June 30, 2009 Annual Fee effective June 30, 2010
Water Systems:
Persons        Annual Fee effective June 30, Annual Fee effective June 30, 2010
               2009
1-99           $50.00                        $100.00
100-199        $150.00                       $300.00
200-499        $250.00                       $500.00
500-999        $250.00                       $500.00
1000-1,999     $500.00                       $1,000.00
2000-4,999     $1,000.00                     $2,000.00
5,000-9,999    $1,500.00                     $3,000.00
10,000 or more $3,000.00                     $6,000.00
 
         d.   Collection and transportation of solid waste:
            i)   Operating permit, one hundred sixty-two dollars plus one
dollar per customer,
            ii)   Waste vehicle license, seventy-nine dollars per vehicle,
            iii)   Collection frequency variance, five hundred dollars.
   G . Fee schedule for field inspections due to noncompliance: For each field
inspection of an activity permitted pursuant to this section resulting from a
complaint made to the department and that results in a finding of noncompliance
with any provisions of this title or any condition of a permit issued pursuant
to this title, seventy-five dollars.
   H.   Permits may be revoked by the environmental officer upon written notice
to the permit holder when an immediate and imminent danger to public health or
safety or the environment exists. In all other instances where a permit is
revocable pursuant to state or local law, a minimum of five calendar days'
written notice must be given by the environmental officer to the permit holder.
The permit holder may make a written request for a hearing in accordance with
Section
7.03.140.
   I.   No person shall refuse to allow the environmental officer to inspect
any and all regulated establishments or facilities at any reasonable time,
during the regular business hours of the regulated establishment or facilities,
and no person shall molest or resist authorized representatives of the
department in the discharge of its duties during the inspection for application
approval or for the enforcement of this title.
(Ord. 2009-36 § 1, 2009: Ord. 1992-128 § 1, 1992: Ord. 1991-139 § 1, 1991: Ord.
1991-138 § 2, 1991: Ord. 1991-137 § 2 (part), 1991)
7.03.140   Appeals and hearing procedure.
   A.   Right of Appeal. Unless otherwise specified in this title, any person
who has been adversely affected by the actions of the department may appeal
that action by filing with the director a written request for appeal within
thirty calendar days of the time the person is notified of the action. At the
time the department notifies the person that he is taking action adverse to
that person's interest, the department shall inform the person of the latter's
right to appeal. Upon receiving a request for appeal, the director shall
appoint an administrative law judge or a hearing officer to hold a hearing on
the matter. Unless otherwise specified in this title, all hearings shall be
conducted in accordance with ADEQ Rules of Procedure (A.A.C. R18-1-201 et seq.)
and the Arizona Administrative Procedures Act (A.R.S. Section 41-1001 et seq.).
If no appeal is filed, the department's action becomes final when the time for
appeal has expired.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 12, 1996: Ord. 1991-137 § 2 (part), 1991)
7.03.145   Effect of other laws.
   A.   Compliance with Pima County zoning requirements shall be demonstrated
before the department may issue or renew any permit required by this title.
   B.   The granting or issuance of any certificate, permit, registration or
other approval pursuant to this title in no way abrogates the necessity of
complying with all other laws affecting or regulating conduct that is subject
to approval.
(Ord. 1994-33 § 3, 1994: Ord. 1991-137 § 2 (part), 1991)
7.03.150   Violation—Penalty.
   A.   Unless otherwise specified in this title, any person who violates any
provision of this title shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor unless another
classification is specifically provided for in this title. Each day of a
continuing violation constitutes a separate offense.
   B.   The environmental officer may also seek injunctive relief to enforce
the provisions of this title.
   C.   The director may proceed, when applicable, under A.R.S. Section 49-143
or 49-144 to abate the environmental nuisances.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 13, 1996: Ord. 1991-137 § 2 (part), 1991)
Chapter 7.05
(RESERVED)
Chapter 7.09
HAZARDOUS WASTE GENERATORS
Sections: 
7.09.010   Applicability.
7.09.015   Incorporated by reference.
7.09.020   General requirements.
7.09.030   Storage.
7.09.040   Recordkeeping.
7.09.050   Registration requirements.
7.09.055   Alternate registration information.
7.09.060   Registration renewals.
7.09.070   Variances.
7.09.080   Types of registration.
7.09.090   Fees.
7.09.100   Revenues from other sources.
7.09.105   Hazardous waste management fund.
7.09.110   Enforcement.
7.09.120   Penalties.
7.09.130   Appeals and hearing procedures.
7.09.140   Inspection and entry.
7.09.150   Confidentiality of records.
7.09.010   Applicability.
   A.   Delegation. This chapter shall be effective when, and to the extent
which, the state delegates task and enforcement responsibility for the
Hazardous Waste Management System, A.R.S. Sections 49-921, et seq., as
promulgated in A.C.R.R. R18-8-260, et seq., as it applies to generators of
hazardous wastes.
   B.   Registration. Any person, by site, whose act or process produces
hazardous waste identified or listed in A.C.R.R. R18-8-261 or whose act first
causes a hazardous waste to become subject to regulation shall register with
the department as a generator.
   C.   Exclusions. The registration provisions of this chapter do not apply
to:
      1.   Hazardous waste treatment storage or disposal facilities (TSDF)
which have a hazardous waste permit pursuant to A.R.S. Section 49-922;
      2.   Generators excluded by A.R.S. Section 49-922(E).
(Ord. 1990-39 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.09.015   Incorporated by reference.
   The following documents, as applicable, are incorporated herein by
reference:
   A.   A.R.S. Sections 49-921 through 49-932; and
   B.   A.A.C. R18-8-260 through R18-8-280, including the adopted U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency rules under 40 CFR 260 through 270 (as of July
1, 1993).
(Ord. 1996-49 § 15, 1996)
7.09.020   General requirements.
   A.   Generators shall comply with applicable hazardous waste management
system rules and regulations promulgated by the Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality.
   B.   In the event of a fire, explosion, or other release which could
threaten human health outside the facility or when the generator has knowledge
that a release has reached surface water, entered a storm sewer or dry well or
may otherwise reach groundwater, the generator shall notify the department
within twenty-four hours.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 6, 1991: Ord. 1990-39 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.09.030   Storage.
   Generators shall conform to all applicable storage requirements as set forth
in A.C.R.R. R18-8-261 and R18-8-262.
(Ord. 1990-39 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.09.040   Recordkeeping.
   All documentation required pursuant to A.C.R.R. R18-8-260, et seq., shall be
kept up to date and available for inspection at the facility.
(Ord. 1990-39 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.09.050   Registration requirements.
   A.   Registration Information. The generator shall provide to the
department, on forms approved by the department, at the time of registration or
no later than thirty calendar days after becoming a hazardous waste generator,
information which may include:
      1.   General Information:
         a.   An EPA identification number;
         b.   The type of hazardous waste and amount generated, specified by
EPA hazardous waste number and quantity generated, for the greater of the
maximum actual waste generated in any calendar month during the previous
twelve-month period, or the maximum projected waste expected to be generated in
any one calendar month during the next permit period, or a statement that the
facility generates more than one thousand kilograms per month;
         c.   An explanation of the method by which each type of waste is
disposed;
         d.   Facility identification:
            1)   Proper name for the facility,
            2)   Street address for the facility or, if the facility does not
have a street address, a legal description,
            3)   Mailing address for the facility,
            4)   Telephone number of the facility,
            5)   SIC codes (the identification number assigned by the Standard
Industrial Classification Code to specific types of businesses) which best
define the type of facility to be registered, and
            6)   Occupancy classification of each building or structure;
         e.   Facility Operations. A brief narrative setting forth the nature
of operations which are or will be conducted at the facility and the processes
associated with the handling of hazardous wastes;
         f.   Facility Environmental Permits. A listing of all environmental
permits held by the facility, including issuing agency, effective dates and
permit number;
         g.   Operator:
            1)   Name of the operator,
            2)   Mailing address of the operator,
            3)   Business telephone number of the operator, and
            4)   Identity of an authorized representative and a technical
contact person and telephone numbers at which the representative and contact
person can be reached at all times;
         h.   Owner if different from operator:
            1)   Name of the owner,
            2)   Mailing address of the owner,
            3)   Business telephone of the owner, and
            4)   Identity of an authorized representative and, a telephone
number at which the representative can be reached at all times.
      2.   Hazardous Waste Management Plan (HWMP). A complete HWMP is required
for the facility to be registered. The information submitted may be plans to be
built. At a minimum, an HWMP shall include:
         a.   General Site Plan. A legible general site plan drawn to scale
showing:
            1)   Site orientation,
            2)   Locations and names of adjacent streets and alleys,
            3)   Location of all buildings,
            4)   Access points and internal roads,
            5)   Parking lots,
            6)   Evacuation routes,
            7)   Accumulation areas containing more than fifteen gallons of
hazardous waste or any amount of acutely hazardous waste,
            8)   Hazardous waste loading areas,
            9)   Storm and sanitary sewer access points,
            10)   Surface drainage areas, clearly delineating the direction of
flow,
            11)   Dry wells,
            12)   Emergency equipment,
            13)   Fire hydrants,
            14)   Adjacent property uses,
            15)   Groundwater wells, active and abandoned, and
            16)   Other relevant information;
         b.   Accumulation Area Plans. A legible plan drawn to scale shall be
provided for each accumulation area in which hazardous wastes will be
accumulated in amounts greater than fifty-five gallons or in an amount greater
than one quart for acutely hazardous waste. The plan shall show:
            1)   Hazardous waste accumulation areas,
            2)   Rooms,
            3)   Doorways,
            4)   Corridors,
            5)   Exits,
            6)   Evacuation routes,
            7)   Emergency equipment, and
            8)   Other relevant information;
         c.   Hazardous Waste Handling. A description of all activities
involving the handling of hazardous waste, and an explanation of precautions
taken to prevent the release of hazardous waste;
         d.   Chemical Compatibility and Separation. A description of
procedures and control methods used to ensure separation and protection of
accumulated waste from activities or conditions which may cause accidental
ignition or reaction;
         e.   Monitoring Devices. Where devices are installed to monitor
releases of hazardous waste, information describing the location, type and
manufacturer's specifications;
         f.   Security. A description of a security program to prevent
unauthorized entry of persons or animals into accumulation areas to reduce the
potential for theft, sabotage, or release of hazardous waste;
         g.   Hazard Labels and Warning Signs. A description of warning
markings on containers, accumulation areas, surrounding fences, gates and
access ways;
         h.   Inspection and Recordkeeping.
            1)   Schedules and procedures for inspecting and maintaining
monitoring, safety and emergency equipment pursuant to this chapter,
            2)   Schedules and procedures for inspecting the facility pursuant
to this chapter, and
            3)   A sample inspection log that provides for the date, time,
location, inspector's name, and a description of problems and corrective
actions taken;
         i.   Emergency Procedures and Equipment. A written summary of
procedures for handling releases, spills, fires or explosions, including
shutdown of operations, agency notification, mitigation of release, evacuation
procedures and a list of emergency equipment. A RCRA contingency plan as
required by A.C.R.R. R18-8-264 may be substituted;
         j.   Employee Training. A written summary of training programs
conducted pursuant to guidance from the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration, RCRA, or other relevant sources.
      3.   Hazardous Waste Inventory. The inventory shall list all hazardous
wastes handled. The inventory shall include the following information for each
waste listed:
         a.   Chemical name, if available;
         b.   Common name/trade name;
         c.   Chemical Abstract Service (CAS) number, if available;
         d.   RCRA hazardous waste number;
         e.   Identification numbers as listed by the Department of
Transportation, if available;
         f.   Maximum quantity handled at any one time;
         g.   Accumulation location;
         h.   Description of how hazardous waste is disposed;
         i.   A separate list of waste stored shall be provided for each
accumulation area shown on the general site plan.
      4.   Release Report. The operator of an existing facility shall tabulate
and submit a summary of all releases of hazardous wastes which were reported to
a regulatory agency for the two-year period prior to making the initial
application.
      5.   Information required by A.C.R.R. R-18-8-260, et seq.
      6.   Additional Information. Any additional information determined
necessary by the director to make the application complete.
      7.   Signature. The registration application shall be signed by the
operator or authorized representative. The owner or authorized representative
shall also sign the registration for the purpose of establishing the owner's
awareness of the permitted operations.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 8, 1991)
7.09.055   Alternate registration information.
   A copy of information submitted by a generator to ADEQ pursuant to A.R.S.
Section 49-929 may be substituted for information required in Section
7.09.050.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 16, 1996)
7.09.060   Registration renewals.
   At least ninety days prior to expiration of an existing registration, the
operator shall submit an application for renewal of the registration.
(Ord. 1990-39 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.09.070   Variances.
   As part of a registration application, the operator may submit an
alternative to a specific registration provision required by this chapter. If
the director finds the alternative to be equivalent, the provision may be
waived and a specific facility requirement shall be used.
(Ord. 1990-39 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.09.080   Types of registration.
   The director may issue the following types of registration:
   A.   Regular. A regular registration shall be issued for facilities which
fully comply with this chapter. A regular registration shall be valid for a
period of up to three years from the date of issuance.
   B.   Provisional. A provisional registration shall be issued to operators of
existing facilities which require modifications in order to comply with
requirements of this chapter. The provisional registration shall set forth a
compliance schedule which shall be met in order for the registration to
continue in effect. A provisional registration shall be valid for a period of
up to three years from the date of issuance.
(Ord. 1990-39 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.09.090   Fees.
   A.   Payment of Fees.
      1.   A Registration fee shall be assessed for each facility requiring
registration under this chapter, the department shall serve the registration
applicant with an invoice of the amount due pursuant to this chapter as
follows:
         a.   For an initial registration, at the time the registration is
granted;
         b.   For renewal of an existing registration, prior to expiration of
the registration.
      2.   If a fee invoiced pursuant to susbsection (A)(1) of this section is
not received by the department within thirty days of the date of the invoice,
the registration applicant shall pay a late fee of thirty dollars. If the
registration fee and late fee is not received by the department within forty-
five days of the date of invoice, the registration is void and the department
shall notify the applicant in writing. An applicant for a registration that has
become void shall pay the late fee set forth in this paragraph.
      3.   For regular or provisional registration issued for a three-year
period, the applicable registration fee shall be multiplied by three.
      4.   If a regular or provisional registration is issued for less than
three years, the fee shall be prorated accordingly.
   B.   Registration Fees. The fee for generators generating greater than two
hundred twenty pounds, regulated under this chapter, shall be based on the
greater of the maximum actual waste generated in any calendar month during the
previous twelve-month period, or the maximum projected waste expected to be
generated in any one month during the next registration period. The annual fee
per facility shall be:
 
Generator Category         Annual Fee effective June Annual Fee effective June
                           30, 2009                  30, 2010
Greater than 220 pounds,
but less than or equal to
660 pounds of hazardous    $505.00                   $1,010.00
waste; or greater than 2.2
pounds acute hazardous
waste
Greater than 660 pounds,
but less than or equal to  $880.00                   $1,760.00
1,100 pounds of hazardous
waste
Greater than 1,100 pounds,
but less than or equal to  $1,895.00                 $3,790.00
2,200 pounds of hazardous
waste
Greater than 2,200 pounds  $1,895.00                 $3,790.00
of hazardous waste
 
   C.   Reinspection Fees. A fee of one-fourth the annual registration fee
shall be assessed when reinspection of a facility is required due to material
noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   D.   Refund of Registration Fees.
      1.   If the department does not issue a registration due to disapproval
of the application, the amount to be refunded will be the fee, less one hundred
dollars which shall be retained by the department as a filing fee.
      2.   If the department does not issue a registration because it is
determined that none is required for the facility, the entire fee shall be
refunded.
      3.   Any moneys received by the department in excess of the required fee
shall be refunded.
   E.   Revision of Fees.
      1.   Registration Fee Inflation Studies. Within thirty days after the
adoption by the board of supervisors of a cost-of-living allowance for a
majority of Pima County employees, the director shall reevaluate the total
service cost of the department related to registration and make a report to the
board of supervisors. If the results indicate that the service cost has
increased since the date of setting of fees, the director shall propose a
increase in all fee schedules for the percentage increase in service cost. The
board of supervisors shall hold a public hearing on the proposed fee increase
before taking appropriate action.
      2.   Periodic Review of Individual Fee Schedules. The director shall
annually reevaluate the service costs associated with individual fee schedules
and shall propose appropriate adjustments. Detailed justifications for the fee
adjustments shall be made by the director. The director shall conduct study
sessions and provide opportunities for conferences and public hearings with
affected operators before recommending to the board of supervisors significant
adjustments to any individual fee schedule.
   F.   Fees collected in excess of program implementation costs shall be
deposited into a special revenue fund to be used to offset future revenue needs
of the department related to this chapter.
(Ord. 2009-36, § 2, 2009: Ord. 1991-137 § 9, 1991: Ord. 1990-39 § 1 (part),
1990)
7.09.100   Revenues from other sources.
   The department shall negotiate with Arizona Department of Environmental
Quality for funding of the programs conducted pursuant to this chapter. Fees
for the state delegated and funded sections of this chapter shall be reduced in
proportion to the level of state funding support received by the department.
(Ord. 1990-39 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.09.105   Hazardous waste management fund.
   A.   A hazardous waste management fund is established to be administered by
the department. The fund consists of any moneys transferred by the board of
supervisors to the hazardous waste management fund; registration fees collected
and appropriated to the department under Section
7.09.090; any moneys from civil or criminal penalties the Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality has collected pursuant to A.R.S. Title 49, Chapter 5 and
provided to the department; and any interest earned on moneys in the fund.
   B.   Moneys in the hazardous waste management fund may be expended by the
department, upon appropriation by the board of supervisors, only as authorized
by law.
   C.   The director shall submit a report to the board of supervisors through
the county administrator by July 1 of each year which relates the activities of
the fund for the prior year.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 17, 1996: Ord. 1994-33 § 9, 1994)
7.09.110   Enforcement.
   If the director has reasonable cause to believe that a person is violating
this chapter, the director may pursue enforcement in accordance with A.R.S.
Section 49-923 and the delegation agreement between ADEQ and Pima County
effective January 1, 1996.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 18, 1996: Ord. 1990-39 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.09.120   Penalties.
   Violations of this chapter are subject to civil and criminal penalties or
other remedies provided in A.R.S. Sections 49-923, 49-924 and 49-925.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 19, 1996: Ord. 1990-39 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.09.130   Appeals and hearing procedures.
   Any registrant may appeal an action of the department by filing with the
director a written request for appeal pursuant to Section
7.03.140 and A.R.S. Section 49-923.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 20, 1996: Ord. 1990-39 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.09.140   Inspection and entry.
   The registrant shall allow the department to:
   A.   Enter and inspect the facility at reasonable times;
   B.   Have access to and copy, at reasonable times, any records applicable to
the facility that are required to be kept pursuant to this title; and
   C.   Sample or monitor at reasonable times, for the purposes of assuring
compliance with this chapter. Split samples shall be made available to the
operator.
(Ord. 1990-39 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.09.150   Confidentiality of records.
   Records or other information furnished to or obtained by the director
concerning hazardous materials are available to the public subject to the
provisions of A.R.S. Sections 39-121.01 through 39-123.03, except that any
records and information which relate to the trade secrets, processes,
operations, style of work or apparatus, or to the identity, confidential
statistical data, amount or source of any income, profits, losses or
expenditures of any person are only for the confidential use of the department
in the administration of this chapter unless the owner or operator expressly
agrees to their publication or availability to the public. This section does
not prohibit the appropriate governmental agency from publishing quantitative
and qualitative statistics pertaining to the storing, dispensing, using, or
handling of hazardous materials.
(Ord. 1990-39 § 1 (part), 1990)
Chapter 7.13
(RESERVED)
Chapter 7.17
ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARD MITIGATION FUND
Sections: 
7.17.010   Environmental hazard mitigation fund.
7.17.020   Uses of fund moneys.
7.17.030   Environmental mitigation fund plan.
7.17.040   Emergency expenditures.
7.17.050   Contract bidding.
7.17.010   Environmental hazard mitigation fund.
   There is hereby established the environmental hazard mitigation fund, a
special revenue fund, to be administered by the director. The fund shall
consist of a solid waste environmental hazard mitigation account. In addition
to any other moneys transferred by the board of supervisors to the
environmental hazard mitigation fund, all of the following moneys shall be
deposited in the solid waste environmental hazard mitigation account:
   A.   Moneys collected pursuant to Section 13.40.040 (B) of the Pima County
Code;
   B.   Moneys collected as tipping fees pursuant to Section 13.40.040A of the
Pima County Code;
   C.   Any interest earned upon the money deposited in the account;
   D.   Any moneys received from the federal government pursuant to the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, 42 U.S.C. Section
6901, et seq., to the extent allowed by state and federal laws.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 22, 1996: Ord. 1994 § 10, 1994: Ord. 1990-39 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.17.020   Uses of fund moneys.
   A.   The moneys deposited in the general environmental hazard mitigation
account may be expended by the department, upon appropriation by the board of
supervisors, for:
      1.   Costs incurred by the department in the abatement of environmental
nuisances pursuant to
Chapter 7.45 of this title. The costs may include, but are not limited to:
         a.   Abatement action taken by the county,
         b.   Administration of abatement actions, including costs of recovery
or reimbursement actions,
         c.   Studies and investigations related to abatement actions;
      2.   Costs incurred by the county pursuant to A.R.S. Section 49-281, et
seq.
   B.   The moneys deposited in the solid waste environmental hazard mitigation
account may be expended by the department, upon appropriation by the board of
supervisors, for the purposes related to the solid waste management activities
described in A.R.S. Section 49-742.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 10, 1991: Ord. 1990-39 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.17.030   Environmental mitigation fund plan.
   The department shall annually prepare an environmental mitigation fund plan
as a basis for expenditures from the environmental hazard mitigation fund. The
plan shall be approved annually by the board of supervisors, and provisions may
be made for mid-year updates. The plan may be reviewed and amended by the board
at any time.
(Ord. 1990-39 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.17.040   Emergency expenditures.
   A.   Notwithstanding Section
7.17.030, if the director determines that an environmental nuisance exists on
private property pursuant to
Chapter 7.45, and further determines that immediate corrective action is
necessary to abate a nuisance determined to be an imminent and substantial
endangerment to human health or the environment, the director may expend moneys
from the general environmental hazard mitigation account to cause the
environmental nuisance to be abated, removed or corrected if the owner or
occupant fails to comply with the terms of the order issued pursuant to Section
7.45.040.
   B.   The director may expend moneys from the general environmental hazard
mitigation account that have been annually appropriated by the board of
supervisors for the purposes of this chapter. Within thirty days of initiating
any expenditures pursuant to subsection A of this section, the director shall
notify the board of supervisors and the director of the county finance
department of the purpose for and the amount of the expenditures.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 11, 1991: Ord. 1990-39 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.17.050   Contract bidding.
   Any person, except for a federal, state, or local agency, bidding for a
contract offered by the county pursuant to this chapter shall submit a
disclosure statement on a form approved by the director. The board may prohibit
a person from bidding on such a contract if the director determines, in
writing, that the bidder has had a license, permit or registration for the
generation, transportation, treatment, storage, recycling, disposal or handling
of hazardous waste or hazardous materials revoked or suspended.
(Ord. 1990-39 § 1 (part), 1990)
Chapter 7.21
LIQUID WASTE
Sections: 
   
Article I. - General Provisions
   
Article II. - Sewage System Construction
   
Article III. - Liquid Waste Disposal
   
Article IV. - Septic Tank Cleaners and Liquid Waste Haulers
   
Article V. - Enforcement
Article I. General Provisions
7.21.010   Purpose.
7.21.015   Incorporated by reference.
7.21.020   Definitions.
7.21.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to preserve, protect and secure the
environment and the health, comfort, welfare and safety of the general public
by regulating sewage collection and disposal within the county.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
7.21.015   Incorporated by reference.
   The following rules, and all accompanying appendices, are incorporated
herein by reference:
   A.   A.A.C. R18-5-401 through R18-5-410; and
   B.   A.A.C. R18-9-801 through R18-9-807, R18-9-809 through R18-9-815 and
R18-9-819.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 23, 1996)
7.21.020   Definitions.
   The following definitions shall apply throughout this chapter, unless a
different meaning is clearly indicated by the context or is stated in any
section of this chapter:
      1.   "Acre" means forty-three thousand five hundred sixty square feet.
      2.   "Alternative on-site disposal system" means any on-site disposal
system other than a conventional septic tank system.
      3.   "Bulletin 12" means the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality
Engineering Bulletin No. 12 dated June, 1989.
      4.   "Cesspool" means an underground excavation which receives the
discharge of sewage.
      5.   "Disposal system" means a system for disposing of wastes, either by
surface or underground methods, and includes sewerage systems, treatment works,
disposal wells, and other systems.
      6.   "Human excreta" means human fecal and urinary discharges and
includes any waste containing such material.
      7.   "Individual disposal system" means a device or system for the
treatment or disposal of sewage from a single housing unit.
      8.   "Individual septic tank system" means a method of sewage disposal
consisting of a covered settling tank and subsurface absorption disposal field
or seepage pit.
      9.   "Minimum design criteria" means Bulletin 12.
      10.   "On-site disposal system" means any individual septic tank system
or alternative disposal system installed at a site to treat and dispose of
sewage or industrial liquid waste generated at that site.
      11.   "Pollution" means such contamination or other alteration of the
physical, chemical or biological properties of any waters of the state,
including change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of the
waters, or such discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other
substance into any waters of the state as will or is likely to create a public
nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental, or injurious to public
health, safety or welfare or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural,
recreational or other beneficial uses or to livestock, wild animals, birds,
fish or other aquatic life.
      12.   "Public sewer" means a sewer located in a road, street, alley, or
right-of-way used to convey sewage to community treatment and disposal
facilities.
      13.   "Residential lot" means a lot improved, or to be improved, with a
dwelling unit.
      14.   "Sewage" means wastes from toilets, baths, sinks, lavatories,
laundries and other plumbing fixtures in residences, institutions, public and
business buildings, mobile homes and other places of human habitation,
employment or recreation.
      15.   "Sewage pumping truck" means any mobile vehicle designed and used
for pumping, storing and transporting sewage or industrial waste from one
location to another.
      16.   "Treatment works" means any plant or other works used for the
purpose of treating, stabilizing or holding wastes.
      17.   "Waters of the state" means all waters within the jurisdiction of
this state including all streams, perennial or intermittent, lakes, ponds,
impounding reservoirs, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs,
irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface and underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
situated within or bordering upon the state.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 24, 1996: Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
Article II. Sewage System Construction
7.21.025   General prohibitions.
7.21.027   Minimum lot size.
7.21.030   Exceptions to minimum lot size.
7.21.032   Design flow.
7.21.035   Minimum design criteria.
7.21.037   Certificate of approval to construct.
7.21.038   Subdivisions.
7.21.039   Fees for approval to construct.
7.21.040   Variance from minimum lot size.
7.21.045   Operating permits.
7.21.050   Maintenance.
7.21.067   Conflicts with other rules and regulations.
7.21.025   General prohibitions.
   A.   No person shall cause or allow sewage or industrial waste to flow into
waters of the county or upon or under any lands within the county in any manner
determined by the environmental officer to be detrimental to the environment or
the health, safety or welfare of any person.
   B.   No person shall cause pollution by the improper design, construction,
quality or materials, use, location or maintenance of any on-site disposal
system.
   C.   No person shall use a cesspool for the disposal of sewage or industrial
waste.
   D.   An on-site disposal system is prohibited where the environmental
officer determines in writing that, due to topography or soil or subsurface
conditions, the on-site disposal system:
      1.   May cause pollution of the groundwater supply; or
      2.   Cannot be expected to function satisfactorily.
   E.   No person shall begin construction of any on-site disposal system or
make any change or repair of a failed system which may affect capacity,
quality, flow or operational performance of an on-site disposal system prior to
receiving a certificate of approval to construct from the environmental
officer. If a certificate of approval to construct is required pursuant to this
chapter, the certificate shall be obtained before any building permit will be
issued for any structure utilizing the on-site disposal system.
   F.   No person shall operate an on-site disposal system that:
      1.   Does not meet all operational and maintenance requirements set forth
in this title;
      2.   Does not conform to any construction plans submitted to and approved
by the department or any other governmental regulatory agency;
      3.   Does not conform to all design criteria required by law at the time
the on-site disposal system is constructed, replaced, reconstructed or
significantly altered or repaired.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
7.21.027   Minimum lot size.
   A.   No on-site disposal system shall be approved or installed on a single-
family residential lot of less than one acre, including easements and
designated rights-of-way.
   B.   Single-family residential lots smaller than one acre shall be connected
to a sanitary sewerage system which leads to a waste treatment works other than
a leach field disposal system.
   C.   Lots for land uses other than single-family residential shall be of
sufficient size to accommodate and meet minimum design criteria.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
7.21.030   Exceptions to minimum lot size.
   A.   Lot size requirements in Section
7.21.027 shall not apply to an existing lot recorded pursuant to law prior to
December 5, 1985, provided that:
      1.   A waiver has been granted pursuant to Section
7.21.037E; and
      2.   The lot otherwise meets minimum design criteria.
   B.   If the environmental officer finds it necessary to approve a
replacement system in order to abate pollution or correct health hazards, lot
size requirements may be waived by the environmental officer.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
7.21.032   Design flow.
   A.   The anticipated volume of sewage from sources of domestic liquid waste
shall be calculated in accordance with Bulletin 12.
   B.   For a lot in a subdivision recorded prior to December 5, 1985, which
does not meet the minimum lot size requirements in Section
7.21.027, the allowable design flow for a subsurface disposal system specified
in the minimum design criteria may be waived in writing by the environmental
officer, provided that:
      1.   Metered water flow demonstrates a history of subdivision water use
that is consistent with the requested waiver;
      2.   Low flow water fixtures shall be installed to assure that the flow
will not exceed the design flow;
      3.   Either a public agency or private agency such as a homeowners
association exists, to monitor and enforce the installation and use of low flow
fixtures and to monitor water use over time;
      4.   The soil absorption system can reasonably be expected to function
under the proposed conditions.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
7.21.035   Minimum design criteria.
   All on-site disposal systems shall be designed and installed in accordance
with Bulletin 12.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 25, 1996: Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
7.21.037   Certificate of approval to construct.
   A.   An application for a certificate of approval to construct required by
Section
7.21.025E shall be made to the environmental officer on forms provided by the
department and set forth at least the following information:
      1.   Legal description of the property, including a verified street
address;
      2.   Owner of property;
      3.   Owner's mailing address and phone number;
      4.   Agent or contractor's name, address and phone number;
      5.   Systems contractor's name, address and phone number;
      6.   Plot plan as described in Bulletin 12;
      7.   Type of building by use;
      8.   Type of water supply and name of water company;
      9.   Type of soil or soil classifications as required by Bulletin 12;
      10.   Soil percolation or hydraulic conductivity tests when necessary to
the design of the on-site disposal system;
      11.   Proximal location of bedrock;
      12.   Proximal depth to the seasonal groundwater level as defined in
Bulletin 12;
      13.   Type of the on-site disposal system;
      14.   An engineered design by an Arizona registered engineer if required
by the environmental officer;
      15.   Signature of owner or owner's agent;
      16.   Such additional information as deemed necessary by the
environmental officer.
   B.   The environmental officer shall act on a completed application for a
certificate of approval to construct within thirty days by either approving or
denying it. If denied, the environmental officer shall state in writing the
reasons. No construction shall be commenced until approval has been obtained
from the environmental officer and a certificate has been issued.
   C.   Pima County wastewater management department shall review each
application for an on-site disposal system certificate of approval. The chief
engineer or his designated representative shall notify the department of the
nearest location and availability of the public sewer. Pima County wastewater
management review shall be concurrent with the department review.
   D.   If a public sewer with available capacity is located within two hundred
feet of the property line of the parcel for which the certificate of approval
is sought, the application shall be denied.
   E.   A waiver of the requirement in subsection D may be granted when the
environmental officer finds that the public health and the environment can be
adequately protected and that any of the following conditions apply:
      1.   The sewer is not accessible by recorded legal access; or
      2.   The sewer is not accessible by gravity; or
      3.   The cost of connecting to an adequate public sewer, calculated from
the nearest point on the applicant's property line to the public sewer and
excluding any sewer connection fees, is greater than two times the cost of
installing an on-site disposal system; or
      4.   Other physical characteristics of the property make connection to
the public sewer unreasonable.
   F.   A request for a waiver shall be made on a form provided by the
department and shall be reviewed and acted upon by the environmental officer
within thirty days of request. The environmental officer may impose any
conditions on the waiver that will:
      1.   Provide adequately for the protection of the public health and the
environment, and the rights of surrounding property owners and residents;
      2.   Secure the intent and purposes of this title; and
      3.   Terminate the waiver when it is no longer warranted.
   G.   An appeal from a decision of the environmental officer may be made in
accordance with Section
7.03.140.
   H.   Subdivisions further than 200 feet from a public sewer using on-site
disposal systems shall be required at the time of recordation to record
permanent rights-of-way for future public sewer construction and covenants
requiring connection within five years of public sewer availability.
   I.   The minimum requirements for connection to a public sewer for
nonresidential uses shall be as required by minimum design criteria. In
addition, when the environmental officer finds that such an on-site disposal
system may create unsanitary conditions or an environmental or public health
nuisance, the environmental officer shall require the property to be connected
to the public sewer or other acceptable waste disposal system.
   J.   A certificate of approval to construct shall become null and void if
work or construction authorized is not commenced within one hundred eighty days
or if construction or work is suspended or abandoned for a period of one
hundred eighty days at any time after work is commenced. Any change in plans or
specifications after the certificate has been issued invalidates the
certificate unless approval is obtained in advance from the environmental
officer for such changes. An expired certificate may be extended or renewed if:
      1.   There has been no change in the plans and specifications of the
proposed system as set forth in the original application;
      2.   The application for extension or renewal is submitted to the
department not more than thirty days after the expiration of the original
certificate and meets all of the requirements of the original certificate; and
      3.   The applicant has paid to the department a fee equal to the fee
amount for a certificate of approval to construct.
   K.   The issuance of a certificate does not constitute assumption by the
county or its employees of liability for the failure of any on-site disposal
system.
   L.   Final Inspection: When construction of an on-site disposal system has
been completed the system contractor shall notify the department, and a
representative of the department shall make a final inspection before the
system is covered.
   M.   Approval to Operate:
      1.   If upon final inspection of the system, the environmental officer
finds it installed in accordance with this chapter and the certificate of
approval to construct, the environmental officer shall issue a certificate of
approval to operate the completed system.
      2.   If the system has been designed by and constructed under the
supervision of a registered professional engineer, the engineer shall certify
in writing that construction and installation of the system has been completed
in accordance with the terms of the certificate of approval to construct and
the provisions of this chapter.
      3.   If the inspection discloses any significant departure from the
description or design of the system as stated in the application for and
certificate of approval to construct, or if any aspect of the system fails to
comply with the provisions of this chapter, approval shall be withheld. Written
notice of deficiencies causing the denial shall be given to the system
contractor. Another inspection shall be made upon notification that the
deficiencies have been corrected and the system has been brought into
compliance with all applicable requirements.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
7.21.038   Subdivisions.
   A.   Prior to approval by the board of a subdivision for which on-site
disposal systems are proposed to be used, the subdivider shall obtain the
approval of the environmental officer for this method of sewage disposal. The
subdivider shall demonstrate that an on-site disposal system can be installed
pursuant to minimum design criteria on each proposed lot. Any lot that cannot
meet minimum design criteria for an on-site disposal system shall be excluded
from the subdivision and shall not be approved as part of the subdivision as a
separate lot. Prior to the construction of an on-site disposal system on any
lot of the subdivision, additional testing, specific design approval and a
certificate of approval to construct shall be required as provided in this
article.
   B.   The following information shall be submitted to the environmental
officer pursuant to subsection A:
      1.   A tentative plat showing the net usable acreage for each lot;
      2.   A geological report prepared by an engineer, geologist or other
qualified person.
   C.   Size of Lots: The minimum size for single-family residential lots shall
be one acre, including easements and designated rights-of-way. In addition,
each lot shall be of sufficient size to accommodate an on-site disposal system
for a four-bedroom house and provide for at least one hundred percent expansion
of the system within the bounds of the property, allowing a minimum of five
feet distance to the property lines. For all other uses, the lot shall be
sufficient size to meet Bulletin 12 disposal density requirements, to
accommodate the on-site disposal system and provide for at least one hundred
percent expansion of the system within the bounds of the property allowing a
minimum of five feet distance to the property lines.
   D.   The geological report submitted pursuant to subsection A shall include
at least the following:
      1.   General description of the area;
      2.   A vicinity map having sufficient detail to enable a person
unfamiliar with the area to find the site;
      3.   Description of methods used in making the soil profile and
percolation tests;
      4.   Map giving location of soil profiles and percolation tests;
      5.   Boring log results;
      6.   Percolation test results;
      7.   Depth to groundwater;
      8.   Description of topography;
      9.   Detailed description of present and planned land uses adjacent to
the proposed subdivision.
   E.   Number of Percolation Tests and Boring Logs:
      1.   Percolation tests and boring logs shall be conducted sufficient to
accurately depict soil conditions. The location of percolation test sites and
the depth of boring logs shall be determined by the environmental officer.
      2.   There shall be a minimum of one percolation test and one ten-foot
boring log per acre, or one percolation test and boring log per lot for lots
larger than one acre.
      3.   In areas proposed for on-site disposal systems where the slope of
the terrain is five percent or less, the depth to groundwater is greater than
fifty feet and an impermeable strata is greater than fifteen feet below the
existing ground surface, fewer percolation and boring log tests than one per
acre may be approved by the environmental officer if the boring log test
results indicate a uniform soil structure and percolation test results indicate
that the percolation rate is uniform in the area and is between one and fifteen
minutes per inch.
      4.   The environmental officer may require additional tests when, based
upon the geology and physical conditions of a particular site, the
environmental officer deems it necessary.
      5.   The results of all tests conducted pursuant to this subsection shall
be submitted to the department for review pursuant to subsection A.
   F.   Boring Logs: Data on the types of soil strata, rock or impervious
strata shall be obtained from boring logs to a depth to be determined by the
environmental officer, but not less than four feet below the bottom of the
proposed subsurface on-site disposal system using disposal trenches. Data on
groundwater shall be obtained to fifty feet below the bottom of the subsurface
on-site disposal system by borings or existing hydrogeological data.
   G.   Soil Depths: Impervious soil strata or bedrock shall be four feet or
more below the bottoms of proposed subsurface disposal systems. If installation
in more shallow soils is proposed, it shall be demonstrated that:
      1.   The bedrock is permeable; and
      2.   The bedrock does not limit construction practices necessary to meet
minimum design criteria; and
      3.   Contamination of water supplies is improbable.
   H.   Topography: Topographic map of proposed site. The contour intervals
shall be such as to clearly identify all washes, watercourses, rocks,
outcroppings and similar features. The maximum contour interval shall be:
 
GRADE            CONTOUR INTERVAL (FEET)
0—5%           2
5—10%          5
Greater than 10% 10
 
   I.   Septic System Locations: In areas of rough terrain or poor absorption,
the location of the on-site disposal system and reserve area shall be shown for
each lot on the final plat plan.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
7.21.039   Fees for approval to construct.
   Fees for an approval to construct issued pursuant to Section
7.21.037 and fees for subdivision approval pursuant to Section
7.21.038 shall be assessed pursuant to Section
7.03.120.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 26, 1996)
7.21.040   Variance from minimum lot size.
   A.   Any person denied a certificate of approval to construct an on-site
disposal system for a single-family residential lot on the basis of inadequate
lot size pursuant to Section
7.21.027 may appeal in accordance with Section
7.03.140, and request a hearing for a variance from the minimum lot size.
   B.   A variance may be granted if the hearing officer finds that an on-site
disposal system and a replacement system which meets all other minimum design
criteria can be installed on the lot.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
7.21.045   Operating permits.
   A.   It is unlawful to place in use an on-site disposal system constructed
after December 5, 1985, until an operating permit has been obtained from the
environmental officer.
   B.   The owners of existing unpermitted on-site disposal systems shall
obtain an operating permit within sixty days of notice from the environmental
officer. To obtain an operating permit for an existing system, the owner shall
file a certificate of inspection as described in Section
7.21.050 with the environmental officer and pay a fee of eight dollars. If an
existing septic tank does not meet capacity requirements at the time of
application, the environmental officer shall make a notation of this deficiency
on the operating permit.
   C.   If a plan of an existing on-site disposal system is not already on file
with the environmental officer, the system owner shall file an as-built plan,
acceptable to the environmental officer prior to the issuance of an operating
permit.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
7.21.050   Maintenance.
   A.   No longer than six months prior to any transfer to another person of
title to real property served by an individual sewage disposal system, the
system shall be inspected and a certificate of inspection shall be filed with
the environmental officer.
   B.   The certification inspector shall certify that the on-site disposal
system is in good repair and functioning properly. For purposes of this
section, "good repair and functioning properly" means:
      1.   The septic tank has been pumped-out if the bottom of the scum layer
is within three inches of the bottom of the outlet device, or the sludge level
is within eight inches of the bottom of the outlet device;
      2.   There are no cracks in the tank which allow the liquid level to drop
below the outlet;
      3.   All baffles and sanitary tees are intact and in place;
      4.   The pipe and valves conducting liquids to the disposal fields are
not clogged and the leaching field is accepting liquids;
      5.   Surfacing sewage, saturated areas or other signs of failure are not
present.
   C.   The certification inspector shall determine the interior dimensions and
liquid capacity of the septic tank.
   D.   The inspection shall be certified by a licensed plumber, septic system
installer, or septic tank pumping company and shall be the responsibility of
the property seller. Approved license types for certification inspectors
include the Arizona Registrar of Contractors licenses L-37, L-41, L-77, A-12,
C-37, C-41 and a liquid waste haulers license issued by the department.
   E.   If a public or private agency, approved by the environmental officer,
exists to administer the operation and maintenance of on-site disposal systems,
the environmental officer may establish, by agreement, different criteria for
testing, inspecting and pumping septic systems which carry out the purposes of
this article.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
7.21.067   Conflicts with other rules and regulations.
   If the provisions of this chapter conflict with any other ordinance or rule
of the county such as, but not limited to, the building codes, zoning code and
floodplain management code, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
Article III. Liquid Waste Disposal
7.21.080   Definitions.
7.21.090   General requirements.
7.21.100   Sewage disposal required.
7.21.110   Connection to public sewer required—Exceptions.
7.21.120   Inspection.
7.21.080   Definitions.
   Within this article and
Article IV of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
      1.   "Chemical toilet" means a toilet having a watertight, impervious
pail or tank containing a chemical solution placed immediately beneath the seat
and a pipe or conduit connecting the riser with the tank.
      2.   "Earth-pit privy" means a device for disposal of human excreta in a
pit in the earth.
      3.   "Engineer" means the person or firm which designed the sewage works
and conceived, developed, executed or supervised the preparation of the plan
documents.
      4.   "Human excreta" means human fecal and urinary discharges and
includes any waste containing such material.
      5.   "Incinerator toilet" or "incinerator privy" means a toilet or privy
designed to permit destruction of excreta by incineration using LP gas, natural
gas, or other source of heat to effect destruction of the body wastes.
      6.   "Individual septic tank system" means a method of sewage disposal
consisting of a settling tank and subsurface disposal field or seepage pit.
      7.   "Industrial waste hauler" means a person using equipment and
vehicles for the collection, transportation and disposal of industrial waste at
a facility provided by Pima County.
      8.   "Pail or can-type privy" means a privy equipped with a watertight
container directly under the seat for receiving deposits of human excreta and
having provisions for the removal of receptacles for emptying and cleaning.
      9.   "Septic tank cleaner" means a person using equipment and vehicles
for the collection, transportation and disposal of human excreta.
      10.   "Treatment works" means any plant or other works used for the
purpose of treating, stabilizing or storing wastes.
      11.   "Vault privy" means a privy for disposal of human excreta into a
vault which is lined with impervious material and which provides access for the
removal of excreta.
      12.   "Wastes" means sewage, industrial waste, and all other liquid,
gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance which may pollute or tend to
pollute any waters of the state. The term "wastes" does not include
agricultural irrigation and drainage waters for which water quality standards
have been established by the state of Arizona.
      13.   "Wastewater management" means that agency responsible for the
operation of sewage treatment in the county or its successors.
      14.   "Water closet" means a water-flush toilet for disposal of human
excreta into an approved water carriage sewage disposal system.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 27, 1996: Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
7.21.090   General requirements.
   A.   The collection, storage, transportation and disposal of human excreta
and other liquid waste shall be carried out in a sanitary manner which does not
endanger public health or create a nuisance.
   B.   No sewage or industrial waste shall be permitted to flow into any of
the waters of the state, or upon or under any land in the county in any manner
determined by the environmental officer to be detrimental to the quality of the
receiving body of water, or to the use of the receiving lands, or prejudicial
to the health, safety or welfare of persons who may be affected by the
resulting environmental conditions. Where characteristics of the waters of the
receiving bodies indicate pollution to exist, treatment works as are determined
to be necessary by the environmental officer shall be installed and operated.
   C.   No person, including the owner or person in possession of any real
property in the county on which there is a water closet, privy, septic tank,
sewage line, cesspool or other on-site disposal system shall permit them to
become unsanitary or an environmental or public health nuisance.
   D.   The use of cesspools for waste disposal is prohibited.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
7.21.100   Sewage disposal required.
   All property where persons reside, assemble or are employed, shall be
provided with a method of sewage disposal that complies with the requirements
of this chapter prior to occupancy.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
7.21.110   Connection to public sewer required—Exceptions.
   The storage and disposal of sewage shall be accomplished by connection to a
public sewer unless otherwise specifically allowed pursuant to this chapter. If
an on-site disposal system is specifically allowed pursuant to this chapter,
the environmental officer may issue a certificate of approval to construct the
following systems if they otherwise comply with the requirements of this
chapter:
      1.   An individual septic tank system;
      2.   An alternative on-site disposal system if an individual septic tank
system cannot meet minimum design criteria;
      3.   An earth pit privy if the on-site disposal systems provided for in
paragraphs l and 2 cannot meet minimum design criteria;
      4.   Any other on-site disposal system such as chemical toilets, vault
privies and pail or can privies if the on-site disposal systems provided for in
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 cannot meet minimum design criteria.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
7.21.120   Inspection.
   The environmental officer shall make such inspections of property or
structures, processes or vehicles used for the storage, collection,
transportation and disposal of human excreta and industrial waste as are
necessary to assure compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
Article IV. Septic Tank Cleaners and Liquid Waste Haulers
7.21.130   General requirements.
7.21.140   Duties of the director of wastewater management.
7.21.150   Permit to operate.
7.21.160   Vehicle license.
7.21.170   Suspension of permit or license.
7.21.180   Suspension of license.
7.21.190   Procedure for suspension.
7.21.200   Reinstatement of suspended permits or licenses.
7.21.210   Revocation of permit and license.
7.21.220   Service of notice.
7.21.230   Hearing.
7.21.240   Application after revocation.
7.21.130   General requirements.
   A.   The collection, storage, transportation and disposal of all human
excreta, industrial and commercial waste shall be carried out in a sanitary
manner which does not endanger the public health or create a nuisance.
   B.   All waste shall be transported in a leak-proof and fly-tight container.
   C.   All portable containers, pumps, hoses, tools or other implements, when
not in use, shall be stored within a covered and fly-tight enclosure.
   D.   Waste to be removed shall be transferred as quickly as possible by
means of portable, fly-tight containers or suitable suction pump and hose to
the transportation container. The transportation container shall be tightly
closed and made absolutely closed and fly-tight immediately after the contents
have been transferred. If portable containers are used, they shall be kept fly-
tight while being transported to and from the vehicles. Any waste dropped,
spilled or leaked in the process of collection shall be completely cleaned up
immediately and the area properly disinfected and decontaminated.
   E.   All pumps and discharge lines shall be free from leaks. All downspouts
shall not be more than twelve inches from the ground level when in use.
   F.   All shut-off valves shall be of a quick-close type which will not
permit sewage to splash or flood the area surrounding a manhole.
   G.   All vehicles, tools and equipment shall be maintained in good repair at
all times and when not in use shall be stored in a clean and sanitary
condition. At the end of each day's work all portable containers, suction
pumps, hose and other tools shall be cleaned and disinfected or otherwise
decontaminated.
   H.   No person shall dispose of any sewage, industrial or commercial waste
except pursuant to approval granted by a federal, state or local environmental
agency.
   I.   Industrial or commercial waste shall not be deposited into a public
sewer without the written approval of the director of wastewater management.
(Ord. 1994-33 § 11, 1994: Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
7.21.140   Duties of the director of wastewater management.
   Duties of the director of wastewater management shall be as follows:
      1.   Select and designate manholes for the disposal of sewage;
      2.   Paint covers of approved manholes a distinct color for ready
identification;
      3.   Notify the environmental officer in writing of any change in the
location of approved manholes.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
7.21.150   Permit to operate.
   A.   No person shall operate as a septic tank cleaner or an industrial waste
hauler without obtaining a permit from the environmental officer. The
application for the permit, and all corresponding department action and review,
shall be made pursuant to A.A.C. R18-8-606 and R18-8-612 through R18-8-617.
   B.   The operating permit shall include a list of approved dumping sites.
   C.   Each vehicle licensed shall have the number of the license plainly and
durably inscribed in contrasting colors on the side door panels of the cab and
the rear face of the tank in figures not less than three inches high. Such
numbers shall be legible at all times.
   D.   Classification of vehicles as to size, type of waste hauled, or other
categorization, restriction or requirement may be imposed by the environmental
officer and shall be stated on the permit.
   E.   Fees for permits issued pursuant to this section shall be assessed
pursuant to Section
7.03.130.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 28, 1996: Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
7.21.160   Vehicle license.
   A.   No vehicle shall be operated without a current and valid license issued
by the environmental officer.
   B.   Every vehicle shall be inspected and approved annually by the
environmental officer prior to the issuance or renewal of the license.
   C.   Each license shall be affixed to the vehicle in a place designated by
the environmental officer and shall be legible at all times.
   D.   Licenses are not transferable from vehicle to vehicle.
   E.   Fees for licenses issued pursuant to this section shall be assessed
pursuant to Section
7.03.130.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 29, 1996: Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
7.21.170   Suspension of permit or license.
   The environmental officer may suspend a permit to operate or license issued
pursuant to this article if inspection by the department indicates that a
licensed vehicle is not being maintained and operated in a satisfactory manner
or that conditions are such that the work cannot be performed in accordance
with the applicable rules.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 30, 1996: Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
7.21.180   Suspension of license.
   Reserved.
7.21.190   Procedure for suspension.
   If a permit or license is suspended, the permit or license holder shall be
notified pursuant to A.A.C. R18-8-616.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 32, 1996: Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
7.21.200   Reinstatement of suspended permits or licenses.
   The environmental officer may terminate the suspension of a permit or a
license after confirming either by an inspection or by a hearing held pursuant
to Section
7.21.190 that the requirements of this article have been satisfied.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
7.21.210   Revocation of permit and license.
   A.   The environmental officer may, after providing opportunity for a
hearing, revoke a permit or license for serious or repeated violations of any
requirements of this chapter or for interference with the environmental officer
in the performance of his duty.
   B.   Prior to revocation, the environmental officer shall notify the holder
of the permit or license pursuant to A.A.C. R18-8-616.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 33, 1996: Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
7.21.220   Service of notice.
   A notice provided for in this article is properly served when delivered to
the holder of the permit or license or their statutory agent, or when it is
sent by registered mail, return receipt requested, to the address set forth on
the permit or license application.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
7.21.230   Hearing.
   The hearing provided for in this article shall be conducted in accordance
with Section
7.03.140.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
7.21.240   Application after revocation.
   The holder of the revoked permit or license may make a written application
for new permit or license in accordance with this article, but a new license or
permit shall not be issued by the environmental officer sooner than six months
from the date the revocation became final.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
Article V. Enforcement
7.21.260   Violation—Penalty—Remedies.
7.21.260   Violation—Penalty—Remedies.
   A.   A violation of this chapter shall be a Class 3 misdemeanor. Each day of
a continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   The county, any other political subdivision, or any person who is
damaged as a result of a violation of this chapter may institute any
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, abate or remove a violation of
this chapter.
   C.   All penalties and remedies provided for in this chapter shall be
cumulative and not exclusive. Conviction under this chapter shall not relieve a
violator from the duty to abate prohibited conditions or to remove prohibited
on-site disposal systems, obstructions or improvements, nor prevent any further
enforcement action from being taken.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 13 (part), 1991)
Chapter 7.25
WASTE COLLECTION
Sections: 
7.25.010   Definitions.
7.25.020   Licenses required—Application—Issuance.
7.25.030   Exemptions from licensing.
7.25.040   Standard solid waste collection services.
7.25.050   Containers—Location for pickup—Conditions.
7.25.060   Containers—Hours for placement.
7.25.070   Hours of collection.
7.25.080   Containers—Care and handling.
7.25.090   Vehicles.
7.25.100   Notices.
7.25.110   Disposal of collected materials.
7.25.120   Recyclable materials collection services—Minimum standards.
7.25.125   Waivers
7.25.130   Disposal of recyclable materials.
7.25.140   Quarterly reports.
7.25.150   Recycling education program and distribution of information.
7.25.155   Standards of performance
7.25.160   Inquiries and complaints—Telephone facilities and record keeping.
7.25.170   Inspections.
7.25.180   Cease and desist orders.
7.25.190   Revocation of license.
7.25.200   License fees.
7.25.210   Term of license.
7.25.220   Violations.
7.25.230   Confidentiality of records.
7.25.010   Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   A.   "Approved" means acceptable to the department.
   B.   "Ashes" means residue from the burning of any combustible material.
   C.   "Garbage" means all animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
processing, handling, preparation, cooking and serving of food or food
materials.
   D.   "Manure" means animal excreta, including cleanings from barns, stables,
corrals, pens or conveyances used for stabling, transporting or penning of
animals or fowls.
   E.   "Public facility" means any site owned and operated or utilized by any
person for resource conservation or recovery or for the collection, source
separation, storage, transportation, transfer, processing, treatment or
disposal of solid waste that is not generated on-site. "Public facility"
includes a public solid waste landfill.
   F.   "Recyclable material" means:
      1.   Aluminum and metal cans, newspapers, glass bottles or jars, plastic
beverage containers, all nonsoiled paper, and corrugated cardboard; and
      2.   Any other potentially recyclable material which a licensed waste
collector elects to collect.
   G.   "Recycling facility" means a public facility which receives, stores,
converts, separates or transfers recyclable materials for processing.
   H.   "Refuse" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid
wastes, except human excreta, but including garbage, rubbish, ashes, manure,
street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and industrial wastes.
   I.   "Resource recovery" means the recovery of energy or materials from
solid waste.
   J.   "Rubbish" means nonputrescible solid wastes, excluding ashes,
consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper,
cardboard, waste metal, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding,
crockery and similar materials.
   K.   "Solid waste" for the purposes of this chapter shall have the same
meaning as defined in A.R.S. Section 49-701.01.
   L.   "Waste collector" means any private person operating within the
unincorporated area of Pima County one or more collection vehicles in the
business of collecting solid waste from the property where the materials
originate to another location for transfer, salvage, resource recovery or
disposal. "Waste collector" does not include those persons whose operations
occur solely "on-site" according to A.R.S. Section 49-701 or whose operations
are exempt according to A.R.S. Section 49-762(H).
(Ord. 1996-49 § 34, 1996: Ord. 1992-127 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 1990-115 § 1
(part), 1990)
7.25.020   Licenses required—Application—Issuance.
   All waste collectors shall apply for and obtain licenses for their business
and each vehicle used for waste collection and transportation.
   A.   Application.
      1.   A waste collector shall apply for and obtain an operating license
prior to conducting any activity regulated by this chapter. The application
shall include all information and documents that the director reasonably
determines are necessary to decide whether the applicant's proposed waste
collector operation will comply with all applicable laws and regulations,
including, but not limited to, a report indicating areas served, types of
services provided, rates and description of standard type service, holiday
schedules and other related information required by the director.
      2.   A waste collector shall apply for and obtain a waste vehicle license
for each vehicle before it is used in any waste collection activity regulated
by this chapter. An application shall not be approved until the director has
inspected the vehicle and determined it is in compliance with all of the
provisions of Section
7.25.090.
   B.   Form. An application shall be submitted to the director on forms
approved by the director.
   C.   Fees. An application shall not be complete until the applicable license
fee has been submitted to the director.
   D.   Incomplete Application. If the director determines that an application
is incomplete, the director shall notify the applicant within fifteen days
specifying the deficiencies.
   E.   Approval. Within thirty days after the submittal of a complete
application, the director shall either approve or deny issuance of the license.
   F.   Appeal of Denial. The denial of an application may be appealed by the
waste collector pursuant to the procedure for appeal in Section
7.25.190.
(Ord. 1992-127 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 1990-115 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.25.030   Exemptions from licensing.
   No waste collector license shall be required for:
   A.   The hauling or disposal of vegetative cuttings or other solid waste not
containing garbage or manure to a legal place of disposal as a part of
gardening or horticulture;
   B.   A waste collector who collects only the materials listed in Section
7.25.040B2;
   C.   A waste collector who collects only recyclable materials.
(Ord. 1992-127 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 1990-115 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.25.040   Standard solid waste collection services.
   A.   Duty to Collect. Waste collectors shall collect solid waste from
customers who have contracted for the service.
   B.   Acceptable Solid Waste.
      1.   The following solid waste is acceptable for collection and shall be
collected: garbage, ashes, rubbish and small dead animals which do not exceed
seventy-five pounds in weight.
      2.   The following solid waste is not considered acceptable for
collection but may be collected at the discretion of the waste collector where
special facilities or equipment required for the collection and disposal of
such wastes are provided:
         a.   Dangerous materials or substances, such as poisons, acids,
caustics, infected materials, radioactive materials and explosives;
         b.   Materials resulting from the repair, excavation or construction
of building and structures;
         c.   Solid wastes resulting from industrial processes;
         d.   Animals exceeding seventy-five pounds in weight, condemned
animals, animals from a slaughterhouse or other animals normally considered
industrial waste;
         e.   Manure.
   C.   Frequency of Collection.
      1.   The frequency of collection shall be in accordance with rules of the
waste collector but not less than:
         a.   Garbage only, twice weekly;
         b.   Refuse with garbage, twice weekly;
         c.   Rubbish and ashes, as often as necessary to prevent nuisances and
fly breeding.
      2.   A variance from the required frequency rate may be granted to allow
for the collection of garbage once weekly. The variance may be granted by the
director upon submission of an acceptable plan approved by the county health
department demonstrating that no public health hazards or nuisances will exist
and that fly breeding will be controlled by either biological, chemical or
mechanical means. The variance may be revoked whenever the director determines
that the circumstances warranting the variance no longer exist.
      3.   Requests for variances pursuant to paragraph 2 of this subsection
shall be submitted to the director on application forms approved by the
director. An application shall not be complete until the applicant has paid the
variance fee prescribed by Section
7.25.200. Upon submission of a complete application, the director shall give
notice of the proposed variance once each week for two consecutive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation within the waste collector service area
proposed to be affected. The notice shall describe the variance requested,
shall invite public comment on the proposed variance and shall notice a public
hearing on the proposed variance.
      4.   A person requesting a variance pursuant to paragraph 2 of this
subsection shall give notice of the requested variance to each person whose
refuse collection is proposed to be affected. The notice shall be in a form
approved by the director, describe the requested variance and procedures to
comment pursuant to paragraph 3 and be mailed or left at the residence or place
of business of each person prior to the public hearing noticed by the director.
The intentional failure of the applicant to give notice pursuant to this
paragraph shall constitute grounds for denial of the requested variance.
      5.   If a variance is denied by the director, a subsequent request for a
variance may not be submitted by the waste collector within six months
following the denial.
   D.   The standard collection service set forth in this chapter only
prescribes a minimum level of service and does not preclude a waste collector
from agreeing to provide a higher level of service.
(Ord. 1992-127 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 1990-115 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.25.050   Containers—Location for pickup—Conditions.
   A.   All refuse shall be property placed on the premises for convenient
collection as agreed between each customer and the waste collector, except that
where alleys are provided the refuse shall be placed on the alley side of the
premises and if collected from the front of the premises the refuse shall be
placed at the curb along the street in front of the premises.
   B.   Residential waste collectors shall not be required to collect from:
      1.   A blind alley;
      2.   An alley less than fifteen feet wide;
      3.   An alley which is L or T shaped and not wide enough to be safe for
the waste collection vehicle to turn without damage to the vehicle or to
adjacent improvements on private property; or
      4.   An alley or road the surface of which could endanger the safety or
the convenient operation of the collection vehicles at all seasons of the year.
(Ord. 1992-127 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 1990-115 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.25.060   Containers—Hours for placement.
   If collected from the front of the premises, no person shall place any solid
waste, or any container containing solid waste, at any place of collection
before five p.m. of the day preceding the scheduled collection of the solid
waste, or leave any such container at the place of collection after eight p.m.
on the day of actual collection, or more than two hours after actual
collection, whichever is later.
(Ord. 1992-127 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 1990-115 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.25.070   Hours of collection.
   Residential waste collectors shall not collect solid waste within a
residential area between the night-time hours of ten p.m. and six a.m. the next
day. Collectors of nonresidential solid waste may provide collection services
at any time; provided, however, that collections made within five hundred feet
of a residential area shall be limited to the times specified for residential
waste collectors. The director may waive these requirements when necessitated
by conditions beyond the control of the waste collector.
(Ord. 1992-127 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 1990-115 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.25.080   Containers—Care and handling.
   Waste collectors shall replace all solid waste containers where found.
Containers or lids shall not be deposited in the street or on adjoining
property.
(Ord. 1992-127 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 1990-115 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.25.090   Vehicles.
   A.   Vehicles used for collection and transportation of garbage, or refuse
containing garbage, shall have covered, watertight, metal bodies of easily
cleanable construction, shall be cleaned frequently to prevent a nuisance or
insect breeding, and shall be maintained in good repair.
   B.   Vehicles used for collection and transportation of refuse shall be
loaded and moved in such a manner that the contents, including ashes, will not
fall, leak, or spill therefrom. Where spillage does occur, it shall be picked
up immediately by the collector and returned to the vehicle or container.
   C.   Vehicles used for collection and transportation of rubbish or manure
shall be of such construction as to prevent leakage or spillage, and shall
provide a cover to prevent blowing of materials or creating a nuisance.
(Ord. 1992-127 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 1990-115 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.25.100   Notices.
   A.   All waste collectors shall provide each customer served with a copy of
the requirements governing the storage and collection of refuse. The notices
shall conform to the provisions of this chapter and the statutes and
regulations of the state of Arizona and shall cover at least the following
items:
      1.   Definitions;
      2.   Places to be served;
      3.   Places not to be served;
      4.   Scheduled day or days of collection;
      5.   Materials acceptable for collection;
      6.   Materials not acceptable for collection;
      7.   Preparation of for collection;
      8.   Types and size of containers permitted;
      9.   Points from which collections will be made;
      10.   Necessary safeguards for collectors.
(Ord. 1992-127 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 1990-115 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.25.110   Disposal of collected materials.
   All solid waste collected by waste collectors in the unincorporated area of
Pima County shall be disposed of at a lawful public facility where the waste
can legally be accepted.
(Ord. 1992-127 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 1990-115 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.25.120   Recyclable materials collection services—Minimum standards.
   A.   All licensed waste collectors shall offer, as one of their services,
the collection of all recyclable materials listed in
7.25.010 at least once a week from every customer in the unincorporated area of
Pima County with whom they have contracted to provide any waste collection
service.
   B.   The director may modify the list of recyclable material upon finding
that viable markets do not exist for a particular material, and that a county
subsidized market does not exist.
(Ord. 1997-22 § 1, 1997; Ord. 1992-127 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 1991-30 § 1,
1991: Ord. 1990-115 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.25.125   Waivers
   A.   A waiver from the requirements in Section
7.25.120.A may be issued to a waste collector if the waste collector provides a
written request to the director and the waste collector meets all the following
requirements:
      1.   The waste collector has fewer than twenty full-time employees in
Pima County; and
      2.   The waste collector demonstrates that the requirements of
7.25.120.A pose an undue economic hardship.
   B.   The director shall act upon a request for a waiver within sixty days
upon its receipt.
   C.   A waste collector that is denied a waiver may appeal the decision of
the director pursuant to Section
7.03.145.
   D.   The director shall assess a fee to waste collectors requesting a waiver
pursuant to subsection A. The fee shall not exceed the actual cost of services
provided in processing the request.
   E.   A waiver granted pursuant to this section shall remain valid for a
period of time determined by the director, but in no event shall a waiver
exceed five years.
   F.   A waste collector that has received a waiver pursuant to this section
shall not offer recycling services to its customers unless it complies with all
of the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 1997-22 § 2, 1997)
7.25.130   Disposal of recyclable materials.
   Waste collectors shall sell, give or otherwise transfer recyclable materials
collected pursuant to this chapter to a recycling facility unless otherwise
permitted in writing by the director based upon the nonavailability of an
appropriate recycling facility.
(Ord. 1992-127 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 1990-115 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.25.140   Quarterly reports.
   Waste collectors shall submit quarterly recycling service reports to the
director on forms approved by the director. The report shall include:
      1.   The total number of residential customers served by regular refuse
collection;
      2.   The number of commercial customers served by regular refuse
collection;
      3.   The number of residences participating in the recycling program;
      4.   The number of commercial customers participating in the recycling
program;
      5.   The number of recyclable materials containers set out by customers
each week;
      6.   The estimated tonnage of total recyclables collected;
      7.   The estimated tonnage of each type of recyclable material collected;
      8.   Where and how each type of recyclable material is dispersed or
disposed of; and
      9.   Any other information deemed necessary by the director and required
in a license issued to a waste collector.
(Ord. 1992-127 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 1990-115 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.25.150   Recycling education program and distribution of information.
   A.   Waste collectors shall provide a public awareness program for their
customers which shall include, but is not limited to, literature and other
information designed to promote public participation and awareness in the
community for the need, benefit and availability of recycling services,
including all materials issued by the director for this purpose.
   B.   If based upon inspections by the department, inquiries or complaints
made to the department by the public or a review of any report or other
information required to be submitted to the department pursuant to this
chapter, the director determines that the customers of a licensed waste
collector may not be sufficiently informed or aware of any of the information
required to be noticed pursuant to Section
7.25.100, or provided pursuant to subsection A of this section, the director
may require the licensed waste collector to mail or otherwise distribute to
each of their customers informational literature approved or developed by the
department to remedy the deficiency.
(Ord. 1992-127 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 1991-137 § 14, 1991: Ord. 1990-115 § 1
(part), 1990)
7.25.155   Standards of performance
   A waste collector who meets the following standards of performance, as
documented to and approved by the director, shall be eligible for landfill
tipping fees as specified in Pima County Code Section 13.40.035:
   A.   Provide each residential customer at no charge a bin for recyclables;
or rebate the cost of a bin if customer has been charged in the past for the
cost of a bin; or allow the placement of recyclables in a container of the
customer's own choosing;
   B.   Provide each customer the same fees for service regardless of the
customers participation in recycling;
   C.   Provide each customer, on a minimum of a quarterly basis, educational
material on recycling, as prepared or approved by the director.
(Ord. 1992-127 § 1 (part), 1992)
7.25.160   Inquiries and complaints—Telephone facilities and record keeping.
   Every waste collector shall maintain a telephone for the purposes of
responding to inquiries and for the receipt of complaints. The waste
collector's telephone number shall be listed in the telephone directory in the
firm's name. At the specified telephone number, there shall be a person,
personal answering service or recording service available for the receipt of
telephone calls between eight a.m. and five p.m., Monday through Friday,
holidays excepted.
(Ord. 1992-127 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 1990-115 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.25.170   Inspections.
   Representatives of the director shall make such inspections of any premises,
process, equipment or vehicle used for collection, storage, transportation,
disposal or reclamation of refuse as are necessary to insure compliance with
this chapter.
(Ord. 1992-127 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 1990-115 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.25.180   Cease and desist orders.
   The director may issue an administrative cease and desist order against any
person in violation of any provision of this chapter as necessary to protect
public health, safety and the environment and to prevent and abate public
nuisances.
(Ord. 1992-127 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 1990-115 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.25.190   Revocation of license.
   A.   The director may revoke a waste collector license upon a finding of
three or more violations of any laws regulating waste collection by the
licensee within a twelve-month period.
   B.   The director shall serve upon the licensee a notice of revocation,
either personally or by registered mail, return receipt requested, stating the
grounds for revocation.
   C.   Within ten days after receipt of a revocation notice, the licensee
shall respond in writing to the director setting forth the licensee's response
to the grounds stated in the revocation notice and informing the director of
all actions taken by the licensee to correct or avoid future violations of law.
   D.   Upon receipt of a licensee's response pursuant to subsection C of this
section, the director shall give written notice to the licensee of a time and
place at which the parties shall meet to discuss the grounds for revocation.
   E.   After meeting with the licensee pursuant to subsection D, the director
may order the license revoked, vacate the notice of revocation or vacate the
notice of revocation subject to an order imposing conditions on the license
that the director determines are reasonably necessary to ensure that the
continuing violations set forth in the notice of revocation will cease.
   F.   A licensee may appeal a decision of the director made pursuant to
subsection E of this section to the board of supervisors by filing a notice of
appeal with the clerk of the board of supervisors within fifteen days of
receipt of the decision.
   G.   The director shall adopt written rules and procedures for hearings of
appeals pursuant to this section which shall be approved by resolution of the
board of supervisors after public notice and hearing.
(Ord. 1992-127 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 1990-115 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.25.200   License fees.
   The director shall collect fees at the time of application for an operating
permit, waste vehicle license and collection frequency variance in an amount
prescribed by
Chapter 7.03.
(Ord. 1992-127 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 1991-137 § 15, 1991: Ord. 1990-115 § 1
(part), 1990)
7.25.210   Term of license.
   A.   The term of a waste collector operating license is one year.
   B.   The term of a waste vehicle license is one year.
(Ord. 1992-127 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 1990-115 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.25.220   Violations.
   A.   A person who fails to obtain a waste collector operating license or a
waste vehicle license as required by this chapter prior to engaging in any
waste collecting is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. A person who violates any
other provision of this chapter is guilty of a petty offense.
   B.   Each day of a violation of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. 1990-115 § 1 (part), 1990)
7.25.230   Confidentiality of records.
   Any records and information furnished to the director which relate to the
trade secrets, processes, operations, style of work or apparatus, or to the
identity, confidential statistical data, amount or source of any income,
profits, losses or expenditures of any person are only for the confidential use
of the department in the administration of this chapter unless the owner or
operator expressly agrees to their publication or availability to the public.
(Ord. 1992-127 § 1 (part), 1992)
Chapter 7.29
SOLID WASTE
Sections: 
7.29.010   Purpose.
7.29.020   Definitions.
7.29.030   Responsibility for storage and disposal of solid waste.
7.29.040   Unlawful storage and disposal of solid waste.
7.29.050   Penalty.
7.29.060   Approval to construct.
7.29.070   Operating permit.
7.29.080   Fees.
7.29.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to preserve and secure the health, comfort,
welfare and safety of the public by regulating the uncontrolled disposal of
solid waste within the county.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 16 (part), 1991)
7.29.020   Definitions.
   In this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
      1.   "Approved site" means a site permitted and approved by the State
Department of Environmental Quality or the department as a site for the
disposal of solid waste.
      2.   "Permitted contractor" means a person who has a valid permit from
the State Department of Environmental Quality or the department to collect and
transport solid waste.
      3.   "Solid waste" for the purposes of this chapter shall have the same
meaning as defined in A.R.S. Section 49-701.01.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 35, 1996: Ord. 1991-137 § 16 (part), 1991)
7.29.030   Responsibility for storage and disposal of solid waste.
   A.   Any person generating, producing, storing or transporting or any person
who has received any solid waste shall be responsible for the proper storage,
removal, transport and disposal of that solid waste. Solid waste, while being
transported, shall be covered, tied or otherwise secured so waste will not be
blown or dropped from the transport vehicle.
   B.   When solid waste is generated, produced, stored or received upon a
leased premises, both the landlord and the tenant are responsible for
compliance with the provisions of this chapter regardless of the provisions of
the tenancy, except that neither party is responsible for actions outside the
scope of their actual or constructive knowledge which were conducted by the
other party in violation of this chapter.
   C.   In addition to other persons who may be responsible pursuant to this
section, a person generating solid waste is responsible for the lawful storage,
removal, transport and disposal of that solid waste until it is lawfully
deposited in an approved site or collected by a permitted contractor.
   D.   If solid waste is dumped or deposited in violation of this chapter and
three or more items in the solid waste identify the same person as the owner or
recipient of that item, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the person
is responsible for the unlawful dumping of solid waste.
   E.   The owner of real property on which solid waste is located is
responsible for complying with the provisions of this chapter even if the solid
waste was placed on their property without their knowledge or consent.
   F.   Any person who by contract, agreement or otherwise arranges for the
recovery, transport, disposal or dumping of solid waste is responsible for
complying with the provisions of this chapter regarding that solid waste.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 16 (part), 1991)
7.29.040   Unlawful storage and disposal of solid waste.
   A.   It is unlawful to store or accumulate solid waste in a manner that is a
hazard to the public health or safety or the environment, as determined by the
director.
   B.   It is unlawful to collect or transport solid waste unless the person is
responsible for that waste pursuant to the provisions of Section
7.29.030 or the person is a permitted contractor.
   C.   It is unlawful for a person to dump, deposit or dispose of solid waste
any place within the county other than at an approved site.
   D.   It is unlawful to dispose of industrial waste at the HHWCP. Commercial
waste may be disposed after registration with HHWCP.
   E.   It is unlawful to provide inaccurate information regarding generator
status or waste stream analysis.
(Ord. 1994-33 § 12, 1994: Ord. 1991-137 § 16 (part), 1991)
7.29.050   Penalty.
   A.   Any person who violates subsections A, B, D or E of Section
7.29.040 is guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor.
   B.   Any person who violates subsection C of Section
7.29.040 is guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor.
   C.   Failure to register with the HHWCP pursuant to Title 13 of the Pima
County Code prior to disposing of commercial waste at the HHWCP is a Class 3
misdemeanor.
   D.   Failure to provide accurate information regarding generator or TSDF
status or waste stream analysis prior to disposal of commercial waste at the
HHWCP is a Class 3 misdemeanor.
   E.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to a
civil penalty in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars. Each day of
continued offense constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. 1994-33 § 13, 1994: Ord. 1991-137 § 16 (part), 1991)
7.29.060   Approval to construct.
   A.   Approval must be obtained from the department for any method or methods
used for the disposal of refuse prior to the start of operations.
   B.   All applications required by subsection A of this section, and all
corresponding department action and review, shall be pursuant to A.A.C. R18-8-
511 and R18-8-512, which are incorporated herein by reference.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 36, 1996)
7.29.070   Operating permit.
   Upon adoption of applicable rules pursuant to A.R.S. Section 49-762, no
person shall operate an existing public or private landfill without first
obtaining a valid operating permit that has been issued by the department
pursuant to Section
7.03.130.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 37, 1996)
7.29.080   Fees.
   Fees for department action taken pursuant to Sections
7.29.060 and
7.29.070, such as plan review, permit issuance, and compliance inspections,
shall be assessed pursuant to Sections
7.03.120 and
7.03.130.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 38, 1996)
Chapter 7.31
MANAGEMENT OF USED OIL
Sections: 
7.31.010   Delegation.
7.31.020   Prohibited practices.
7.31.030   Violation—Classification.
7.31.040   Violation—Civil penalty.
7.31.050   Compliance orders—Injunctive relief.
7.31.010   Delegation.
   This chapter shall become effective when the state delegates task and
enforcement responsibility for Title 49, Chapter 4, Article 7, Management of
Used Oil, Arizona Revised Statutes (A.R.S. Section 49-801, et seq.).
(Ord. 1994-33 § 14 (part), 1994)
7.31.020   Prohibited practices.
   A.   Used oil shall not be used or disposed of by any of the following
methods:
      1.   Discharge into sewers or waters of the state, except pursuant to a
permit issued by appropriate regulatory authorities;
      2.   Incineration except at a facility authorized to incinerate hazardous
waste under Title 17 of this code or state or federal law. Burning for energy
recovery is not considered incineration for purposes of this section, unless
the director determines that the purpose of the burning is for destruction of
listed or characteristic hazardous waste rather than energy recovery;
      3.   Disposal on land unless permitted or approved by the director;
      4.   Dispersal as a dust suppressant or contact herbicide.
   B.   Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, used oil which is not a
hazardous waste and which is generated by an individual farm or ranch during
normal agricultural or ranching activities may be reused for purposes of weed
control and dust suppression, if the reuse is conducted on the property owned
or managed by that individual farming or ranching entity.
   C.   For the purposes of this section, "waters of the state" shall have the
meaning specified in A.R.S. Section 49-201.
   D.   For the purposes of subsection A.3 of this section, normal minimal
leakage from properly maintained vehicles and equipment shall not be considered
disposal on land.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 39, 1996: Ord. 1994-33 § 14 (part), 1994)
7.31.030   Violation—Classification.
   A.   A person who knowingly violates the requirements of Section
7.31.020 is guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor.
   B.   An act or omission punishable under this section or any other section
of criminal law may be punished under both, but any punishments, including
fines, shall be concurrent.
(Ord. 1994-33 § 14 (part), 1994)
7.31.040   Violation—Civil penalty.
   A.   Except as otherwise provided, a person who violates any provision of
this chapter is subject to a civil penalty of not more than ten thousand
dollars per day for each violation.
   B.   The county attorney, at the request of the director, shall file an
action in superior court to recover civil penalties provided by this section.
This subsection shall not be construed to reduce the authority of the county
attorney under any other provision of law.
(Ord. 1994-33 § 14 (part), 1994)
7.31.050   Compliance orders—Injunctive relief.
   A.   If the director has reasonable cause to believe that a person is
violating a provision of this chapter, the director may serve on the person an
order requiring compliance with that provision. The order shall state with
reasonable particularity the nature of the violation and shall specify either
immediate compliance or a time period for compliance which the director
determines is reasonable, taking into account the seriousness of the violation
and any good faith efforts to comply with applicable legal requirements. The
alleged violator has thirty days from the date of issuance of the order within
which to request a hearing pursuant to Section
7.03.140.
   B.   If the director has reasonable cause to believe that an order issued
pursuant to this section is being violated or that a person is engaging in an
act or practice which constitutes a violation for which he is authorized to
issue an order pursuant to this section, the county attorney at the request of
the director may apply to the superior court for preliminary injunction or
permanent injunction. Such action has precedence over all other matters pending
in the court.
   C.   If the director has reasonable cause to believe that a person is
engaging in an act or practice which violates any provision of Section
7.31.040, the county attorney at the request of the director may apply to the
superior court for a temporary restraining order, preliminary injunction or
permanent injunction. Such action has precedence over all other matters pending
in the court.
   D.   No provision of this section shall be construed to reduce the authority
of the county attorney under any other provision of law.
   E.   The court, in issuing any final order in any civil action brought under
this section may award costs of litigation, including reasonable attorney and
expert witness fees, to any substantially prevailing party if the court
determines such an award is appropriate.
(Ord. 1994-33 § 14 (part), 1994)
Chapter 7.33
REMOVAL OF RUBBISH, TRASH, WEEDS, FILTH AND DEBRIS*
Sections: 
7.33.010   Definitions.
7.33.020   Removal.
7.33.023   Calculation of time.
7.33.025   Opportunity to correct for weeds.
7.33.030   Notice of abatement.
7.33.040   Abatement by county.
7.33.050   Assessments.
7.33.055   Cost recovery for injunction.
7.33.060   Penalties.
7.33.070   Applicability.
7.33.010   Definitions.
   A.   In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
      1.   "Contiguous areas" means sidewalks, streets, trails and alleys
dedicated and open to the public that are contiguous to property.
      2.   "Occupant" means an occupant of property, but does not include any
corporation or association operating or maintaining rights-of-way for and on
behalf of the United States of America, either under contract or under federal
law.
      3.   "Property" means real property including buildings, grounds and
lots.
      4.   "Weed" includes any species of plant that is listed in Arizona
Administrative Code R3-4-244, including Pennisetum ciliare (L.) Link-
Buffelgrass
(Ord. No. 2008-117, § 1 (part), 2009)
7.33.020   Removal.
   The owner, lessee or occupant of property shall remove all rubbish, trash,
weeds, filth, debris, and dilapidated buildings that constitute a hazard to
public health and safety from the property and contiguous areas.
(Ord. No. 2008-117, § 1 (part), 2009)
7.33.023   Calculation of time.
   A.   Unless otherwise specified, time periods for actions involving an
opportunity to correct for weeds shall be calculated as follows:
      1.   For time periods of fourteen days or less, only business days are
included in calculating the total number of days;
      2.   For time periods of longer than fourteen days, each calendar day is
included in calculating the total number of days;
      3.   For all time periods, the date on which the time period begins to
run is excluded from the calculation of the total number of days.
   B.   Calculation of time for purposes of actions involving the opportunity
to correct shall begin upon the signature date on the certified receipt or date
hand delivered by the county.
   C.   Calculation of time for situations where the certified mail sent by
Pima County is:
      1.   Refused by the recipient, the time shall begin on the date of
refusal; or
      2.   Unclaimed, the time shall begin fifteen calendar days from the
postal service's first attempt to deliver.
(Ord. No. 2008-117, § 1 (part), 2009)
7.33.025   Opportunity to correct for weeds.
   A.   Upon reasonable belief that a violation of Section
7.33.020 has occurred with respect to weeds listed in Arizona Administrative
Code R3-4-244, the county shall provide the owner, lessee or occupant an
opportunity to correct the violation. The opportunity to correct shall be sent
by certified mail or hand delivered.
   B.   The notice of opportunity to correct shall include the following:
      1.   A requirement that the owner, lessee, or occupant notify the county,
in writing, that they have received notice within thirty days of receipt of the
notice.
      2.   A requirement that the owner, lessee or occupant develop a written
abatement plan to be submitted to the county within sixty days of receipt of
the notice. The abatement plan shall include:
         a.   A map identifying the property and extent of weed infestation
         b.   A description and schedule of management and eradication
techniques to be implemented
         c.   An estimated cost of implementing the abatement plan. The basis
for the cost estimate shall be specified.
         d.   A statement of any other legal or physical factors or
characteristics affecting the plan
   C.   The owner, lessee or occupant shall provide additional information as
requested by the county to address deficiencies in a submitted abatement plan.
The owner, lessee or occupant shall be allowed an opportunity to amend the
abatement plan before denial. Failure to provide adequate information or
respond to the county's request for information within the time frame specified
by the county may result in the county issuing a notice of abatement.
   D.   The county shall approve or deny the abatement plan. If denied, the
county shall state in writing the reasons for denial. Denial of an abatement
plan may result in the county issuing a notice of abatement.
   E.   Pima County's decisions concerning a notice of opportunity to correct
or an abatement plan are not appealable.
(Ord. No. 2008-117, § 1 (part), 2009)
7.33.030   Notice of abatement.
   A.   A county department director, or designee, may issue a notice of
abatement when:
      1.   The director reasonably believes that a violation Section
7.33.020 has occurred; or,
      2.   An acceptable abatement plan required by Section
7.33.030 is not submitted; or,
      3.   An approved abatement plan is not complied with.
   B.   The notice shall include the following:
      1.   A compliance date, which is not less than thirty calendar days from
the notice date, to remove all rubbish, trash, weeds, filth, debris, and
dilapidated buildings that constitute a hazard to public health and safety from
the property and contiguous areas;
      2.   The estimated cost to the county for the removal if the owner,
occupant or lessee, does not comply. The basis for the cost estimate shall be
included in the notice.
   C.   Within ten business days of the date of the notice of abatement the
owner, occupant or lessee may appeal the notice to the board of supervisors.
All appeals shall be in writing and shall specify the grounds for appeal. The
appeal shall be filed with the clerk of the board. The date of mailing of the
appeal shall be the date of filing. The clerk of the board shall set a date to
hear the appeal after receipt of a timely notice of appeal. Written notice of
the hearing shall be provided to the appropriate county departments and to the
owner and any lessee or occupant who is appealing. The board of supervisors'
decision is final.
   D.   The notice of abatement shall be personally served or sent by certified
mail to the owner and any lessee or occupant at their last known address, or at
the address on file in the county treasurer's office to which the most recent
property tax bill was mailed. If the owner of the property does not reside on
the property, a duplicate notice shall be mailed to the owner at the owner's
last known address. The notice of abatement should be mailed to any known
lienholder.
   E.   The county may provide a copy of the notice of abatement to the local
fire authority.
(Ord. No. 2008-117, § 1 (part), 2009)
7.33.040   Abatement by county.
   A.   If the owner, lessee, or occupant fails to remove or abate all rubbish,
trash, weeds, filth, debris, and dilapidated buildings by the compliance date
determined in the Notice of Abatement, or the Board of Supervisors' final
appeal hearing decision, the county may remove, abate, enjoin or cause the
removal or abatement of the rubbish, trash, weeds, filth, debris, and
dilapidated buildings by the county's employees, agents or contractors at the
expense of the owner, lessee or occupant.
   B.   The county shall provide advance written notice identifying the
scheduled date of abatement to the owner, lessee or occupant at their last
known address, or at the address on file in the County Treasurer's office to
which the most recent property tax bill was mailed. The notice shall be sent by
certified mail or hand delivered. If the owner of the property does not reside
on the property, a duplicate notice shall be mailed to the owner at the owner's
last known address.
(Ord. No. 2008-117, § 1 (part), 2009)
7.33.050   Assessments.
   A.   After the county, its employees, agents or contractors have removed,
abated, or caused the removal or abatement of the rubbish, trash, weeds, filth,
debris, and dilapidated buildings pursuant to this chapter, the county shall
issue a written order of assessment. The order of assessment shall include the
following:
      1.   The date of the assessment;
      2.   The common address, legal description and tax parcel number of the
property; and
      3.   The amount of the assessment, including a detailed itemized list of
costs for removal including all incidental costs, legal costs, and costs for
any additional inspections;
   B.   The owner may request an informal review of the detailed itemized cost
with the county department issuing the assessment. The request shall be made in
writing, and received by the county department director within ten business
days of the date of the order of assessment. Unless the director and owner
agree otherwise, the informal review shall take place within twenty calendar
days after the director's receipt of the request. The director shall arrange
the date and location of the informal review with the owner at least ten
business days before the informal review. The director shall review whether
itemized costs including all incidental costs, legal costs, and additional
inspection costs are correct and reasonable for the tasks involved. The
director may adjust the costs based upon the informal review. The director
shall mail his or her decision on the informal review to the owner within ten
business days after the informal review date.
   C.   The owner, lessee, lienholder or occupant shall have ten business days
from receipt of the order of assessment or the receipt of the director's
written decision on an informal review to appeal the assessment to the board of
supervisors as provided in subsection E of this section.
   D.   The order of assessment shall be recorded in the office of the county
recorder when the time to appeal expires, if the owner agrees to the amount or
on final decision on an appeal by the board of supervisors.
   E.   Within ten business days of the order of assessment or the decision on
an informal review the owner, occupant, lienholder or lessee may appeal the
amount of the assessment levied by the county to the board of supervisors. All
appeals shall be in writing and shall specify the grounds for appeal. Only the
amount of the assessment may be appealed. The board of supervisors shall not
hear any appeals of violations upon appeal of an order of assessment. The
appeal shall be filed with the clerk of the board. The date of mailing of the
appeal shall be the date of filing. The clerk of the board shall set a date to
hear the appeal after receipt of a timely notice of appeal. Written notice of
the hearing shall be provided to the appropriate county departments and to the
owner, lessee, lienholder or occupant who is appealing. The board of
supervisors shall determine whether the assessment was made in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter and state statute and whether the amount
actually represents the costs incurred by the county. The board of supervisors
shall issue its determination in writing upholding or modifying the amount of
the assessment. The board of supervisors' decision is final.
   F.   The assessment shall be paid to the county treasurer and any delinquent
assessments shall bear interest at the legal rate from the date of delinquency.
Interest will accrue at the rate stated in A.R.S. Section 44-1201(A).
   G.   A prior assessment under this chapter is not a bar to a subsequent
assessment or assessments under this chapter, and any number of liens pursuant
to this chapter may be enforced in the same action.
   H.   Assessments that are imposed under this chapter run against the
property until they are paid and are due and payable in equal annual
installments as follows:
      1.   Assessments of less than five hundred dollars shall be paid within
one year after the assessment is recorded.
      2.   Assessments of five hundred dollars or more but less than one
thousand dollars shall be paid within two years after the assessment is
recorded.
      3.   Assessments of one thousand dollars or more but less than five
thousand dollars shall be paid within three years after the assessment is
recorded.
      4.   Assessments of five thousand dollars or more but less than ten
thousand dollars shall be paid within six years after the assessment is
recorded.
      5.   Assessments of ten thousand dollars or more shall be paid within ten
years after the assessment is recorded.
   I.   The county shall maintain a list of all delinquent assessments made
pursuant to this chapter.
   J.   All assessments sixty calendar days delinquent shall be forwarded to
the county administrator or his designee for review. If the county
administrator or his designee determines that the value of the assessment and
interest, together with the value of all other liens having priority over the
assessment does not exceed the value of the property, the county attorney may
commence legal action to foreclose the lien and request the superior court to
order the property sold and the proceeds used to pay off all liens having
priority and the assessment and interest.
   K.   If the county administrator or his designee determines that the value
of assessment and interest, together with the value of all other liens having
priority over the assessment exceeds the value of the property, legal action to
foreclose the lien need not be commenced.
   L.   On payment in full of an assessment and interest, the county shall
record a notice of satisfaction of assessment in the office of the county
recorder. The notice shall contain the name of the owner of the property, the
tax parcel number, the common street address and the legal description of the
subject property. The notice shall refer to the date of the order of assessment
and the docket and page number in the office of the county recorder where such
order is recorded.
(Ord. No. 2008-117, § 1 (part), 2009)
7.33.055   Cost recovery for injunction.
   If the county obtains an injunction to compel compliance with Section
7.33.020, the court shall award attorneys' fees and all costs associated with
securing or enforcing the injunction, including costs of additional
inspections, to the county. An award of fees and costs by a court is not
appealable to the board of supervisors. The court's order awarding fees and
costs may be recorded as an assessment and may be collected in the manner
provided for in this section and A.R.S. Section 11-268(E).
(Ord. No. 2008-117, § 1 (part), 2009)
7.33.060   Penalties.
   A.   In addition to the abatement and assessment procedure or injunction
provided for by this chapter, any person, firm or corporation that places any
rubbish, trash, filth or debris upon any private or public property located in
the unincorporated areas of the county not owned or under the control of the
person, firm or corporation is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
   B.   The provisions of this section are cumulative and do not bar any other
enforcement action provided for by law.
(Ord. No. 2008-117, § 1 (part), 2009)
7.33.070   Applicability.
   The provisions of this chapter apply to all unincorporated areas of the
county.
(Ord. No. 2008-117, § 1 (part), 2009)
Chapter 7.37
WATER POTABILITY
Sections: 
7.37.010   Purpose.
7.37.020   Scope.
7.37.030   Approval to construct.
7.37.040   Operating permit.
7.37.050   Compliance and enforcement.
7.37.060   Fees.
7.37.070   Violation—Remedy—Penalty.
7.37.010   Purpose.
   In recognition that taste, odor, color and other aesthetic qualities are
important factors in the public's acceptance of and confidence in a public
water system, the board declares that water delivered by public water systems
within the county shall at all times be potable.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 40, 1996: Ord. 1991-137 § 18 (part), 1991)
7.37.020   Scope.
   This chapter applies to all public water systems in the county over which
the department has regulatory jurisdiction pursuant to a delegation of
authority pursuant to A.R.S. Section 49-107.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 18 (part), 1991)
7.37.030   Approval to construct.
   A.   Before any person shall construct or enter into a contract for
construction, installation, extension or alteration of a water system, an
application for approval to construct shall be submitted to the department.
   B.   All applications required by subsection A of this section, and all
corresponding department action and review, shall be pursuant to A.A.C. R18-4-
501 through R18-4-509 which are incorporated herein by reference.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 41, 1996: Ord. 1991-137 § 18 (part), 1991)
7.37.040   Operating permit.
   No person shall operate an existing water system without first obtaining a
valid operating permit that has been issued by the department pursuant to
Section
7.03.130.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 42, 1996: Ord. 1991-137 § 18 (part), 1991)
7.37.050   Compliance and enforcement.
   To the extent delegated, the department shall enforce the following
regulations, incorporated herein by reference:
   Drinking Water Systems: A.A.C. R18-4-101 through R18-4-405, including all
accompanying appendices.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 43, 1996: Ord. 1991-137 § 18 (part), 1991)
7.37.060   Fees.
   Fees for department action taken pursuant to this chapter, such as plan
review, permit issuance, and compliance inspections, shall be assessed pursuant
to Sections
7.03.120 and
7.03.130.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 44, 1996: Ord. 1991-137 § 18 (part), 1991)
7.37.070   Violation—Remedy—Penalty.
   Reserved.
Chapter 7.41
POLLEN CONTROL
Sections: 
7.41.010   Plants designated.
7.41.020   Common bermuda grass control.
7.41.030   Mulberry tree and olive tree control.
7.41.040   Abatement of nuisance.
7.41.050   Exclusion.
7.41.010   Plants designated.
   The following plants produce large amounts of allergenic wind-borne pollens
which are noxious and contribute to human disease:
   A.   Common bermuda grass;
   B.   Mulberry tree;
   C.   Olive tree.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 19 (part), 1991)
7.41.020   Common bermuda grass control.
   A.   Any person maintaining lawn or open space planted in common bermuda
grass shall mow that grass frequently enough to prevent pollination.
   B.   Any person owning land on which common bermuda grass has become
established shall cause that grass to be cut or removed.
   C.   In no case shall bermuda grass be allowed to grow unchecked. Bermuda
grass which is freely pollinating shall constitute a nuisance.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 19 (part), 1991)
7.41.030   Mulberry tree and olive tree control.
   A.   No mulberry tree or olive tree shall be sold in the county.
   B.   The sale of a mulberry tree or olive tree in the county shall
constitute a nuisance.
   C.   No mulberry or olive tree shall be planted in the county.
   D.   The planting of a mulberry tree or olive tree in the county shall
constitute a nuisance.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 19 (part), 1991)
7.41.040   Abatement of nuisance.
   A.   If a nuisance exists on private property, the director may order the
owner or occupant to remove the nuisance within twenty-four hours at his/her
own expense. The order may be given to the owner or occupant in person or left
at his usual place of abode. If the order is not complied with, the director
may cause such nuisance to be removed, and the expenses of removal shall be
paid by the owner or occupant who caused the nuisance.
   B.   When a nuisance exists on public property, the director shall notify
the responsible public official, who shall cause the nuisance to be removed.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 19 (part), 1991)
7.41.050   Exclusion.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to Swan Hill olive trees and
Wilson olive trees.
(Ord. 1995-4 § 1, 1995: Ord. 1991-137 § 19 (part), 1991)
Chapter 7.45
ENVIRONMENTAL NUISANCES
Sections: 
7.45.010   Purpose—Delegation.
7.45.020   Environmental nuisances.
7.45.030   Prohibition.
7.45.040   Order of abatement.
7.45.050   Site security.
7.45.060   Abatement by the department.
7.45.070   Right of inspection.
7.45.080   Standard for abatement of petroleum contaminated soil.
7.45.010   Purpose—Delegation.
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to preserve and secure the health,
safety and welfare of the public by prohibiting the maintenance of and
requiring the abatement of environmental nuisances and by providing for the
recovery of public moneys expended to regulate, mitigate and abrogate
environmental nuisances.
   B.   This chapter shall be effective when, and to the extent which, the
state delegates task and enforcement responsibility for environmental
nuisances, A.R.S. Chapter 1, Article 3 (A.R.S. Section 49-141 et seq.), to the
department.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 46, 1996: Ord. 1991-137 § 20 (part), 1991)
7.45.020   Environmental nuisances.
   The director may take action under this section to abate environmental
nuisances. As used in this section, an environmental nuisance is the creation
or maintenance of a condition in the soil, air or water that causes harm to the
public health or the environment and that is not otherwise subject to
regulation under A.R.S. Title 49. Subject to this limitation, the following
conditions may constitute environmental nuisances:
      1.   A condition or place in populous areas which constitutes a breeding
place for flies, rodents, mosquitoes and other insects which are capable of
carrying and transmitting disease-causing organisms to any person;
      2.   A place, condition or building which is controlled or operated by
any governmental agency, state or local, and which is not maintained in a
sanitary condition;
      3.   Sewage, human excreta, wastewater, garbage or other organic wastes
deposited, stored, discharged or exposed so as to be a potential instrument or
medium in the transmission of disease to or between any person or persons;
      4.   A vehicle or container which is used in the transportation of
garbage or human excreta and which is defective and allows leakage or spillage
of contents;
      5.   The maintenance of an overflowing septic tank or cesspool, the
contents of which may be accessible to flies;
      6.   The pollution or contamination of any domestic waters;
      7.   The use of the contents of privies, cesspools, or septic tanks or
the use of sewage or sewage plant effluents for fertilizing or irrigation
purposes for crops or gardens except by specific approval of the Arizona
Department of Health Services or the Arizona Department of Environmental
Quality;
      8.   The storage, collection, transportation, disposal and reclamation of
garbage, trash, rubbish, manure and other objectionable wastes other than as
provided and authorized by law;
      9.   Water, other than used by irrigation, industrial or similar systems
for nonpotable purposes, which is sold to the public, distributed to the public
or used in production, processing, storing, handling, servicing or
transportation of food and drink and which is unwholesome, poisonous or
contains deleterious or foreign substances or filth or disease-causing
substances or organisms.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 47, 1996: Ord. 1991-137 § 20 (part), 1991)
7.45.030   Prohibition.
   No person shall maintain an environmental nuisance.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 20 (part), 1991)
7.45.040   Order of abatement.
   A.   If the director determines that an environmental nuisance exists, the
director may pursue enforcement in accordance with A.R.S. Sections 49-142, 49-
143 and 49-261.
   B.   An order of abatement issued pursuant to this section may be appealed
pursuant to A.R.S. Section 49-261.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 48, 1996: Ord. 1991-137 § 20 (part), 1991)
7.45.050   Site security.
   Reserved.
7.45.060   Abatement by the department.
   A.   If an owner or occupant fails or refuses to comply with the terms of an
order of abatement issued pursuant to Section
7.45.040 or if after reasonable attempts the director is unable to serve the
order, the director may cause the environmental nuisance to be abated at the
department's expense.
   B.   If an environmental nuisance is abated pursuant to subsection A of this
section, the director shall be entitled to recover the reasonable costs of
abatement incurred in accordance with any terms of the order that have been
upheld after all rights to appeal or judicial review have been exhausted or
waived.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 50, 1996: Ord. 1991-137 § 20 (part), 19910
7.45.070   Right of inspection.
   A.   The department may, if the director deems it necessary, enter any land,
building, or structure for the purpose of examining, destroying, removing or
preventing an environmental nuisance.
   B.   If the department is refused entrance under subsection A, the director
may file a complaint of the refusal under oath to a justice of the peace. The
justice of the peace shall issue a warrant directing the sheriff or other peace
officer accompanied by and under the direction of at least one employee of the
department to examine, destroy, remove or prevent, between the hours of sunrise
and sunset, the environmental nuisance.
(Ord. 1991-137 § 20 (part), 1991)
7.45.080   Standard for abatement of petroleum contaminated soil.
   If an environmental nuisance described in Section
7.45.010 consists in whole or in part of soil contaminated by petroleum, the
nuisance shall be remediated in accordance with A.R.S. Section 49-152.
(Ord. 1996-49 § 51, 1996: Ord. 1991-137 § 20 (part), 1991)
Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapters: 
   
Chapter 8.04 - HEALTH PROVISIONS GENERALLY
   
Chapter 8.08 - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
   
Chapter 8.12 - IMMUNIZATION
   
Chapter 8.14 - STD AND HIV TESTING AND COUNSELING
   
Chapter 8.16 - HOTELS, MOTELS AND TOURIST COURTS
   
Chapter 8.20 - MOBILE HOME PARKS
   
Chapter 8.24 - REST ROOMS
   
Chapter 8.28 - OUTDOOR MASS GATHERINGS
   
Chapter 8.32 - SWIMMING POOLS AND SPAS
   
Chapter 8.40 - RODENTS, INSECTS, VERMIN, AND OTHER ANIMALS
   
Chapter 8.50 - SMOKING
   
Chapter 8.54 - VAPOR RELEASING SUBSTANCES CONTAINING TOXIC SUBSTANCES
   
Chapter 8.56 - ADULT AMUSEMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
   
Chapter 8.60 - BLASTING REGULATIONS
   
Chapter 8.70 - DROUGHT RESPONSE PLAN AND WATER WASTING
   
Chapter 8.80 - MEDICAL MARIJUANA
Chapter 8.04
HEALTH PROVISIONS GENERALLY [1] 
8.04.010   Short title.
8.04.020   Scope and legal authority.
8.04.030   Definitions.
8.04.040   Plan approval required.
8.04.050   Application for approval to construct.
8.04.060   Certificate of approval to construct.
8.04.070   Construction in compliance with approved plans.
8.04.080   Access to construction sites for inspection.
8.04.090   Notification required for final inspection.
8.04.100   Extension of certificate of approval to construct.
8.04.110   Operating permit required.
8.04.120   Fees.
8.04.130   Hearing procedure.
8.04.140   Violation—Penalty.
8.04.010   Short title.
   The ordinances codified in this title and future ordinances enacting rules
and regulations may be cited and shall be known as the health code.
(Ord. 2016-12, § 1 (part), 2016)
8.04.020   Scope and legal authority.
   A.   Abolishment of City-County Health Department.
      1.   The city-county health department, which was previously established
by joint acts of the city council of Tucson and the board of supervisors of the
county, was abolished as of June 30, 1955.
      2.   The action taken in the form of a resolution creating a city-county
department of health by the board of supervisors of the county on July 9, 1954,
was repealed and rescinded effective June 30, 1955.
   B.   Establishment of County Health Department. A county department of
health was established as of July 1, 1955, pursuant to A.R.S. Sections 36-182
through 36-191, as amended.
   C.   The health code adopted and contained in this title, and the
enforcement thereof by the department or any peace officer, shall be liberally
construed and applied to protect the public health and prevent unhealthful or
unsanitary conditions or public health nuisances.
   D.   These rules and regulations are adopted pursuant to A.R.S. Sections 11-
251, 36-136, 36-184, and 36-187, as amended.
(Ord. 2016-12, § 1 (part), 2016)
8.04.030   Definitions.
   The following definitions apply throughout the health code, unless a
different meaning is clearly indicated by the context or stated in the chapter:
   A.   "Board of health" means the county board of health.
   B.   "Board of supervisors" means the county board of supervisors.
   C.   "Certificate of approval to construct" means approval to construct or
remodel a regulated establishment.
   D.   "Department" means the county health department.
   E.   "Fixed" means attached to the land in a physical place.
   F.   "Health officer" means the director of the county health department or
his authorized representative.
   G.   "Regulated establishment" means an entity required to obtain a permit
issued by the department in order to conduct all or some of its operations.
   H.   "Requested inspection" means a health and sanitation inspection of a
non-regulated establishment requested by the establishment or a regulating
agency.
(Ord. 2016-12, § 1 (part), 2016)
8.04.040   Plan approval required.
   The following regulated establishments are required to submit plans and
specifications for the department's approval for the construction or
substantial alteration of their facilities:
   A.   Food establishments;
   B.   Public or semi-public aquatic facilities;
   C.   Mobile home and travel trailer parks;
   D.   Motels, hotels and tourist courts;
   E.   Ice manufacturing and beverage plants;
   F.   Schools, with respect to facilities regulated by Arizona Administrative
Code (A.A.C.) Title 9;
   G.   Camp grounds and children's camps.
(Ord. 2016-12, § 1 (part), 2016)
8.04.050   Application for approval to construct.
   Before any regulated establishment may construct or enter into a contract
for the construction or substantial alteration of any facility listed in
Section
8.04.040 it must apply to the department for approval. The application must be
submitted at least thirty days before the proposed start date of the project
and be accompanied by the appropriate fee and the following:
   A.   Scaled drawings of the work to be done. Sufficient detail must be shown
on the drawings to make clear to the department what work is to be done. All
scaled drawings must be submitted electronically, with the exception of those
for mobile food, limited manufacturing, and catered food sites;
   B.   Complete specifications to supplement the drawings;
   C.   Additional data as may be required by the health officer including a
design report describing the project, the basis of design, together with design
data and other pertinent information necessary to give a clear understanding of
the work to be undertaken.
(Ord. 2016-12, § 1 (part), 2016)
8.04.060   Certificate of approval to construct.
   If plans and specifications submitted to the department comply with the
requirements of this title, the health officer will issue a certificate of
approval to construct. If construction is not completed within one year after
the date of issue, the certificate of approval to construct is void, unless a
written extension of time is granted by the health officer.
(Ord. 2016-12, § 1 (part), 2016)
8.04.070   Construction in compliance with approved plans.
   All work shall conform to approved plans and specifications. Should it be
necessary or desirable to make any material change in the design of the
approved establishment which will affect the capacity, hydraulic conditions,
flow, an operating unit or sanitary feature of the proposed work, revised plans
and specifications, together with a written statement of the reason for the
change, must be submitted to the health officer for review, and approval must
be obtained in writing before the work affected by the change is undertaken.
Minor revisions not affecting the capacity, hydraulic conditions, flow,
operating unit or sanitary feature will be permitted during construction
without further approval but plans clearly showing such alterations must be
filed with the department at the completion of the entire project.
(Ord. 2016-12, § 1 (part), 2016)
8.04.080   Access to construction sites for inspection.
   A.   The health officer is permitted to inspect the construction site of any
regulated establishment prior to issuing a certificate of approval to
construct.
   B.   The health officer is permitted to inspect any regulated establishment
during construction to ensure that the work is being completed in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications.
(Ord. 2016-12, § 1 (part), 2016)
8.04.090   Notification required for final inspection.
   The regulated establishment must notify the department at least ten business
days before the expected date of completion of the work to allow final
inspection by the health officer.
(Ord. 2016-12, § 1 (part), 2016)
8.04.100   Extension of certificate of approval to construct.
   A regulated establishment may request a six-month extension of the
certificate of approval to construct by submitting a written request to the
department together with the appropriate fee. Additional six-month extensions
may be requested in the same manner. The department may deny an extension if
the plans no longer comply with the health code.
(Ord. 2016-12, § 1 (part), 2016)
8.04.110   Operating permit required.
   A.   No person may operate a regulated establishment without a valid
operating permit.
   B.   Applicants must complete an application form provided by the
department.
   C.   Applicants must comply with all applicable laws, rules, and
regulations.
   D.   Operating permits are valid for one year from the date of issuance,
unless suspended or revoked.
   E.   An operating permit is not transferable from person to person or place
to place.
   F.   Operating permits must be placed in a conspicuous location visible to
the public and approved by the department.
   G.   An operating permit is required for the following:
      1.   Food establishments;
      2.   Ice manufacturing and beverage plants;
      3.   Public and semi-public aquatic facilities;
      4.   Motels, hotels, resorts and tourist courts;
      5.   Mobile home and travel trailer parks;
      6.   Adult amusement establishments;
      7.   School facilities regulated by A.A.C. Title 9;
      8.   Camp grounds and children's camps.
   H.   Annual operating permit and late fees:
      1.   Operating permits must be renewed annually. If the operating permit
fee is not paid before the expiration of the prior permit period a late payment
fee will be assessed. If a regulated establishment fails to pay the annual fee
and late payment fees within thirty days of the expiration date, the regulated
establishment must cease operations and apply for a new operating permit and
will be subject to compliance with all current applicable laws, rules, and
regulations.
      2.   Regulated establishments operating without a valid operating permit
may be subject to posted notices at entrances to the establishment stating that
the establishment does not possess the mandatory operating permit. The
regulated establishment must not remove or alter the notices.
   I.   The department may suspend an operating permit upon written notice to
the permit holder that an immediate and imminent danger to public health
exists. Where the danger to the public is not imminent the department must
provide five calendar days' written notice to the permit holder of suspension
of the operating permit.
   J.   Regulated establishments must allow the health officer to inspect the
facility during its operating hours.
(Ord. 2016-12, § 1 (part), 2016)
8.04.120   Fees.
   A.   Fees for inspections must be paid before the department conducts the
inspection.
   B.   Fees are assessed according to the fee schedule established by the
board of supervisors.
(Ord. 2016-12, § 1 (part), 2016)
8.04.130   Hearing procedure.
   A.   Right of Appeal. A regulated establishment that is adversely affected
by the actions of the department may submit a request for appeal to the
director of the department. The request for appeal must be in writing and be
submitted within ten business days of notice of the adverse action. The notice
of adverse action must inform the regulated establishment of the right to
appeal. In the event the action taken is pursuant to A.R.S. Section 36-601(B),
the time for appeal is fifteen days. If no appeal is filed, the department's
action becomes final when the time for appeal has expired.
   B.   Appointment of Hearing Officer. Upon receiving a request for appeal,
the director of the department shall appoint a hearing officer to hold a
hearing on the matter within twenty days from the time the director received
the request for appeal. The hearing officer shall be an impartial person who is
trained in law and is knowledgeable about this title.
   C.   Notification of Hearings. The hearing officer shall notify the person
requesting the appeal that a hearing on the appeal will be held at a specified
time and place.
   D.   Rights of Parties at Hearing. The person requesting the appeal and the
department may appear on their own behalf or through counsel, may submit
evidence, and have the right to confront witnesses of the other side by cross-
examination. A corporation may appear only through a corporate officer or
counsel.
   E.   Conduct of Hearing. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in a
manner consistent with due process. Witnesses shall be sworn and their
testimony recorded manually or by recording device. The cost of transcribing
such testimony shall be paid by the party requesting it. The hearing officer
shall receive relevant, probative and material evidence and shall exclude all
irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence. The formal rules of
evidence need not be followed. Proof shall be by a preponderance of the
evidence. The hearing officer may issue subpoenas pursuant to A.R.S. Section
12-2212.
   F.   Hearing Officer's Recommendation. Within five days of the hearing's
completion, the hearing officer shall submit a written recommendation to the
director that the appeal be affirmed or denied. This recommendation shall
contain findings of fact and conclusions of law which are the basis of the
hearing officer's recommendation.
   G.   Director's Decision. Within three days of receiving the hearing
officer's recommendation, the director shall notify the person requesting the
appeal of the decision. The director's decision is final.
   H.   Notice. Whenever notice is required to be given, it shall be given in a
manner that is reasonably calculated, under all circumstances, to inform the
person of the action to be taken.
(Ord. 2016-12, § 1 (part), 2016)
8.04.140   Violation—Penalty.
   A.   Any person who violates any provision of the health code is guilty of a
Class 3 misdemeanor as provided by A.R.S. Section 36-191, unless otherwise
indicated.
   B.   The health officer may also seek injunctive relief.
   C.   In addition, the health officer may proceed under A.R.S. Section 36-
602.
(Ord. 2016-12, § 1 (part), 2016)
   FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-12, § 1, adopted March 1, 2016, repealed the
former
Chapter 8.04, §§ 8.04.010—8.04.160, and enacted a new
Chapter 8.04 as set out herein. The former
Chapter 8.04 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Cross-Reference Table
and the Ordinance List for the chapter's history. (Back)
Chapter 8.08
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS [2] 
8.08.010   Applicability.
8.08.020   Definitions.
8.08.030   Mobile food establishments—Generally.
8.08.040   Temporary, seasonal, and farmers market food establishments.
8.08.050   Food safety certification and training.
8.08.060   Enforcement.
8.08.070   Micro markets requirements—General.
8.08.080   Pet friendly patio requirements—General.
8.08.090   Gloves, use limitation.
8.08.100   Violation—Penalty.
8.08.010   Applicability.
   All food establishments in the county must comply with this chapter,
Chapter 8.04, the 2013 FDA Food Code including Annex 1 Subpart 8-903 and Annex
7 Guide 3-B, and the Arizona Administrative Code (A.A.C.) Title 9, Chapter 8,
Article 1. Any conflicts or inconsistencies are resolved in the following order
of priority: 1. this title; 2. the FDA Food Code; 3. the A.A.C.
(Ord. 2016-12, § 2 (part), 2016)
8.08.020   Definitions.
   A.   "Commissary" means an approved fixed food establishment that stores,
prepares, portions, or packages food for service elsewhere or that provides a
service area for mobile food establishments.
   B.   "Farmers market" means an organized group of stalls or booths where
farmers or other vendors sell their produce or food products directly to
consumers.
   C.   "Micro market" means an unattended food establishment where
commercially prepackaged, time/temperature control for food safety foods or
ready-to-eat fruits and vegetables are vended to employees of a business.
   D.   "Mobile food establishment" means a food establishment that is designed
to be readily moveable and mounted on a motorized vehicle frame or vehicle-
drawn or a pushcart or in a structure not permanently attached to the land.
   E.   "Pet friendly patio" means a designated outside dining service area
where pets may accompany their owners.
   F.   "Pushcart" means a non-self-propelled vehicle limited to serving ready-
to-eat foods.
   G.   "Re-inspection" means an inspection to check whether violations have
been corrected.
   H.   "Routine inspection" means a comprehensive inspection determining
compliance with all aspects of the food code.
   I.   "Seasonal food establishment" means a temporary food establishment that
operates for a period of no more than four months on a predetermined schedule
in conjunction with a single or regular event at a single location.
   J.   "Event coordinator" means an individual who is responsible for ensuring
the food establishments at an event possess a current operating permit and
liaising with the department.
   K.   "Temporary food establishment" means a food establishment that operates
for a period of no more than fourteen consecutive days in conjunction with a
single event.
(Ord. 2016-12, § 2 (part), 2016)
8.08.030   Mobile food establishments—Generally.
   A.   Construction Requirements.
      1.   Exterior.
         a.   A mobile food establishment must permanently affix the business
name to at least two structural sides of the unit in four-inch or taller
lettering. The business name must be clearly visible to the consumer at the
service window, at any entrance to the mobile food establishment, and on at
least one other side of the establishment.
         b.   Food service openings are limited to two hundred sixteen square
inches (such as twelve inches by eighteen inches) each, and must be equipped
with a screen (sixteen mesh per square inch minimum) or solid door that must be
closed when not in use. Multiple service openings must be at least eighteen
inches apart.
         c.   All waste disposal connections must be of different size or type
than those used for supplying potable water. The waste connection must be
located lower than the water inlet connection to prevent contamination of the
potable water system. Wastewater outlets must be greater than one inch and
potable water inlets must be no larger than three-quarters-inch unless
otherwise approved by the department. Potable water system inlets must be
capped when not in use.
         d.   All exterior water system connections must include an approved
backflow prevention device.
      2.   Interior.
         a.   The cab or driving portion must be completely separated from the
food preparation and serving areas by a wall or door.
         b.   Doors to the food preparation and serving areas must be self-
closing and kept closed.
         c.   A three-compartment sink equipped with two integral metal drain
boards must be permanently installed. Each compartment must be at least twelve
inches wide, twelve inches long and ten inches deep, or ten inches wide,
fourteen inches long and ten inches deep, and each drain board must be at least
one hundred forty-four square inches. A metal shelf may be used instead of one
drain board if approved by the department.
         d.   A self-contained hand washing sink of at least nine inches wide,
nine inches long and five inches deep with integral splash-guards must be
permanently installed with a potable water tank with a minimum ten-gallon
capacity and fifteen percent greater capacity waste tank. The flow rate of hot
and cold water to the sink basin must be at least one-half gallon per minute.
         e.   Interior walls and ceilings must be light in color.
         f.   A pressurized potable water system, supplying hot and cold water,
with a minimum capacity of thirty gallons, must be permanently installed. A
liquid waste storage tank with a capacity at least fifteen percent larger than
the potable water storage tank is required for all mobile food establishments
serving any open food or drink. This provision does not apply to pushcarts.
   B.   Additional Operating Permit Requirements.
      1.   Mobile food establishments must operate from an approved commissary
and provide a commissary agreement to the department as a part of the documents
submitted during plan review for a new permit, at permit issuance or renewal,
and upon request. Trucks and pushcarts that only sell or dispense individually
packaged, commercially processed items from an approved source are exempt from
providing a commissary agreement.
      2.   Mobile food establishments must notify the department of any
substantial changes to their daily operations within a week of the change. A
global tracking device must be permanently installed on the mobile unit.
      3.   Mobile food establishments serving time/temperature control for
safety (TCS) foods must log their visits to the approved commissary or fixed
food establishment. The log must be in a format approved by the department and
kept with the commissary at all times.
   C.   Operations.
      1.   Mobile food establishments must report at least daily to their
approved commissary for supplies, food storage, vehicle and equipment cleaning,
waste disposal, and service operations.
      2.   TCS foods must be prepared on the same day of sale or service. TCS
foods must not be held over from a previous day's operation unless otherwise
approved by the department. Time without temperature control may not be used by
mobile food establishments.
      3.   Food preparation must be limited to cooking, reheating, or
assembling ingredients that have been prepared at the commissary.
      4.   All food preparation and storage must be done at the commissary or
inside the mobile unit, unless the department approves a variance.
      5.   When in transit, all windows and vents to the food preparation area
must be closed and all food appropriately protected.
      6.   All tea except instant tea must be brewed with boiling water.
      7.   Food offered for self-service must be wrapped or packaged in a
manner that prevents contamination.
      8.   Ice for consumption or that contacts food must be made from potable
water.
      9.   Bacon-wrapped hotdogs must be pre-wrapped at the commissary.
      10.   Mobile food establishments must not reuse consumer service-ware.
      11.   Mobile food units must not connect to water or waste water systems
except during servicing operations at a commissary or as approved by the
department.
      12.   All water tanks, pumps and hoses must be flushed and sanitized
before being placed in service after construction, repair, modification, or
periods of nonuse longer than seven days. Potable water tanks must be flushed
and sanitized monthly.
      13.   Wastewater holding tanks must be emptied into an approved sewage
disposal system.
      14.   The potable water tank must be filled using an approved food grade
potable water hose that is not used for any other purpose.
      15.   Grease must be disposed of in a manner approved by the department.
      16.   When a mobile food establishment operates at the same site for more
than two hours, sanitary toilet facilities for employees must be available
within two hundred feet of the unit. Mobile food establishments located further
than two hundred feet from a sanitary toilet must provide a portable toilet
unit for employees.
      17.   Mobile food establishments selling or dispensing open food or
beverages must provide employees with hot and cold potable water, hand washing
soap, and sanitary towels.
      18.   The operating area must be kept clean and free from refuse at all
times.
      19.   A mobile food establishment must not be located within one hundred
feet of a petting, riding, or holding area for animals unless dust and runoff
are controlled.
   D.   Commissary.
      1.   All commissaries, including qualifying restaurants, must obtain a
permit as a commissary.
      2.   A commissary located outside of Pima County must provide a copy of
its current operating permit issued by the applicable health department and a
copy of a health inspection report issued by its regulatory authority within
the previous six months.
      3.   A commissary may service a limited number of mobile food
establishments. The health officer determines the maximum number of mobile food
establishments that a commissary is able to support based on the menu items,
the volume of food being prepared or stored, the capacity of the commissary
equipment, and the capacity of the mobile unit equipment.
      4.   Reports. A commissary must submit reports to the department
disclosing the names, addresses and operating license numbers of all mobile
food establishments using the commissary in accordance with the following
schedule:
         a.   Monthly and annually at the time of permit renewal for the
commissary;
         b.   Within ten business days after a commissary adds or removes a
mobile food establishment; and
         c.   Upon request by the department.
      5.   Failure to submit any report to the department is grounds for the
revocation of the commissary's operating permit.
      6.   Servicing Area.
         a.   A commissary must provide a servicing area for the mobile food
establishment. Within the servicing area, separate areas must be provided for:
            i.   Flushing and drainage of liquid wastes;
            ii.   Potable water servicing; and
            iii.   Loading and unloading of food and related supplies.
         b.   The surfaces in the servicing area must be constructed of smooth
nonabsorbent material, such as concrete or machine-laid asphalt, and must be
maintained in good repair, kept free of visible dirt and debris, and graded to
drain.
         c.   If the servicing area has walls, they must be maintained in good
condition and kept sanitary.
         d.   Potable water servicing equipment must be installed according to
applicable plumbing requirements, and must be stored and handled in a way that
protects the water and equipment from contamination.
(Ord. 2016-12, § 2 (part), 2016)
8.08.040   Temporary, seasonal, and farmers market food establishments.
   A.   Event Coordinator. Any event with more than one temporary, seasonal, or
farmers market food establishment must have an event coordinator. The event
coordinator must obtain a permit before any food establishment permits for the
event may be issued.
   B.   Available Permits.
      1.   A food establishment may obtain a temporary, seasonal, or annual
permit based on the duration and location of its operations.
      2.   A food establishment offering only food samples may obtain a
temporary, seasonal, or annual sampling permit.
      3.   A food establishment or an event coordinator may obtain a permit fee
reduction for an event organized by a non-profit 501(c)(3) organization that
provides an attestation that a portion of the profits will be reinvested in
future development of the event or be used to benefit the local community.
   C.   Permit Duration and Location Limitations.
      1.   Temporary permits are valid for up to fourteen days and for a single
location and event.
      2.   Seasonal permits are valid for up to one hundred twenty days and for
a single location and event.
      3.   Annual permits are valid for up to a year and for multiple
locations.
      4.   A food establishment must apply for a permit at least fourteen days
prior to an event to avoid a late fee.
   D.   Restricted Operations.
      1.   Food preparation is limited to cooking, reheating, or assembling
ingredients that have been prepared in a fixed food establishment that has a
current operating permit, or is otherwise approved by the department.
      2.   A food establishment utilizing a commissary or food establishment
located outside of Pima County must provide the department with a copy of its
current operating permit and an inspection report issued by its regulatory
authority within the past six months.
      3.   Time/temperature control for safety foods must be prepared on the
same day of sale or service. TCS foods must not be held over from a previous
day's operation unless otherwise approved by the department. Time without
temperature control may not be used.
      4.   Menu items are limited to those listed on its operating permit
application.
   E.   Minimum Structural Requirements.
      1.   Overhead Protection. A food establishment must have overhead
protection from the weather.
      2.   Floors. Floors must be constructed of concrete, asphalt, tight wood,
or other cleanable material and kept in good repair. Dirt or gravel, when
graded to drain, may be used as sub-flooring when covered with a removable
platform or heavy tarping material that is kept clean.
      3.   Walls. Food establishments must have the capacity to erect walls
when necessary to protect food from blowing dust, insects, and other possible
contaminants.
   F.   Equipment. Equipment must be located and installed to prevent food
contamination and facilitate cleaning. Cooking equipment may be located outside
the overhead protection if required by the fire department.
   G.   Ware-washing. A three bin set-up is required for the washing, rinsing,
and sanitizing of utensils and equipment on site. Acceptable sanitizers include
chlorine, quaternary ammonia, or iodine. Test strips must be available to check
the concentration of the sanitizer. A food establishment that does not have
such a ware-wash set-up must possess sufficient quantities of food preparation
and service items to avoid reuse of contaminated items.
   H.   Water. All water must be potable. Food establishments must have
sufficient hot water for hand washing, and for cleaning and sanitizing
equipment. When the distribution system for the potable water is by a hose
conveyance, the hose must be a "food grade" hose that has not been used for any
other purpose. Proper backflow prevention must be provided.
   I.   Waste. All sewage, including liquid waste, must be disposed of
according to law. A mobile unit may not be connected to a fixed water supply
unless the unit uses a sanitary sewage disposal system. All connections must
prevent the potential of cross-connection.
   J.   Hand Washing.
      1.   A convenient hand washing facility with warm running water, soap,
individual paper towels, and a waste container must be available for food
service worker hand washing. Gravity flow hand washing stations must have an
off/on function allowing the water to run without constant pressure at the
point of water discharge.
      2.   The hand washing station must be set up and operational prior to
food service workers handling food or utilizing food contact surfaces. The
station must be designated for hand washing only and must be accessible at all
times. Multiple hand washing stations may be required if the booth is large or
has several food service workers.
      3.   Food establishments operating under an annual permit must provide a
hand sink capable of generating pressurized hot water with integral waste water
collection.
   K.   Food Storage and Protection.
      1.   Food must be transported and stored in a manner to protect it from
cross-contamination and maintain its temperature within the TCS parameters.
      2.   Ice used for food storage must either be stored in containers that
drain continuously or be drained as often as necessary to prevent the
accumulation of water, and to prevent the mouth contact point of any canned or
bottled beverage from submersion.
      3.   Food must be served in a manner that protects it from contamination
by the consumer.
   L.   Food Samples.
      1.   All unwrapped food products that have not been distributed by the
end of the business day must be discarded.
      2.   No public self-service sampling is allowed. Each sample must be
handed to the customer, or placed in single-service containers.
      3.   A physical barrier, such as an approved sneeze guard, must be in
place to prevent contamination of any samples left exposed to the public.
      4.   Only single-service utensils and containers may be used for serving
samples.
      5.   A lined waste container that is easily accessible to the public must
be provided at the sampling area.
(Ord. 2016-12, § 2 (part), 2016)
8.08.050   Food safety certification and training.
   A.   All food establishments except temporary, seasonal, and farmers markets
must have a person in charge on the premises during all times of operation. A
person in charge may obtain a food sanitation certificate from the department
to satisfy the person in charge requirements.
   B.   These establishments must employ at least one person in charge who is
ANSI certified as a food protection manager.
(Ord. 2016-12, § 2 (part), 2016)
8.08.060   Enforcement.
   A.   Any of the following will result in the immediate closure of a food
establishment when it presents an imminent health hazard:
      1.   Sewage back up in the food preparation, cleaning and sanitizing, or
food service areas;
      2.   Failure to appropriately retain or dispose of sewage;
      3.   Interruption of electrical or water service for more than one hour;
      4.   Inability to maintain TCS foods at proper temperatures;
      5.   Lack of functional hand washing facilities;
      6.   Apparent onset of a foodborne illness outbreak;
      7.   Flooding;
      8.   Fire or activation of a fire suppression system;
      9.   Use of poisonous or toxic materials that results in contamination of
food or food contact surfaces;
      10.   For fixed food and mobile food establishments, lack of hot water
under pressure for more than twenty-four hours;
      11.   For a temporary, seasonal, or farmers market food establishment, a
priority item violation that cannot be corrected during the department's
inspection;
      12.   Any grossly unsanitary condition or circumstance that may endanger
public health.
   B.   Violations that Result in Probationary Status.
      1.   Five or more priority or priority foundation violations during one
inspection.
      2.   A pattern of non-compliance. For purposes of this section, a pattern
of non-compliance means:
         a.   Three violations of a priority or priority foundation item in the
same risk factor or intervention within five routine or re-inspections; or
         b.   Four violations of the same good retail practices within six
routine or re-inspections.
      3.   Willfully obstructing or failing to cooperate with an inspection.
   C.   Within ten days of being placed on probationary status a food
establishment must:
      1.   Correct all violations;
      2.   Provide a written corrective action plan showing, for each of the
violations identified, the actions it will take or has taken to correct the
violations and prevent future violations;
      3.   Register staff identified by the department to take a department-
taught food service worker training at the food establishment's expense;
      4.   Pass a re-inspection; and
      5.   Pay a fine of one hundred ninety dollars for an initial probationary
status or three hundred eighty dollars for a second probationary status within
twelve months.
   D.   The operating permit of a food establishment that fails to satisfy the
requirements in subsection C or otherwise receive a written accommodation from
the department will be revoked. A food establishment whose operating permit has
been revoked must obtain a new operating permit, and meet all current code
requirements.
   E.   An owner who has an operating permit revoked more than two times during
a three-year period is ineligible for a new operating permit.
   F.   Suspension and reinstatement of permits for temporary, seasonal or
farmers market food establishments.
      1.   An operating permit will be suspended where priority or priority
foundation violations are not corrected immediately.
      2.   The operating permit will be reinstated upon successful re-
inspection by a health officer.
(Ord. 2016-12, § 2 (part), 2016)
8.08.070   Micro markets requirements—General.
   A.   A micro market may only be located where access can be limited to
employees of the business.
   B.   The area of a micro market in which food is displayed is limited to
three hundred square feet or less.
   C.   All micro market display units must be certified by an ANSI-accredited
certification program and comply with the National Automatic Merchandising
Association Standards.
   D.   All micro market display units offering time/temperature controlled for
safety food must have a self-closing door and an automatic shut-off that
prevents the equipment from opening when there is a power failure, mechanical
failure, or other condition that prevents food from being maintained at safe
temperatures. After any automatic shut-off, the equipment may not be used until
the equipment is serviced and restocked with food that has been maintained at
safe temperatures.
   E.   Prepackaged food items must be appropriately labeled.
(Ord. 2016-12, § 2 (part), 2016)
8.08.080   Pet friendly patio requirements—General.
   A.   A food establishment must obtain a pet friendly patio permit before
animals, other than service animals, are allowed in or on the food
establishment premises. To obtain a pet friendly patio permit, a food
establishment must have the following:
      1.   A separate entrance to the pet friendly patio from the exterior of
the food establishment.
      2.   A sign with at least half inch letters posted at the front entrance
of the food establishment and easily visible to the public that states: "Pet
Friendly Patio — access only through outdoor patio. For complaints contact the
Pima County Health Department."
   B.   A food establishment with a pet friendly patio must comply with the
following requirements:
      1.   No food may be prepared in the outdoor patio area, including mixing
drinks and serving ice, except that a beverage glass may be filled from a
pitcher or other container that has been filled inside the food establishment.
      2.   The outdoor patio must be continuously kept free of visible pet
hair, dander, and other pet-related waste and debris. The outdoor patio must be
hosed down or mopped, and sanitized with animal-friendly chemicals at the
beginning of each shift during which food or beverages are served (breakfast,
lunch, dinner, or late-hours). If a food establishment has continuous food or
beverage service without designated shifts, the outdoor patio must be hosed
down or mopped, and sanitized with animal-friendly chemicals every six hours
that the food establishment is open for business, except that such cleaning is
not required if no pet has been present on the outdoor patio since the last
cleaning.
      3.   Waste created from a pet's bodily functions must be immediately
cleaned up with animal-friendly chemicals. The food establishment must provide
bags and a bag-lined fly-tight container for use by customers for waste
disposal. The contents of the fly-tight container must be disposed of, as often
as necessary, outside of the food establishment in an appropriately covered
waste receptacle.
      4.   Equipment used to clean the outdoor patio must be kept separate from
other cleaning equipment and must not be used in other areas of the food
establishment.
      5.   Employees must not touch, pet, or otherwise handle any pet while
serving food or beverages or handling tableware.
      6.   All pets must be kept on a short leash or in a pet carrier and
remain in the control of the customer at all times while in the outdoor patio
area.
      7.   Pets are not allowed on any seat, chair, a customer's lap, table,
countertop, or similar surface in the outdoor patio area.
      8.   Pets shall not be allowed to have any contact with reusable food
service dishes or utensils. A pet may only have contact with disposable single-
service containers that provide food or water to the pet or with pet-owner
provided containers.
      9.   All patio surfaces shall be constructed of materials that are
smooth, easily sanitized, and durable.
(Ord. 2016-12, § 2 (part), 2016)
8.08.090   Gloves, use limitation.
   Latex gloves may not be used in direct contact with food.
(Ord. 2016-12, § 2 (part), 2016)
8.08.100   Violation—Penalty.
   A person violating any provision in this chapter is subject to the penalties
prescribed in
Chapter 8.04 of this code.
(Ord. 2016-12, § 2 (part), 2016)
   FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-12, § 2, adopted March 1, 2016, repealed the
former
Chapter 8.08, §§ 8.08.010—8.08.100, and enacted a new
Chapter 8.08 as set out herein. The former
Chapter 8.08 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Cross-Reference Table
and the Ordinance List for the chapter's history. (Back)
Chapter 8.12
IMMUNIZATION
Sections: 
8.12.010   Purpose.
8.12.020   Definitions.
8.12.030   General regulations—Fee schedule.
8.12.040   Tuberculosis
8.12.010   Purpose.
   Certain immunization procedures necessary for public health are performed by
personnel of the county health department and its authorized agents. It is
ordained by the board of supervisors that a reasonable fee schedule for
immunization procedures be established for these services.
(Ord. 1997-59 § 1, 1997; prior code § 23.32.010(A))
8.12.020   Definitions.
   The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
   A.   "Authorized agent" means a doctor of medicine or osteopathy and/or a
nurse, all of whom must have a valid license to practice their profession under
the laws of the state and work under the supervision of the director.
   B.   "Board of health" means the board of health of Pima County, Arizona.
   C.   "Health department" means the Pima County Health Department.
   D.   "Director" means the director of the Pima County Health Department.
   E.   "Immunization agent" means any drug, vaccine, serum, or any other agent
approved by the Federal Food and Drug Administration for immunization purposes.
   F.   "Person" means any individual who applies to the health department for
an immunization procedure or procedures for the purpose of immunizing himself,
herself and/or his or her dependents against disease or diseases.
   G.   "Reasonable fee" means the total charge of the immunization to the
client. The formula used to establish the total charge to the client shall be
the vaccine cost to Pima County (variable) plus the administrative cost
(fixed).
   H.   "Variable cost" means actual cost paid by Pima County for vaccine. Such
cost is either the direct manufacturer's price or the negotiated Center for
Disease Control contract price.
   I.   "Fixed cost" means the actual cost incurred by Pima County for the
handling, delivery, storage and administration of the vaccine to clients.
(Ord. 1998-34 § 2 (part), 1998; Ord. 1997-59 § 1, 1997; prior code § 23.32.010
(B))
8.12.030   General regulations—Fee schedule.
   A.   No person shall receive any immunization agent at the health department
without paying the required fee except under one or more of the following
conditions:
      1.   In the event of a public health emergency,
      2.   Upon proof of extreme financial hardship as set by Health Department
sliding fee standards,
      3.   If so waived by the Health Director in the interest of community
welfare, or
      4.   When children are receiving immunizations in accordance with A.R.S.
§§ 36-673 and 36-692.
   B.   The director shall establish a fee schedule which is in compliance with
the definition of a reasonable fee, as provided in Section
8.12.020(G), and such fee schedule shall be reviewed by the board of health to
verify that such fees are reasonable and just and, upon approval by the board
of supervisors, shall be adjusted.
   C.   Federal, state and commercial payer reimbursement guidelines will be
followed. Payment by third party payers for vaccination fees set forth below is
accepted as payment in full.
   D.   Immunization fees shall be:
      1.   International Travel.
         a.   Vaccines required or recommended for international travel will be
provided to adults and children for the variable cost of each vaccine
administered plus a fixed cost of fifteen dollars per vaccine per visit plus a
consultation fee of forty dollars for adults nineteen years of age and older
and twenty dollars for children eighteen years of age and younger. The type of
vaccine to be administered will be determined by established protocols, best
practice standards, and screening review protocols.
         b.   For vaccines Typhim Vi and Immune Serum Globulin (ISG) there is
an additional ten dollar handling fee. For Yellow Fever vaccine there is an
additional twenty dollar fee, which includes a handling and stamp fee.
         c.   A ten dollar fee will be charged for any duplication of
international travel immunization record requested.
      2.   Immunizations (Non-International Travel).
         a.   Adult vaccines, will be provided for the variable cost of the
vaccine plus a fixed cost of fifteen dollars per vaccine per visit. Subsequent
vaccines, given the same day as the initial vaccine, will be given for the
variable cost of the vaccine plus a fixed cost of ten dollars per vaccine. The
type of vaccine to be administered will be determined by established protocols,
best practice standards, and screening review protocols.
         b.   Children age eighteen years and under will not be charged for age
appropriate vaccines. Vaccine administration costs will be billed to third
party payers in accordance with the payers' rates. Vaccine costs may be charged
to third party payers. Charges to third party payers will be consistent with
the fair market value of vaccines.
         c.   Adult influenza vaccine will be provided for fifteen dollars.
   E.   A schedule of the total charge to the client for each vaccine will be
conspicuously posted at all health department clinic sites which offer
immunizations.
(Ord. 2021-16 § 1, 2021; Ord. 2012-67 § 1, 2012: Ord. 2011-86 § 2, 2011; Ord.
2009-24 § 2 (part), 2009; Ord. 2005-33 § 2, 2005; Ord. 2004-96 § 2 (part),
2004; Ord. 2002-51 § 2 (part), 2002; Ord. 1998-34 § 2 (part), 1998; Ord. 1997-
59 § 1, 1997; prior code § 23.32.010(C); Ord. 1970-42)
8.12.040   Tuberculosis
   A.   The health department will charge the following fees:
      1.   Chest x-ray: Sixty-three dollars.
      2.   Tuberculosis skin test (PPD): Fifteen dollars.
      3.   Simple TB screening and issuance of a clearance letter/card: Forty
dollars.
   B.   No person will be denied any services related to tuberculosis from the
health department due to the inability to pay the fee.
(Ord. 2011-86 § 2, 2011: Ord. 2009-24 § 2 (part), 2009; Ord. 2004-96 § 2
(part), 2004; Ord. 2002-51 § 2 (part), 2002; Ord. 1998-34 § 2 (part), 1998;
prior Ord. 1993-44)
Chapter 8.14
STD AND HIV TESTING AND COUNSELING
Sections: 
8.14.010   Purpose.
8.14.020   Definitions.
8.14.030   General regulations—Fee schedule.
8.14.010   Purpose.
   The Pima County health department provides to the public examinations,
testing, laboratory services, necessary medication, supplies, services,
counseling and literature for sexually transmitted diseases (STD) and human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV). In order to recover the costs of these services,
it is ordained by the board of supervisors that a fee schedule be established.
(Ord. 1993-75 (part), 1993)
8.14.020   Definitions.
   The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
   A.   "Board of health" means the board of health of Pima County, Arizona.
   B.   "Department" means the county health department.
   C.   "Health officer" means the director of the county health department.
   D.   "HIV" means human immunodeficiency virus.
   E.   "Person" means any individual who applies to the health department for
services.
   F.   "STD" means sexually transmitted disease.
(Ord. 1993-75 (part), 1993)
8.14.030   General regulations—Fee schedule.
   A.   No person will be denied any services related to STD or HIV from the
health department due to the inability to pay the fee.
   B.   Fees for services are:
      1.   STD clinic visits, forty dollars;
      2.   HIV testing, twenty dollars;
      3.   Herpes serology, seventy dollars;
      4.   Administration of medications, ten dollars.
(Ord. 2011-86 § 3, 2011: Ord. 2009-25 § 2, 2009: Ord. 2006-58 § 1, 2006; Ord.
1993-75 (part), 1993)
Chapter 8.16
HOTELS, MOTELS AND TOURIST COURTS
Sections: 
8.16.010   Scope.
8.16.020   Definitions.
8.16.030   Permit—Required.
8.16.040   Permit—Suspension.
8.16.050   Inspection.
8.16.060   Access.
8.16.070   Record of inspection.
8.16.080   Food service requirements.
8.16.090   Refuse disposal.
8.16.100   Grounds maintenance.
8.16.110   Dwelling units—Ventilation and maintenance.
8.16.120   Bedding.
8.16.130   Toilet and lavatory requirements.
8.16.140   Water supply approval required.
8.16.150   Sewage disposal.
8.16.160   Notification of disease.
8.16.170   Violation—Penalty.
8.16.010   Scope.
   All hotels, motels and tourist courts in the county shall comply with all
the sections and subsections adopted in
Chapter 8.04 of this title and the specific sections adopted in this chapter.
(Prior code § 23.20.010(A))
8.16.020   Definitions.
   All definitions adopted in
Chapter 8.04 of this title and the following specific definitions apply to this
chapter:
   A.   "Dwelling unit" means any suite, room, cottage, bedroom or any other
unit established by a hotel, motel or tourist court for temporary occupancy.
   B.   "Hotel," "motel" or "tourist court" means and includes any place of two
or more dwelling units where sleeping accommodations are available to
transients or tourists for occupancies of less than seven days.
   C.   "Plumbing" or "plumbing systems" means and includes the water supply
distributing pipes, the fixtures and fixture traps, the soil, waste and vent
pipes, and the building drains with their devices, appurtenances and
connections either within or adjacent to the hotel, motel or tourist court. All
such plumbing or plumbing systems must be installed in accordance with the
Uniform Building Code as adopted in
Chapter 8.04 of this title.
   D.   "Refuse" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semi-solid
wastes, except human excreta, but including garbage, rubbish, ashes, manure,
street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and industrial wastes.
(Prior code § 23.20.010(B))
8.16.030   Permit—Required.
   A.   No person shall operate a hotel, motel or tourist court without holding
a current and valid permit to operate issued by the health officer in
accordance with Section
8.04.130 of this code.
   B.   The health officer shall not issue a permit to operate until plans and
specifications for the hotel, motel or tourist court have been submitted and
approved in accordance with Sections
8.04.040 through
8.04.120.
   C.   The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place and shall not be
removed or moved except by the health officer.
   D.   Permits to operate a hotel, motel or tourist court shall be valid for
one year from date of issue, or as otherwise specified by the health officer,
and shall be renewed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and
Chapter 8.04.
(Prior code § 23.20.010(C))
8.16.040   Permit—Suspension.
   A.   The health officer may, without warning or notice, suspend any permit
to operate a hotel, motel or tourist court:
      1.   If the holder of the permit does not comply with the requirements of
this chapter: or
      2.   If the operation of the hotel, motel or tourist court does not
comply with the requirements of this chapter: or
      3.   If the operation of the hotel, motel or tourist court otherwise
constitutes a substantial hazard to public health: or
      4.   If water, gas and/or electricity services to the facility are
suspended.
   B.   Any hotel, motel or tourist court may appeal the health officer's
action in accordance with Section
8.04.140.
(Prior code § 23.20.010(D))
8.16.050   Inspection.
   Any inspection of each hotels, motel or tourist court shall be performed at
least once a year. Additional inspection shall be performed as often as
necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
(Prior code § 23.20.010(E))
8.16.060   Access.
   Representatives of the health officer, after proper identification, shall be
permitted to enter any hotel, motel or tourist court, at any reasonable time
during regular business hours of the hotel, motel or tourist court, for the
purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this chapter.
(Prior code § 23.20.010(F))
8.16.070   Record of inspection.
   A.   Whenever an inspection of a hotel, motel or tourist court is made, the
findings shall be recorded on an inspection form. The inspection form shall
summarize the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   A copy of the completed inspection form shall be furnished to the
person in charge of the hotel, motel or tourist court at the conclusion of the
inspection.
(Prior code § 23.20.010(G))
8.16.080   Food service requirements.
   A.   Compliance.
      1.   The storage, preparation and serving of food shall comply with the
requirements of
Chapter 8.08.
      2.   A separate inspection shall be made of the food operation in
accordance with
Chapter 8.08.
   B.   Drinking Water—Ice.
      1.   Where drinking fountains are provided, the fountain shall be
constructed so that the drinking is from a free jet projected at an angle from
the vertical, and provided with a guard to prevent the mouth from being placed
directly against the orifice. There shall be no possibility of the orifice
becoming submerged. The fountain bowl shall be constructed of nonabsorbent,
easily cleanable material.
      2.   All glasses and multi-use utensils furnished to each dwelling unit
shall be cleaned and sanitized in an approved manner after each occupancy.
Single-service paper and plastic drinking utensils may be used.
      3.   Ice shall be obtained from an approved source and shall be stored
and handled in such a manner as to prevent contamination.
      4.   Ice-making or dispensing equipment shall meet the requirements of
Section
8.08.400D.
(Prior code § 23.20.020)
8.16.090   Refuse disposal.
   A.   All refuse shall be disposed of in accordance with the requirements of
the sanitary code.
   B.   The owner or operator of any hotel, motel or tourist court shall be
responsible for the removal of any animal excreta and other refuse accumulated
on the premises of the hotel, motel or tourist court.
   C.   Garbage containers shall be thoroughly washed after emptying and shall
be maintained free of odors and other objectionable conditions.
   D.   All rubbish containers shall be cleaned as often as necessary to
prevent a nuisance.
   E.   All refuse containers shall be maintained in good repair and kept
tightly covered.
(Prior code § 23.20.030)
8.16.100   Grounds maintenance.
   A.   Grounds of hotels, motels and tourist courts shall be properly drained.
   B.   Grounds of hotels, motels and tourist courts shall be kept clean and
free of accumulations of refuse, animal excreta and debris.
   C.   There shall be no evidence of fly, roach, mosquito or rodent breeding
or infestation.
(Prior code § 23.20.040)
8.16.110   Dwelling units—Ventilation and maintenance.
   A.   Dwelling units shall be of sufficient size to afford ample circulation
of air and freedom of movement but not less than one hundred square feet of
floor area shall be provided for each unit, exclusive of bathrooms, closets,
kitchens and similar ancillary facilities.
   B.   Floors of all rooms shall be of such construction as to be easily
cleaned and shall be kept clean and in good repair.
   C.   The walls and ceilings of all rooms shall be of a finish that will
permit easy cleaning and shall be kept clean and in good repair.
   D.   Where windows are relied upon to provide ventilation, the area of the
windows for each dwelling unit shall be equal to at least twenty percent of the
floor area.
   E.   Not less than twenty-five percent of the window area furnished shall be
capable of being opened unless other satisfactory means of ventilation are
provided. Windows capable of being opened shall be effectively screened.
   F.   Furniture, drapes, carpets and other accessories shall be kept clean
and in good repair.
   G.   Dwelling units shall be maintained free of insects, rodents and other
vermin.
   H.   The provisions of A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 13, Article 2 relating to
gas appliances shall be met.
(Prior code § 23.20.050)
8.16.120   Bedding.
   A.   The beds, mattresses, pillows and bed linen, including sheets, pillow
slips, blankets, etc., used in all hotels, motels and tourist courts shall be
maintained in good repair, shall be kept clean and free of vermin, and shall be
properly stored when not in use.
   B.   Each bed, bunk, cot or other sleeping place shall be provided with
pillow slips, under and top sheets for the use of guests. Sheets and pillow
slips shall be adequately sized to completely cover the mattress and pillow.
   C.   Clean linen shall be provided to each new guest and shall be changed at
least twice each week when occupancy exceeds this period.
(Prior code § 23.20.060)
8.16.130   Toilet and lavatory requirements.
   A.   Cleanliness and Maintenance.
      1.   Adequate and convenient toilet, lavatory and bathing facilities
shall be provided at all hotels, motels and tourist courts and shall be
maintained in a safe and sanitary condition at all times.
      2.   Where private or connecting toilet rooms are not available for each
dwelling unit, separate and plainly marked central toilet rooms for each sex
shall be provided, located within two hundred feet of such units.
      3.   Central toilet rooms shall provide not less than one toilet, one
lavatory and one tub or shower for each sex for each ten dwelling units, or
major fraction thereof, not having private or connecting baths. At least one
urinal shall be provided in each central toilet room designated for men.
      4.   Hot and cold water and soap shall be provided in all toilet rooms.
Clean individual towels shall be furnished for each guest.
      5.   Toilet rooms shall be well-lighted and well-ventilated. Where
gravity or mechanical ventilation is provided, the ventilation ducts for the
toilet rooms shall not be connected into ventilation ducts from or to any
dwelling unit.
      6.   Floors of all toilet rooms shall be of easily cleanable
construction, shall be kept clean and in good repair and, where necessary,
shall slope to properly located drains.
      7.   Walls and ceilings of all toilet rooms shall be of easily cleanable
construction and shall be kept clean and in good repair.
   B.   New Central Toilet Rooms Prohibited. All newly constructed hotels,
motels or tourist courts shall not be allowed to install central toilet rooms.
(Prior code § 23.20.070)
8.16.140   Water supply approval required.
   Each hotel, motel or tourist court shall be provided with an adequate and
safe water supply from an approved source. Whenever a hotel, motel or tourist
court finds it necessary to develop a source or sources of supply, complete
plans and specifications of the proposed water system shall be submitted to the
health officer in accordance with Sections
8.04.040 through
8.04.120 of the sanitary code for his prior approval before any construction is
started.
(Prior code § 23.20.080)
8.16.150   Sewage disposal.
   A.   The liquid wastes from all hotels, motels or tourist courts shall be
discharged into a public sewerage system in compliance with applicable local
ordinances or codes or into separate sewage disposal facilities approved by the
health officer.
   B.   Separate sewage disposal facilities will not be approved where, in the
opinion of the health officer, a public sewer is available.
   C.   Where separate sewage disposal facilities are proposed, the design,
construction and operation of such systems shall be in accordance with the
sanitary code. Plans and specifications for such systems shall be submitted to
the health officer and approval received prior to the start of construction.
   D.   No sewage treatment plant effluent, swimming pool or other waste water
shall be deposited on the ground except in a manner approved by the health
officer.
(Prior code § 23.20.090)
8.16.160   Notification of disease.
   A.   The owner or operator of a hotel, motel or tourist court shall report
to the health officer the name of any guest or employee suspected or known to
have a contagious disease in accordance with A.R.S. Section 36-622.
   B.   Every dwelling unit, after being occupied by a person known or
suspected of having a contagious disease, shall be rendered noncontagious by
disinfection, fumigation or by other treatment methods as specified by the
health officer before further occupancy.
(Prior code § 23.20.100)
8.16.170   Violation—Penalty.
   Any person violating any provisions adopted in this chapter shall be subject
to the penalties prescribed in
Chapter 8.04 of this title.
(Prior code § 23.20.110)
Chapter 8.20
MOBILE HOME PARKS
Sections: 
8.20.010   Scope.
8.20.020   Definitions.
8.20.030   Permit—Required.
8.20.040   Permit—Suspension.
8.20.050   Inspection.
8.20.060   Access.
8.20.070   Record of inspection.
8.20.080   Exemptions.
8.20.090   Food service requirements.
8.20.100   Drinking water—Ice.
8.20.110   Water supply.
8.20.120   Sewage disposal.
8.20.130   Refuse storage, collection and disposal.
8.20.140   Insect and rodent control.
8.20.150   Grounds requirements and maintenance.
8.20.160   Service building and other community service facilities.
8.20.170   Structural requirements of buildings.
8.20.180   Responsibility of park management.
8.20.190   Responsibility of park occupant.
8.20.200   Travel trailer parks.
8.20.210   Violation—Penalty.
8.20.010   Scope.
   All mobile home parks in the county shall comply with the rules and
regulations adopted in
Chapter 8.04 of this title and the specific sections adopted in this chapter.
(Prior code § 23.28.010(A))
8.20.020   Definitions.
   All definitions adopted in
Chapter 8.04 of this title and the following specific definitions apply to this
chapter:
   A.   "Dependent trailer" means a trailer which is dependent upon a service
building for toilet and lavatory facilities.
   B.   "Garbage container" means metal or approved plastic twenty-gallon to
thirty-gallon containers used to store refuse at individual premises.
   C.   "Mobile home" means a transportable, single-family dwelling unit
suitable for year-round occupancy and containing the same water supply, waste
disposal and electrical conveniences as immobile housing.
   D.   "Mobile home lot" means a parcel of land for the placement of a single
mobile home and the exclusive use of its occupants.
   E.   "Mobile home park" means any plot of ground upon which two or more
mobile homes as defined in subsection C of this section, occupied for dwelling
or sleeping purposes, are located regardless of whether or not a charge is made
for such accommodations. This does not apply where all trailers are occupied by
the owner of the plot and his immediate family, nor does it include areas
provided for recreational purposes or overnight parking by agencies of the
local, state and federal governments, where posted restrictions for use of such
areas are provided. For purposes of this chapter, the term "mobile home park"
also includes travel trailer parks. unless otherwise excluded.
   F.   "Mobile home stand" means that part of an individual lot which has been
reserved for the placement of the mobile home, appurtenant structures or
additions.
   G.   "Plumbing" or "plumbing systems" means and includes all potable water
supply and distribution pipes, all plumbing fixtures and traps. all drainage
and vent pipe and all building drains, including their respective joints and
connections, devices, receptacles and appurtenances within the proper lines of
the premises and shall include potable water piping, water heaters and vents
for same.
   H.   "Refuse" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semi-solid
wastes, except human excreta, but includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, manure,
street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and industrial wastes.
   I.   "Refuse containers" or "rubbish containers means covered metal
containers of a size of one-half cubic yard or larger which may be owned by the
park owner or the refuse collection agency.
   J.   "Sanitary station" means a facility used for removing and disposing of
wastes from trailer holding tanks.
   K.   "Self-contained trailer" means a trailer which can operate
independently of connections to sewer, water and electric systems. It contains
a water-flushed toilet, lavatory, shower and kitchen sink, all of which are
connected to water storage and sewage holding tanks located with the trailer.
   L.   "Service building" means a structure housing toilet, lavatory and such
other facilities as may be required by this chapter.
   M.   "Service sink" means a slop sink with a flushing rim for the disposal
of liquid wastes from trailers.
   N.   "Sewer connection" means the connection consisting of all pipes,
fittings and appurtenances from the drain outlet of the mobile home to the
inlet of the corresponding sewer riser pipe of the sewage system serving the
mobile home park.
   O.   "Sewer riser pipe" means that portion of the sewer lateral which
extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at each mobile home
lot or parking space.
   P.   ""Trailer space" means a parcel of land in a travel trailer parking
area for the placement of a single trailer and the exclusive use of its
occupants.
   Q.   "Trailer stand" means that part of an individual trailer space which
has been reserved for the placement of a single trailer and its necessary
structures.
   R.   "Travel trailer" means a vehicular, portable structure built on a
chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational
and vacations uses, permanently identified as a travel trailer by the
manufacturer of the trailer and factory equipped for the road. It shall also
include the following:
      1.   "Camping trailer" means a canvas, folding structure, mounted on
wheels and designed for travel, recreation and vacation use.
      2.   "Motor home" means a portable, temporary dwelling to be used for
travel, recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a self-
propelled vehicle.
      3.   "Pick-up coach" means a structure designed to be mounted on a truck
chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation.
   S.   "Travel trailer parking area" means a mobile home park as defined in
subsection E of this section, which has been planned for the placement of
travel trailers for transient use.
   T.   "Water connection" means the connection consisting of all pipes,
fittings and appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of
the distribution system within the mobile home or travel trailer.
   U.   "Water riser pipe" means that portion of the water supply system
serving the mobile home park or travel trailer parking area which extends
vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at each
mobile home lot or travel trailer space.
   V.   "Watering station" means a facility for supplying water storage tanks
of trailers with potable water.
(Prior code § 23.28.020(B))
8.20.030   Permit—Required.
   A.   No person shall operate a mobile home park without holding a current
and valid permit to operate issued by the health officer in accordance with
Chapter 8.04 of this title.
   B.   The health officer shall not issue a permit to operate a new or
extensively remodeled mobile home park until plans and specifications for the
mobile home park have been submitted and approved in accordance with Section
8.04.150.
   C.   The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place and shall not be
removed or moved except by the health officer.
   D.   Permits to operate a mobile home park shall be valid for one year from
date of issue, or as otherwise specified by the health officer, and shall be
renewed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and
Chapter 8.04.
(Prior code § 23.28.020(C))
8.20.040   Permit—Suspension.
   A.   The health officer may, without prior warning or notice, suspend any
permit to operate a mobile home park:
      1.   If the holder of the permit does not comply with the requirements of
this chapter; or
      2.   If the operation of the mobile home park does not comply with the
requirements of this chapter; or
      3.   The operation of the mobile home park otherwise constitutes a
substantial hazard to public health; or
      4.   If water, gas and/or electrical services to the facility are
suspended.
   B.   Any person who has been adversely affected by the actions of the health
officer may appeal the action in accordance with
Chapter 8.04.
(Prior code § 23.28.010(D))
8.20.050   Inspection.
   An inspection of each mobile home park may be performed at least once a
year. Additional inspections shall be performed as often as necessary for the
enforcement of this chapter.
(Prior code § 23.28.010(E))
8.20.060   Access.
   Representatives of the health officer, after proper identification, shall be
permitted to enter a mobile home park, at any reasonable time during regular
business hours of the mobile home park, for the purpose of making inspections
to determine compliance with this chapter.
(Prior code § 23.28.010(F))
8.20.070   Record of inspection.
   Whenever an inspection of a mobile home park is made, the findings shall be
recorded on an inspection form. The inspection form shall summarize the
requirements of this chapter.
(Prior code § 23.28.010(G))
8.20.080   Exemptions.
   This chapter will not apply to mobile home subdivisions, as defined in
A.R.S. Section 32-2101, which have been subdivided in accordance with all state
and local laws, ordinances. rules and regulations.
(Prior code § 23.28.010(H))
8.20.090   Food service requirements.
   A.   The storage, preparation and serving of food shall comply with the
requirements of
Chapter 8.08.
   B.   A separate inspection shall be made of the food operation in accordance
with
Chapter 8.08.
   C.   This rule will not apply to occasional "pot luck" gatherings attended
by park tenants and guests.
(Prior code § 23.28.020)
8.20.100   Drinking water—Ice.
   A.   Where drinking fountains are provided, the fountain shall be
constructed so that drinking is from a free jet projected at an angle from the
vertical and provided with a guard to prevent the mouth from being placed
directly against the orifice. There shall be no possibility of the orifice
becoming submerged. The fountain bowl shall be constructed of nonabsorbent
easily cleanable material.
   B.   Ice shall be obtained from an approved source and shall be stored and
handled in such a manner as to prevent contamination.
   C.   Ice-making or dispensing equipment shall meet the requirements of
Chapter 8.08 of this title.
(Prior code § 23.28.030)
8.20.110   Water supply.
   A.   General. Each mobile home park shall be provided with an adequate and
safe water supply from an approved source. Whenever a mobile home park finds it
necessary to develop a new source or sources of supply, complete plans and
specifications of the proposed water system shall be submitted to the health
officer in accordance with
Chapter 8.04 for his prior approval before any construction is started.
   B.   Source of Supply.
      1.   Every well or suction line of a water supply system shall be located
and constructed in such a manner that neither underground nor surface
contamination will reach the water supply from any source. The following
minimum distances between wells and various sources of contamination shall be
required:
 
Contamination Source Well or Suction Line (Distance in Feet)
Building Sewer       50
Septic Tank          50
Disposal Field       100
Seepage Pit          100
Dry Well             50
 
      2.   No well-casing, pumping machinery or suction pipes shall be placed
in any pit, room or space extending below ground level nor in any room or space
above ground which is walled in or otherwise enclosed unless such room, whether
above or below ground, has free drainage by gravity to the surface of the
ground.
      3.   The treatment of a private water supply shall be in accordance with
applicable laws and regulations.
   C.   Water Storage Facilities. All water storage reservoirs shall be
covered, watertight and constructed of impervious material. Overflows and vents
of such reservoirs shall be effectively screened. Manholes shall be constructed
with overlapping covers, so as to prevent the entrance of contaminated
material. Reservoir overflow pipes shall discharge through an acceptable air
gap.
   D.   Water Distribution System.
      1.   The water supply system of the mobile home park shall be connected
to all mobile homes or travel trailers, buildings and other facilities
requiring water.
      2.   All water piping, fixtures and other equipment shall be constructed
and maintained in accordance with state and local regulations and requirements
and shall be of a type and in locations approved by the health officer.
      3.   The water piping system shall not be connected with nonpotable or
questionable water supplies and shall be protected against the hazards of
backflow or back siphonage.
      4.   The system shall be designed and maintained to provide a pressure of
not less than twenty pounds per square inch under normal operating conditions
at service buildings and other locations requiring potable water supply.
   E.   Water Supply. The water supply shall be capable of supplying a minimum
of one hundred fifty gallons per day per mobile home.
   F.   Individual Water-riser Pipes and Connections.
      1.   Individual water-riser pipes shall be located within the confined
area of the mobile home lot or trailer space at a point where the water
connection will approximate a vertical position.
      2.   On new construction or where extensive remodeling is done, water
riser pipes shall be at least three-quarter-inch diameter. The water outlet
shall be capped when a trailer coach does not occupy the trailer space.
      3.   Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service
lines, valves and riser pipes and to protect risers from heaving and thawing
actions of the ground during freezing weather. Surface drainage shall be
diverted from the location of the riser pipe.
      4.   Underground stop and waste valves shall not be installed on any
water service.
(Prior code § 23.28.040)
8.20.120   Sewage disposal.
   A.   General.
      1.   The liquid wastes from all mobile home parks shall be discharged
into a public sewerage system in compliance with applicable local ordinances or
codes or into separate sewage disposal facilities approved by the health
officer.
      2.   Separate sewage disposal facilities will not be approved where in
the opinion of the health officer a public sewer is available.
      3.   Where separate sewage disposal facilities are proposed, the design,
construction and operation of such systems shall be in accordance with the
sanitary code. Plans and specifications for such systems shall be submitted to
the health officer and approval received prior to the start of construction.
      4.   No sewage treatment plant effluent, swimming pool or other
wastewater shall be deposited on the ground, except in a manner approved by the
health officer.
   B.   Individual Sewer Connections.
      1.   On all new construction or extensive remodeling, the sewer riser
pipe shall have at least a nominal inside diameter of four inches. shall be
trapped below the ground surface and shall be so located on the mobile home lot
or trailer space that the sewer connection to the trailer coach drain outlet
will approximate a vertical position.
      2.   The sewer connection (as defined in Section
8.20.020) shall have a nominal inside diameter of at least three inches, and
the slope of any portion thereof shall be at least one-fourth-inch per foot.
The sewer connection shall consist of one pipeline only without any branch
fittings. All joints shall be watertight.
      3.   All materials used for sewer connections shall be semi-rigid,
corrosive-resistant, nonabsorbent and durable. The inner surface shall be
smooth.
      4.   Provisions shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when a
mobile home does not occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall be diverted away
from the riser.
   C.   Sink Wastes. See Section 8.08.200.
   D.   Sanitary Stations. See Section 8.08.200.
(Prior code § 23.28.050)
8.20.130   Refuse storage, collection and disposal.
   A.   The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in all mobile home parks
shall be in accordance with the sanitary code and shall be conducted so as to
create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or
fire hazards or air pollution.
   B.   The owner or operator of any mobile home park shall be responsible for
the removal of any animal excreta and other refuse accumulated on common areas
of the mobile home park or mobile home lots and vacant trailer spaces. On any
occupied trailer space or mobile home lot such removal shall be the
responsibility of the occupant of the trailer or mobile home located at that
space.
   C.   All refuse shall be stored in fly-tight, watertight, rodent-proof
containers. Containers shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to
properly store all refuse awaiting collection.
   D.   Garbage containers, if used, shall be maintained free of odors and
other objectionable conditions. They shall be equipped with tight-fitting
covers.
   E.   All refuse containers shall be cleaned as often as necessary to prevent
a nuisance.
   F.   Refuse collection stands shall be provided for all refuse containers.
Such container stands shall be designed to prevent containers from being
tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration and to facilitate
cleaning around them.
   G.   All refuse shall be collected at least twice weekly. Where suitable
collection service is not available from municipal or private agencies, the
mobile home park operator shall provide this service. All refuse shall be
collected and transported in covered vehicles or covered containers.
(Prior code § 23.28.060)
8.20.140   Insect and rodent control.
   A.   Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect
and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other measures
to control insects and rodents shall conform with the requirements of the
health officer.
   B.   Mobile home parks shall be maintained free of accumulations of debris
which may provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and
other pests.
   C.   Storage areas shall be maintained so as to prevent rodent harborage.
Lumber, pipe and other building material shall be properly stored.
   D.   Where the potential for insect and rodent infestation exists, all
exterior openings in or beneath any structure shall be appropriately screened
with wire mesh or other suitable materials.
   E.   The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to prevent
harborage of ticks, chiggers and other noxious insects. Mobile home parks shall
be maintained so as to prevent the growth of ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak,
poison sumac, and other noxious weeds considered detrimental to health. Open
areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any description.
(Prior code § 23.28.070)
8.20.150   Grounds requirements and maintenance.
   A.   The minimum size of mobile home spaces and the minimum space between
mobile homes and travel trailers shall be in compliance with the requirements
of zoning codes and other official agencies of the county and incorporated
cities and towns in the county.
   B.   Grounds Maintenance.
      1.   Grounds of all mobile home parks shall be graded and equipped to
drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner.
      2.   Grounds of all mobile home parks shall be kept clean and free of
accumulations of refuse, animal excreta and debris.
      3.   There shall be no evidence of fly, roach, mosquito or rodent
breeding or infestation.
      4.   Conditions of soil, groundwater level, drainage and topography shall
not create hazards to the property or the health or safety of the occupants and
no portion subject to unpredictable and/or sudden flooding, subsidence or
erosion shall be used for any purpose which would expose persons or property to
hazards.
      5.   The ground surface in all parts of every mobile home stand or travel
trailer space shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a
safe, efficient manner.
(Prior code § 23.28.080)
Table 8.20.160
FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS 
No. of Parking Spaces* Toilets   Urinals Lavatories Showers   Other Fixtures**
                       Men Women Men     Men Women  Men Women
No. of Parking Toilets   Urinals Lavatories Showers   Other Fixtures**
Spaces*        Men Women Men     Men Women  Men Women
1—15         1   1     1       1   1      1   1
16—30        1   1     1       1   1      1   1
31—45        2   2     1       3   3      1   1     1 Service sink with a
46—60        2   3     2       3   3      2   2     flushing rim ***
61—80        3   4     2       4   4      2   2
81—100       3   4     2       4   4      3   3
 
* Parking spaces for dependent trailers.
** Additional fixtures including laundry trays, clothes—washing machines (one
for every thirty).
*** A service sink with a flushing rim shall be provided for disposal of liquid
wastes unless a sanitary station is conveniently accessible for this purpose.
8.20.160   Service building and other community service facilities.
   A.   General. The requirements of this section shall apply to service
buildings, recreation buildings and other community service facilities such as:
      1.   Management office, repair shops and storage areas:
      2.   Sanitary facilities;
      3.   Laundry facilities;
      4.   Indoor recreation areas;
      5.   Commercial uses supplying essential goods or services for the
exclusive use of park occupants.
   B.   Service Buildings.
      1.   A central service building containing the necessary toilet and other
plumbing fixtures specified shall be provided in mobile home parks which
provide spaces for dependent trailers. Service buildings shall be conveniently
located with a radius of approximately two hundred feet to the spaces to be
served in accordance with
Table 8.20.160, Fixture Requirements. For parking areas having more than one
hundred travel trailer spaces there shall be provided: one additional toilet
and lavatory for each sex per each additional thirty travel trailer spaces: one
additional shower for each sex per each additional forty travel spaces: and one
additional men's urinal per each additional one hundred travel trailer spaces.
      2.   When a mobile home park requiring a service building is operated in
connection with a resort or other business establishment, the number of
sanitary facilities for such business establishment shall be in excess of those
required by the schedule for trailer spaces and shall be based on the total
number of persons using such facilities.
      3.   Where a park is designed for and exclusively limited to use by self-
contained trailers, no public sanitary facilities shall be required.
   C.   Exemptions. Any person desiring to furnish temporary facilities for
accommodating a travel trailer rally, or other group of trailers assembled for
the purpose of traveling together, shall make application for such activity to
the health officer The requirements for a service building and other sanitary
physical facilities may be waived by the health officer on the determination
that public health will not be endangered; but the location of the site, the
facilities which are provided, and the method of conducting such rally shall be
acceptable to the health officer before a special permit shall be issued
specifying the location of the site. The period of operation shall not exceed
ten days.
(Prior code § 23.28.090)
8.20.170   Structural requirements of buildings.
   A.   All portions of the structure shall be properly protected from damage
by ordinary uses and by decay, corrosion, termites and other destructive
elements. Exterior portions shall be of such materials and be so constructed
and protected as to prevent entrance or penetration of moisture and weather.
   B.   All rooms containing sanitary or laundry facilities shall:
      1.   Have sound-resistant walls extending to the ceiling between male and
female sanitary facilities. Walls and partitions around showers. bathtubs,
lavatories and other plumbing fixtures shall be constructed of dense,
nonabsorbent. waterproof material or covered with moisture-resistant material:
      2.   Have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the
outdoors. The minimum aggregate gross area of windows for each required room
shall be not less than ten percent of the floor area served by them:
      3.   Have at least one window which can be easily opened, or a mechanical
device which will adequately ventilate the room.
   C.   Toilets shall be located in separate compartments equipped with self-
closing doors. Shower stalls shall be of the individual type. The rooms shall
be screened to prevent direct view of the interior when the exterior doors are
open.
   D.   Illumination levels shall be maintained as follows:
      1.   General seeing tasks, five foot-candles:
      2.   Laundry room work area, forty foot-candles:
      3.   Toilet room, in front of mirrors, forty foot-candles.
   E.   Hot and cold water shall be furnished to every lavatory, sink, bathtub,
shower and laundry fixture, and cold water shall be furnished to every water
closet and urinal.
   F.   Cooking shelters, barbecue pits, fireplaces and wood-burning stoves
shall be located, constructed, maintained and used to minimize fire hazards and
smoke nuisance both on the property on which used and on neighboring property.
No open fire shall be left unattended. No fuel shall be used and no material
burned which emits dense smoke or objectionable odors.
(Prior code § 23.28.100)
8.20.180   Responsibility of park management.
   A.   The permit holder shall operate the mobile home park in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter and shall provide adequate supervision to
maintain the mobile home park, its facilities, and equipment in good repair and
sanitary condition.
   B.   The mobile home park management shall notify all occupants of all
applicable rules and regulations of this chapter and inform them of their
duties and responsibilities under this chapter.
   C.   The mobile home park management shall supervise the placement of each
mobile home stand, which includes securing its stability and installing all
utility connections.
   D.   The mobile home park management shall notify the health officer
immediately of the name of any occupant or employee suspected or known to have
a communicable or contagious disease within the park.
(Prior code § 23.28.110(A))
8.20.190   Responsibility of park occupant.
   A.   All mobile home park occupants shall comply with all applicable rules
and regulations of this chapter and shall maintain their trailer coach space,
its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary
condition.
   B.   All mobile home park occupants shall be responsible for the proper
placement of their mobile home on its stand and proper installation of all
utility connections in accordance with the instructions of the mobile home
management.
   C.   No owner or person in charge of a dog, cat or other animal shall permit
it to run at large or to commit any nuisance while in the limits of any mobile
home park.
(Prior code § 23.28.110(B))
8.20.200   Travel trailer parks.
   A.   Water Supply. Each travel trailer parking area shall be provided with
one or more easily accessible water supply outlets for filling trailer water
storage tanks. Such water supply outlets shall consist of at least a water
hydrant and the necessary appurtenances and shall be protected against the
hazards of backflow and back siphonage.
   B.   Sewer Connections. Pipe used for sewer connections shall be of a type
and size approved by the health officer.
   C.   Sewage Disposal.
      1.   Travel trailer park sewage disposal may be accomplished by two
methods: a sewer connection at each parking area or through use of sanitary
stations.
      2.   A sanitary station shall consist of at least a trapped, four-inch
nominal inside diameter sewer riser pipe.
      3.   Each travel trailer parking area shall be provided with a sanitary
station in the ratio of one for every one hundred trailer spaces or fractional
part thereof.
      4.   Sanitary stations shall be screened from other activities by visual
barriers such as fences, walls or natural growth, and shall be separated from
any trailer space by a distance of at least fifty feet.
      5.   Under no circumstances will sinks or holding tanks be discharged to
the surface of the ground.
   D.   Temporary Travel Trailer Sites and Rallies. Any person desiring to
furnish temporary facilities for accommodating a travel trailer rally, or other
group of trailers assembled for the purpose of traveling together, shall make
application for such activity to the health officer. The requirements for a
service building and other sanitary and physical facilities may be waived by
the health officer on the determination that public health will not be
endangered: but the site, the facilities which are provided, and the method of
conducting such rally shall be acceptable to the health officer before a
special permit shall be issued specifying the location of the site. The period
of operation shall not exceed ten days.
(Prior code § 23.28.120)
8.20.210   Violation—Penalty.
   Any person violating any rules adopted in this chapter shall be subject to
the penalties prescribed in
Chapter 8.04 of this title.
(Prior code § 23.28.130)
Chapter 8.24
REST ROOMS
Sections: 
8.24.010   Scope.
8.24.020   Definitions.
8.24.030   Requirements generally.
8.24.040   Toilet facilities.
8.24.050   Lavatory facilities.
8.24.060   Public nuisance designated.
8.24.070   Violation—Penalty.
8.24.010   Scope.
   All toilet facilities which are made available for the use of employees or
patrons of the establishment, or for the use of the general public shall comply
with the provisions of this chapter unless specific requirements have been
adopted elsewhere in the various chapters of this title.
(Prior code § 23.24.010)
8.24.020   Definitions.
   All definitions adopted in
Chapter 8.04 of this title and the following specific definitions apply to all
restrooms in the county:
   A.   "Employee restrooms" means restrooms the use of which is restricted to
employees of the establishment and which the public is not permitted to use.
   B.   "Public restrooms" means restrooms in commercial and industrial
establishments, in food establishments, hospitals, public buildings, comfort
stations, service stations, public parks, schools, airports, bus and railroad
stations or other places to which the public is invited or which are frequented
by the public without special permission or special invitation, and other
installations (whether pay or free) where restrooms are installed so that their
use is similarly unrestricted.
(Prior code § 23.24.020)
8.24.030   Requirements generally.
   A.   Every place where persons are employed shall have an approved method of
human excreta disposal installed in accordance with the Uniform Building Code,
as adopted in Section
8.04.150D of this code.
   B.   In every place where toilet facilities are installed for the use of
employees or the general public, such facilities shall be installed in
accordance with the requirements of A.R.S. Section 34-406F, as amended, and the
Uniform Plumbing Code, as adopted in Section
8.04.150D of this code.
   C.   It shall be the duty of the management of the establishment to maintain
all employee and/or public restrooms in a clean and sanitary condition at all
times.
   D.   It shall be the duty of the establishment to maintain all employee and
public restrooms in good repair at all times.
(Prior code § 23.24.030)
8.24.040   Toilet facilities.
   A.   The pressure and volume of water shall be sufficient to insure
effective flushing of toilets and urinals.
   B.   Toilets and urinals shall be constructed of vitreous or other approved
material, the surface of which is smooth, hard, impervious and not easily
corrodible, shall be of rim-flush type, and shall be properly vented and
trapped. All joints shall be tight. The construction shall be such as to
prevent back-siphonage of the toilet or urinal contents and to provide ample
flushing action to in sure cleanliness. All toilets and urinals shall be kept
clean and in good repair.
   C.   All toilets and urinals shall be located in well-lighted and well-
ventilated rooms and shall be conveniently accessible to approved handwashing
facilities, toilet rooms shall be kept clean and in good repair and provided
with an adequate supply of toilet paper.
(Prior code § 23.24.040)
8.24.050   Lavatory facilities.
   Lavatory facilities shall comply with the following requirements:
   A.   The lavatory shall be composed of vitreous or other approved material,
the surface of which is smooth, hard, impervious and not readily corrodible.
Taps connected with the lavatory shall be so installed as to discharge at least
one inch above the level at which the lavatory will overflow upon the floor.
   B.   The water supply used in connection with a lavatory shall comply with
the requirements of the sanitary code.
   C.   Soap in a suitable dispensing container and single-service paper towels
or some other approved form of individual towel service shall be provided.
(Prior code § 23.24.050)
8.24.060   Public nuisance designated.
   Restrooms which are not kept in a clean and sanitary condition or in good
repair are specifically declared a public health nuisance dangerous to public
health.
(Prior code § 23.24.060)
8.24.070   Violation—Penalty.
   Any person violating any provision adopted in this chapter shall be subject
to the penalties prescribed in
Chapter 8.04 of this code.
(Prior code § 23.24.070)
Chapter 8.28
OUTDOOR MASS GATHERINGS
Sections: 
8.28.010   Purpose.
8.28.020   Definitions.
8.28.030   License—Required.
8.28.040   License—Application—Filing—Fee.
8.28.050   License—Application—Form and contents.
8.28.060   License—Application—Accompanying documents.
8.28.070   Insurance policy—Cash deposit.
8.28.080   Granting license.
8.28.090   Denial of license.
8.28.100   Conditions of approval.
8.28.110   Revocation or suspension of license—Hearing.
8.28.120   Dates and hours of operation.
8.28.130   Number of participants.
8.28.140   Advertising restrictions.
8.28.150   Alcohol or drugs prohibited.
8.28.160   Remedies of county.
8.28.010   Purpose.
   In recent years mass outdoor gatherings, as defined in Section
8.28.020, have attracted large numbers of persons, sometimes exceeding one
hundred thousand. In connection therewith, automobiles have been stolen and
abandoned; cattle and other animals on adjoining property have been slaughtered
without permission of the owners: adjoining property has been destroyed and
trash, garbage and other debris scattered thereon: automobiles have collided
with persons sleeping on the ground overnight: serious crimes have been
committed with impunity because law enforcement personnel have not been
permitted to adequately patrol the gathering; and those services and facilities
necessary for the preservation of health, safety and welfare of those in
attendance have been found to be inadequate, both in quality and quantity.
Accordingly, the regulatory provisions of this chapter are deemed necessary to
insure that outdoor mass gatherings held within the county, but outside the
city of Tucson, are operated under conditions which will promote and protect
the public health, safety and welfare.
(Prior code § 23.32.020(A))
8.28.020   Definitions.
   As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
indicated meanings:
   A.   "Advertising" means any attempt by publication, dissemination,
solicitation or circulation, whether oral or written, to induce, directly or
indirectly, any person to attend an outdoor mass gathering.
   B.   "Automobile parking space" means any permanently maintained space, not
less than one hundred forty-four square feet in area nor less than eight feet
wide at any place, on or contiguous to the site upon which an outdoor mass
gathering is to be held or operated, and so located and arranged as to permit
the parking of a passenger automobile of average size.
   C.   "Board" means the board of supervisors of Pima County, Arizona.
   D.   "Outdoor mass gathering" means any gathering of three thousand people
or more for twelve hours or more at any place other than in a permanent
building or installation.
   E.   "Owner" means the person in whom the legal title to real property is
vested.
   F.   "Permanent building or installation" means any structure to which
members of the general public have been invited or admitted regularly for one
year or more since the structure was completed, regardless of whether the
members of the general public were invited or admitted to the structure for a
consideration.
   G.   "Person" means any natural person or his legal representative,
partnership, domestic or foreign corporation, any company, trust, business
entity, or association, any agent, employee, salesman, partner, officer,
director, member, stockholder, associate or trustee.
   H.   "Site" means the legally described real property upon which an outdoor
mass gathering will be held, conducted or operated.
(Prior code § 23.32.020(B))
8.28.030   License—Required.
   Any person planning to hold, operate or conduct an outdoor mass gathering
within the county, but outside the city of Tucson, shall first procure a
license to do so from the board of supervisors.
(Prior code § 23.32.020(C))
8.28.040   License—Application—Filing—Fee.
   An application for a license to hold, operate or conduct an outdoor mass
gathering shall be filed with the board not less than sixty days prior to the
beginning of the outdoor mass gathering or not more than ten days after the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, whichever is later,
and shall be accompanied by a ten-dollar nonrefundable fee.
(Prior code § 23.32.020(D))
8.28.050   License—Application—Form and contents.
   Every application for a license to hold, operate or conduct an outdoor mass
gathering shall be typewritten or printed, notarized, consist of an original
and five copies, and contain the following information:
   A.   The date or dates and the hours during which the outdoor mass gathering
is to be held, operated or conducted and during which the site will be held
under the control of the applicant;
   B.   An estimate of the minimum and maximum number of customers, spectators,
participants and other people expected to attend the outdoor mass gathering for
each day it is held, operated or conducted, together with detailed information
supporting such estimate:
   C.   The nature and purpose of the outdoor mass gathering and the nature and
kind of entertainment, if any, which is to be a part of or presented during the
outdoor mass gathering;
   D.   The applicant's name (including aliases, if any), age, residence
address, main living or business address and telephone number shall be required
and the name (including aliases, if any). age, residence address, mailing or
business address and telephone number of the president, or vice-president(s),
and secretary of the corporation shall also be required:
   E.   The name (including aliases, if any), age, residence address, mailing
or business address and telephone number of the owner of the site upon which
the outdoor mass gathering is to be held, operated or conducted. If the owner
of the site is a partnership or corporation, the same information required of
such entities in subsection D of this section shall be required in this
subsection;
   F.   The exact location, size and shape of the site upon which the outdoor
mass gathering is to be held, operated or conducted: and
   G.   The exact location, size and shape of the land to be used for
automobile parking spaces if land other than the site is to be used for this
purpose, and the name (including aliases, if any), age. residence address,
mailing or business address and telephone number of the owner of the land to be
used for automobile parking spaces if the owner is a person other than the
person who owns the site. If the owner of the land to be used for automobile
parking spaces is a partnership or corporation, the information required of
such entities in subsection D of this section shall be required in this
subsection.
(Prior code § 23.32.020(E))
8.28.060   License—Application—Accompanying documents.
   At the time of filing an application for a license to hold, operate or
conduct an outdoor mass gathering, the applicant, at the same time, shall also
file:
   A.   Four copies of white background prints of a map drawn to scale,
showing:
      1.   The location of the site relative to the nearest state highway or
interstate highway,
      2.   The location of the automobile parking spaces and of all other areas
to be used for other uses incidental to the outdoor mass gathering,
      3.   All interior access ways,
      4.   The location and detailed plans of all buildings and structures on
the site or to be erected on the site, including any bandstands, stages or
other facilities for performers or speakers,
      5.   The location of any loudspeakers,
      6.   The location of all toilet, medical, drinking and other facilities;
   B.   A document showing that the applicant is the owner of the site or an
agreement in writing, notarized and signed by the owner of the site permitting
such use of the premises and the filing of the application:
   C.   A document showing that the applicant is the owner of the land to be
used for automobile parking spaces if land other than the site is to be used
for this purpose, or an agreement in writing, notarized and signed by the owner
of the land, if the owner is a person other than the person who owns the site,
permitting such use of the premises and the filing of the application;
   D.   When the applicant is a corporation:
      1.   A certified copy of the articles of incorporation,
      2.   A certified copy of the bylaws of the corporation,
      3.   A certified copy of the corporate resolution wherein the person
signing the application has been authorized to do so in the name of and on
behalf of the corporation;
   E.   A consent to the entry, at any time in the course of his duties, of any
peace officer, member or employee of the board, sheriff, county health officer,
and any other county officer in the performance of his duties;
   F.   A written, signed and notarized agreement by and between the applicant
and a person licensed to remove and dispose of trash, rubbish and debris within
the county that, within seventy-two hours after the conclusion of the outdoor
mass gathering, all trash, rubbish and debris will be removed from the site,
from the land used for automobile parking spaces if it is land other than that
used for the site, and from all other areas within one thousand feet of the
exterior boundaries of the site. The full performance of such agreement shall
be secured by a bond from a recognized surety licensed to transact business in
the state or by a cash deposit filed with the board. The security for the
performance of such agreement shall be in favor of the board and shall be equal
in dollars to ten percent of the maximum estimate made by the applicant
pursuant to Section
8.28.050B;
   G.   A notarized agreement signed by the applicant and by the owner of the
site that they will reimburse all owners and occupants of property adjoining
the site and any person attending the outdoor mass gathering for all damages of
any kind to such owners, occupants, or person or to their property caused by
the applicant, the owner of the site, or by any person attending the outdoor
mass gathering, which damage would not have occurred had the outdoor mass
gathering not been held, operated or conducted, and a policy of insurance or an
agreement accompanied by a cash deposit with the board equal in amount to the
maximum limits of liability required of the policy of insurance or a
combination of both equal in amount to the maximum limits of liability required
by the policy of insurance if submitted alone;
   H.   A notarized written statement signed by the director of the county
health department showing:
      1.   That prior to filing the application for a license, the applicant
provided the department with that information required of the applicant by
subsections A, B and F of Section
8.28.050; and
      2.   That prior to filing the application for a license, the department
reviewed and approved the arrangements, plans and agreements made by the
applicant for protecting the health, safety and welfare of the people expected
to attend the outdoor mass gathering each day, including, but not limited to,
arrangements, plans and agreements for providing:
         a.   Both men and women at the site with an adequate number of
sanitary toilet facilities,
         b.   At least one trash can or receptacle with a thirty-two-gallon
capacity for every twenty-five people expected to attend the outdoor mass
gathering each day,
         c.   An ample supply of water suitable for human consumption and
suitable for sanitation purposes,
         d.   Those in attendance with camping facilities and sleeping areas
when those attending will be permitted to remain overnight on the site on any
date or dates during which the outdoor mass gathering is to be held, operated
or conducted,
         e.   Those in attendance with an ample supply of food of a quality fit
for human consumption when the site is located a substantial distance from
markets, restaurants or like eating establishments as determined by the
department;
   I.   A notarized written statement signed by the sheriff of the county
showing:
      1.   That prior to filing the application for a license, the applicant
provided the sheriff with that information required of the applicant by
subsections A, B, F and G of Section
8.28.050; and
      2.   That prior to filing the application for a license, the sheriff
reviewed and approved the arrangements, plans and agreements made by the
applicant for protecting the health, safety and welfare of the people expected
to attend the outdoor mass gathering each day, including, but not limited to,
arrangements, plans and agreements for providing:
         a.   At least one private patrolperson or security guard for every
five hundred people expected to attend the outdoor mass gathering each day,
each of whom shall be a licensed patrolperson or guard, shall be wearing a
uniform at all times the outdoor mass gathering is in operation, and shall be
under the direction and control of the sheriff,
         b.   An adequate number of automobile parking spaces,
         c.   Ingress and egress for both automobiles and people to and from
the site of the outdoor mass gathering and to and from the site of the
automobile parking spaces,
         d.   An adequate number of private persons to direct and control the
movement of automobiles on the site of the outdoor mass gathering and on the
site of the automobile parking spaces,
         e.   An adequate number of private persons to prevent more people from
attending the outdoor mass gathering than the maximum estimated by the
applicant pursuant to Section
8.28.050B,
         f.   Adequate illumination of the site of the outdoor mass gathering,
the site of the automobile parking spaces and camping and sleeping areas when
people are permitted to remain on any of the foregoing sites or areas after
dark;
   J.   A notarized written statement signed by the county engineer showing:
      1.   That prior to filing the application for license, the applicant
provided the engineer with that information required of the applicant by
subsections A, B, C, E and F of Section
8.28.050;
      2.   That prior to filing the application for a license, the engineer
reviewed and approved the arrangements, plans and agreements made by the
applicant for protecting the health, safety and welfare of the people expected
to attend the outdoor mass gathering each day, including, but not limited to,
arrangements, plans and agreements for providing:
         a.   Well-constructed structures or buildings on the site of the
outdoor mass gathering, the site of the automobile parking spaces, and areas
established for camping and sleeping,
         b.   An emergency communications system sufficient to meet the
emergency requirements of the sheriff of the county,
         c.   A safe electrical system for both communications and
illumination.
(Prior code § 23.32.020(F))
8.28.070   Insurance policy—Cash deposit.
   The insurance policy required by Section
8.28.060G shall insure the applicant, the owner of the site and the county, its
agents, officers and employees against all liability incurred by any or all of
them to any person, which liability arises pursuant to the agreement required
by Section
8.28.060G, or arising from the conduct of the applicant. Such policy of
insurance shall provide the following limits of liability: fifty thousand
dollars of liability for property damage, and three hundred thousand dollars of
liability for personal injury. The cash deposit required by Section
8.28.060G shall be for the benefit of the county, its agents, officers and
employees, and all persons to whom the applicant or the owner of the site may
become liable because of the agreement required by Section
8.28.060G or arising from the conduct of the applicant.
(Prior code § 23.32.020(G))
8.28.080   Granting license.
   The board shall, within five working days after receiving the application
for a license and the accompanying documents required in Section
8.28.060, grant a license for an outdoor mass gathering if it finds:
   A.   The outdoor mass gathering will be held at a location which complies
with and meets all the health, zoning, fire and safety requirements and
standards of the laws of the state and ordinances of the county applicable
thereto;
   B.   All information required by this section is in the application and all
documents required by this section have been filed;
   C.   The proposed outdoor mass gathering will not in any way substantially
jeopardize. adversely affect, endanger, or otherwise constitute a menace to the
public health, safety or general welfare, or be materially detrimental to the
property of other persons located in the vicinity of such use;
   D.   The applicant, his employee, agent or any person connected or
associated with the applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder,
associate or manager, has not knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a license or in
any report or record required to be filed with the board, the county health
department, the sheriff. or the county engineer; and
   E.   The applicant has not had a similar type of license previously revoked
for good cause within one year prior to the filing of the application with the
board, or if the applicant has, the applicant also has shown material changes
in circumstances since such revocation.
(Prior code § 23.32.020(H))
8.28.090   Denial of license.
   If, within the five working days allowed for granting the license, the board
finds that the requirements of Section
8.28.080 have not been met, it shall deny the applicant a license for an
outdoor mass gathering and state the reasons therefor. If, within five working
days after the board has mailed its notification to the applicant by registered
mail of its denial of a license for an outdoor mass gathering, the applicant
requests a hearing before the board in writing, the hearing shall be granted.
(Prior code § 23.32.020(I))
8.28.100   Conditions of approval.
   In granting a license, the board may attach such conditions as it finds
necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter and such conditions shall
appear on the license.
(Prior code § 23.32.020(J))
8.28.110   Revocation or suspension of license—Hearing.
   The board may suspend or revoke a license for an outdoor mass gathering if
it finds that one or more of the following conditions exists:
   A.   The licensee, his employee, agent or any other person connected or
associated with the licensee as partner, director, officer, stockholder,
associate or manager in the operation of the outdoor mass gathering:
      1.   Has knowingly allowed or permitted upon the premises any illegal
possession, use, sale or delivery of narcotics or dangerous drugs as defined
and prescribed by A.R.S. Sections 32-1901 et seq, and 36-1001 et seq., as
amended;
      2.   Has knowingly allowed or permitted any acts of sexual misconduct as
defined and prescribed by A.R.S. Sections 13-1402, 13-1405, 13-1406, 13-1410,
13-1411, 13-1412, 13-3201, 13-3501, 13-3502 and 13-3608, all as amended;
      3.   Has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of
material fact in the application for a license, or in any report or record
required to be filed with the board, the county health department, the sheriff
or the county engineer, which did not come to the attention of the board prior
to the time the license for the outdoor mass gathering was granted.
   B.   The arrangements, plans and agreements made by the applicant for
protecting the health, safety and welfare of the people attending the outdoor
mass gathering, as required by subsections H, I and J of Section
8.28.060, have not been fulfilled within forty-eight hours of the starting date
and hour of the outdoor mass gathering. If the board revokes or suspends a
license, it shall notify the licensee, its agent, or any other person connected
or associated with the licensee as partner, director, officer, associate or
manager, as soon as possible by means of a telegram, and if the board receives
a request for a hearing within twelve hours of the time the board's telegram
was sent, a hearing shall be granted within twenty-four hours of the time the
request for a hearing was sent to the board.
(Prior code § 23.32.020(K))
8.28.120   Dates and hours of operation.
   The licensee shall operate the outdoor mass gathering only on those days and
during the hours specified on the license, which shall not be for more than
seven days or the equivalent number of hours.
(Prior code § 23.32.020(L))
8.28.130   Number of participants.
   The licensee shall not admit, and shall prevent the entrance of, to the site
on which the outdoor mass gathering is to be held, operated or conducted, any
person who does not possess a ticket, except a peace officer or county officer
in the performance of his duties. Admission shall be by ticket only. The
licensee shall not sell, give or distribute a greater number of tickets than
the number which the license permits to attend. The licensee shall not admit
any person to the outdoor mass gathering if such admission would result in a
greater number of persons present than the maximum estimate required by Section
8.28.050B.
(Prior code § 23.32.020(M))
8.28.140   Advertising restrictions.
   No advertising shall be permitted on any outdoor mass gathering prior to the
granting of a license permitting such outdoor mass gathering. No advertising of
an outdoor mass gathering shall be permitted which has not been approved by the
board first and the board shall approve such advertising if it states that
admission is by ticket only, if all statements are true and if there is no
statement which might imply any conclusion contrary to fact.
(Prior code § 23.32.020(N))
8.28.150   Alcohol or drugs prohibited.
   A person shall not enter, be or remain on any part of the site on which an
outdoor mass gathering is conducted while in the possession of, consuming,
using, or under the influence of any alcoholic beverage or drugs, except where
the possession of, consumption or use of alcoholic beverages is expressly
authorized by the board pursuant to the laws of the state.
(Prior code § 23.32.020(O))
8.28.160   Remedies of county.
   The county, by and through the board, retains any and all civil remedies,
including the right of civil injunction, for the prevention of any and all
violations of this chapter and the recovery of money damages therefor.
(Prior code § 23.32.020(P))
Chapter 8.32
SWIMMING POOLS AND SPAS
Sections: 
8.32.010   Purpose and scope.
8.32.020   Definitions.
8.32.030   Approval of plans required.
8.32.040   Application for approval—Plan documents required.
8.32.050   Preparation and certification of plans.
8.32.060   Modification of plans.
8.32.070   Notification of completion—Approval to operate.
8.32.080   Water quality standards.
8.32.090   Instruction signs.
8.32.100   Attire, towels and miscellaneous articles.
8.32.110   Persons excluded from pool.
8.32.120   Operation standard.
8.32.130   First aid equipment required.
8.32.140   Materials and construction standards.
8.32.150   Fill and draw pools prohibited.
8.32.160   Water recirculation and filtering system.
8.32.170   Disinfection.
8.32.180   Bathhouse and dressing facilities.
8.32.190   Public swimming pools.
8.32.200   Semipublic swimming pools.
8.32.210   Wading pools.
8.32.220   Hydrotherapy pools, hot tubs and spa pools.
8.32.230   Special-use pools.
8.32.240   Swimming pool service technicians and operators.
8.32.250   Natural and semiartificial bathing places.
8.32.260   Inspection.
8.32.270   Closing of bathing places—Reasons.
8.32.280   Violation—Penalty.
8.32.290   Compliance required.
8.32.010   Purpose and scope.
   A.   These regulations are promulgated pursuant to A.R.S. Section 36-136,
which authorizes the director of the county health department to:
      1.   Preserve and secure the health, comfort and welfare of the general
public;
      2.   Prevent the spread of contagious and communicable disease;
      3.   Prevent the existence of unclean, filthy and unsanitary conditions
and nuisances.
   B.   These regulations prescribe minimum standards for design of pools and
sanitary conditions which shall be maintained at any public or semi-public
swimming pool or bathing place. These regulations also provide for inspection
of such premises and for closing any premises or facility which does not comply
with the minimum standards.
   C.   It is the intent of the board of supervisors to adopt this chapter
pursuant to A.R.S. Sections 11-251, 36-136 and 36-184, as amended.
(Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.010(A))
8.32.020   Definitions.
   As used in this chapter:
   A.   "Bathing place" means and includes all bodies of water used by persons
for swimming, wading, hydrotherapy, recreation, bathing or special use,
together with the shores, bathhouses, sanitary facilities, bathing attire,
equipment, and all other appurtenances to such bodies of water.
   B.   "Construct" means and includes building or installing a new bathing
place or enlarging or altering existing facilities.
   C.   "Cross-connection" means any physical connection between two piping
systems, one of which contains potable water and the other sewage or water of
unknown or questionable quality, through which water may flow from either
system to the other.
   D.   "Department" means the county health department.
   E.   "Fill and draw pool" means a swimming pool where the principal means of
cleaning is the complete removal of the used water and the replacement thereof
with potable water.
   F.   "Flow-through pool" means a swimming pool where potable water
constantly enters the pool and an equal quantity of used water constantly flows
out of the pool.
   G.   "Freeboard" means that section of the pool wall measured vertically
between the water surface and the walkway or deck surface.
   H.   "Hydrotherapy pool" means any pool providing a vapor environment,
roiling water, injected air, or similar effect.
   I.   "Natural bathing place" means unmodified natural outdoor lakes, ponds,
rivers, etc.
   J.   "Operate" means to conduct, maintain, or otherwise provide facilities
and appurtenances at bathing places.
   K.   "Overflow system" means and includes gutters and other rim-type
overflows, surface skimmers and collection systems of various designs and
manufacture.
   L.   "Private pool" means a pool operated by an individual for his own or
his family's use, or for guests of his household, or by an owner to serve a
housing group consisting of not more than three (3) living units.
   M.   "Public pool" means a swimming pool, admission to which may be gained
by the general public with or without payment of a fee.
   N.   "Recirculating pool" means a swimming pool where a portion of pool
water is constantly being removed, filtered and disinfected, then returned to
the pool.
   O.   "Return line" means that portion of the recirculating system piping
which carries clean water from the filter back to the swimming pool.
   P.   "Secchi disk" means a 200 mm. circular plate which has opposite
quarters painted gloss white and black.
   Q.   "Semiartificial bathing place" means outdoor bathing places which are
partly artificial and partly natural.
   R.   "Semipublic pool" means a swimming pool on the premises of, or part of,
but not limited to, a hotel, motel, mobile home park, apartment house, country
club, camp, health club, condominium, homeowners' association, or similar
establishment where the primary business of the establishment is not the
operation of the swimming facilities and where admission to the use of the pool
is included in the fee, or consideration paid or given for the primary use of
the premises.
   S.   "Special-use pool" means a pool designed and used for special purposes,
such as diving, aquatic training, swimming instruction, or similar use as
recognized by the department.
   T.   "Spray pond" means an artificially constructed special-use pool into
which water is sprayed but not allowed to accumulate.
   U.   "Swimming pool" and/or "pool" means an artificial basin, chamber or
tank, constructed and used, or intended to be used, for swimming, diving or
bathing.
   V.   "Wading pool" means a shallow pool intended primarily for use by
children.
   W.   "Water level" shall be established in one of the following ways:
      1.   Deemed to fall in the midpoint of the operating range of the
skimmers;
      2.   On pools with overflow systems, the level shall be deemed to be that
established by the height of the overflow rim.
(Ord. 1990-81 § 1, 1990: Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.010(B))
8.32.030   Approval of plans required.
   No bathing place shall be constructed, nor shall any bathing place now or
hereafter existing be materially altered or enlarged, before complete plans and
specifications, together with such further information as the department may
require, shall have been submitted to and received the written approval of the
department.
(Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.010(C))
8.32.040   Application for approval—Plan documents required.
   A.   An application for approval of any proposed bathing place shall be made
to the department by the owner on forms furnished by the department Such
application for approval shall accompany the plans and specifications at the
time of submission to the department for review.
   B.   The operator/owner of a previously approved swimming pool, as defined
in this chapter, wishing to change the nature of his classification from public
to semipublic or semipublic to public, must demonstrate, to the satisfaction of
the department, that the facility meets all requirements of these regulations
as related to the desired classification. If any additional construction or
modification of the facility shall be required, plans and specifications of the
proposed facility shall be submitted for approval as required in Section
8.32.030.
   C.   Plans and specifications shall be submitted to the department at least
thirty days prior to the date upon which action is desired. Plan documents
submitted for approval shall include a general plot plan, plans and
specifications showing the pool shape, dimensions, water treatment and pumping
facilities, piping arrangements and sizes, source of water supply, method of
disposal of wastes, together with all pertinent data upon which the design is
based, including capacities of the various units, safety equipment, and other
information necessary to permit a clear and full understanding of the proposed
project. Where required, detailed plans of bathhouses, dressing rooms, toilets,
recreational, and other pool appurtenances shall be included.
(Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.010(D))
8.32.050   Preparation and certification of plans.
   All plans and specifications submitted to the department for approval must
have been prepared by, or under the supervision of, a currently registered
professional engineer or architect, or a commercial swimming pool contractor,
who is licensed to practice in the state of Arizona, who shall certify that the
plans comply with these regulations and criteria contained in the swimming pool
design policy. All plans and specifications shall be submitted on drafting
paper, eighteen inches by twenty-four inches minimum size.
(Ord. 1990-81 § 2, 1990: Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.010(E))
8.32.060   Modification of plans.
   All work shall conform to approved plans and specifications. Should it be
necessary or desirable to make any changes in the approved plans and
specifications of the proposed work, revised plans and specifications, together
with a written statement of the reasons for such change, shall be submitted to
the department for review. Approval must be obtained in writing before the work
affected by the change is undertaken.
(Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.010(F))
8.32.070   Notification of completion—Approval to operate.
   A.   The design, operation and maintenance of bathing places shall be in
conformance with this chapter and criteria contained in the county department
of health services swimming pool design policy.
   B.   Before initial approval shall be given for the operation of a bathing
place, the swimming pool contractor, or a currently registered engineer or
architect, shall certify that the complete bathing place is constructed in
accordance with the approved plans and specifications.
   C.   Operation of newly constructed bathing places shall not commence before
a final inspection has been made and approval to operate has been given by the
department.
   D.   No public or semipublic bathing place shall be maintained or operated
in the county without a permit in force issued by the department. The permit
shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises where it may be
readily observed by the public.
(Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.010(G))
8.32.080   Water quality standards.
   A.   Generally. Swimming pool water shall be treated and maintained so that,
whenever the swimming pool is open for use, the bacterial, chemical and
physical qualities of the water will meet the standards set forth in this
section.
   B.   Bacterial Standards. Not more than fifteen percent of the water samples
collected for a pool shall:
      1.   Contain more than two hundred bacteria per milliliter, as determined
by the standard (358 C) Agar Plate Count; or
      2.   Show a confirmed positive test for coliform organisms in any of 5-10
milliliter portions of a sample, or more than one coliform organism per fifty
milliliters when the membrane filter test is used. All samples shall be
collected dechlorinated, or similarly neutralized when another disinfectant is
used, and examined in accordance with the procedures outlined in the latest
edition of Standard Method for the Examination of Water and Wastewater (APHA).
The department may collect, or require the pool owner to collect and submit,
water samples for bacteriological examination on a routine basis while the pool
is in active use.
   C.   Chemical Standards. All pools shall be continuously disinfected by an
approved means which will maintain an adequate, readily measurable residual or
disinfectant in the water. Whenever chlorine, or chlorine compound, is employed
for pool disinfection, the amount of free chlorine residual in the water shall
not be less than 1.0 P.P.M. or more than 5.0 P.P.M. at a pH of 7.0 to 8.0.
Whenever chlorinated isocyanurate or isocyanuric acid are applied to the water
for stabilization, the free chlorine residual shall not be less than 1.0 P.P.M.
or more than 5.0 P.P.M. with a isocyanurate level of not more than 100 P.P.M.
The total alkalinity must be between 60 and 180 P.P.M. The procedure for
determination of free chlorine residual shall be by the DPD method or any of
the other procedures outlined in the latest edition of Standard Methods for
Examination of Water or Wastewater (APHA), or by other methods approved by the
department.
   D.   Physical Standards. The surface of the pool water shall be kept free of
scum and floating debris. The bottom and sides shall be maintained free of
sediment, dirt, slime and algae. Water shall be maintained free of turbidity
and shall be sufficiently clear so that the main drain outlet is clearly
visible from the side of the pool, or that a Secchi disk 200 mm. in diameter
when placed at the bottom of the pool at the deepest point is clearly visible
from all sides of the pool.
   E.   Tests. All pools shall be equipped with approved test equipment to
determine pH and disinfectant residual. The pool operator shall perform the
tests and record the results in the daily operating records. Such records shall
be made available to state and county health department officials upon request.
Public pools shall be tested every hour. Semi-public pools shall be tested
twice a day.
(Ord. 1990-81 § 3, 1990: Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.010(H))
8.32.090   Instruction signs.
   All persons shall be instructed before entering the pool, by means of
suitable, clearly lettered signs properly located to observe all safety
regulations set out in appendices C-1 and C-2 of the ordinance codified in this
section, on file and available for public inspection with the county health
department.
(Ord. 1990-81 § 4, 1990: Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.010(I))
8.32.100   Attire, towels and miscellaneous articles.
   A.   Bathing attire, towels, linens, and similar articles shall be clean,
dry and sanitary when provided to patrons.
   B.   The provision of towels, drinking cups, combs, hair brushes, soap, and
other similar items for use in common by the public is prohibited.
(Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.010(J))
8.32.110   Persons excluded from pool.
   Persons with sore or inflamed eyes, colds, nasal or ear discharges, boils or
other acute or obvious skin or body infections, or cuts shall be excluded from
the pool. No person in or at a swimming pool shall commit, or be permitted to
commit, any act prejudicial to the life or health of any other person using the
pool. Animals shall be excluded from the pool.
(Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.010(K))
8.32.120   Operation standard.
   All bathing place facilities shall at all times be operated and maintained
in a clean and sanitary condition.
(Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.010(L))
8.32.130   First aid equipment required.
   An O.S.H.A. sixteen-unit or equivalent first aid kit shall be provided,
maintained and readily available for emergency use. In public pools, a standard
stretcher, or spine board, and two blankets shall be provided.
(Ord. 1990-81 § 5, 1990: Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.010(M))
8.32.140   Materials and construction standards.
   Materials and construction of a swimming pool shall be sound, durable and,
where required, waterproof. The pool shall be rigid, smooth, free from cracks,
easily cleanable and finished in either white or a light color. Pool lining,
specifically plastic and similar linings, and finishes not totally bonded to
the pool sides and bottom are prohibited.
(Ord. 1990-81 § 6, 1990: Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.010(N))
8.32.150   Fill and draw pools prohibited.
   The construction and operation of fill and draw pools is prohibited.
(Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.010(O))
8.32.160   Water recirculation and filtering system.
   A.   Generally. The water recirculation system, consisting primarily of
piping, pumps, filters, water conditioning and disinfecting equipment, together
with other standard accessory equipment, shall be adequate to clarity and
disinfect the entire contents of the pool in eight hours or less. Except that
indoor exercise pools shall be designed to provide a six-hour turnover. The
recirculation system shall operate continuously when the pool is open for use.
   B.   Piping. Piping systems shall be:
      1.   Designed to carry the required quantity of water at a velocity of
not more than ten feet per second when located on the discharge side of a pump
and not more than six feet per second when located on the suction side of a
pump, unless accompanied by an approved hydraulic design;
      2.   Of sufficient strength to withstand operating pressure;
      3.   Made of nontoxic material;
      4.   Reasonably resistant to corrosion under conditions of operation;
      5.   Installed so that pipes and fittings which pass through the pool
structure shall not project in a manner which is hazardous to users of the
facility;
      6.   Meet or exceed National Sanitation Foundation standards.
   C.   Identification. Piping systems shall be identified by name tags or
appropriate colors painted or located at conspicuous points.
   D.   Hair Strainer. The recirculation system shall include a removable
strainer to prevent hair, lint, etc., from reaching the pump and filters.
Strainers shall be of corrosion-resistant material, with openings having a
total area equal to four times the area of the recirculation pump suction pipe.
   E.   Pool Cleaning System. A pool vacuum cleaning system shall be provided.
In integral systems, connection shall be provided in sufficient number and
located in the pool walls and said connection is recommended to be at least ten
inches below the water line. In addition, automatic or self-cleaning systems
may be installed if they are approved by the department. Vacuum systems are to
be installed with positive-type shutoff valves in the equipment area. Vacuum
system shall be operational only when the vacuum lines are attached during the
cleaning process. Vacuum inlets are to be installed with International
Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials-approved safety covers.
   F.   Inlets. Adjustable pool wall inlets shall be provided on all pools.
Inlets shall be of sufficient number, properly designed, sized and installed to
produce uniform circulation throughout the pool. There shall be a minimum of
six inlets. At least one inlet shall be located within five feet of each corner
and in each step alcove. Inlets shall be on a closed loop piping system. Where
the width of the pool exceeds thirty feet, bottom returns will also be
required. Bottom returns shall be flush with the pool bottom or of such design
as to prevent injury to bathers. Returns will be considered to have an area of
influence described by a radius of fifteen feet.
   G.   Drains. Pools shall be equipped with at least one main drain located in
the deepest portion. Drains shall be covered by grating, which are not readily
removable by bathers and which have safe openings at least four times the area
of the drain pipe. Drains shall be spaced at intervals of not greater than one
each twenty feet of pool width in the deepest portion. All drains shall have
appropriate plumbing features so as to prevent the possibility of entrapping
suction.
   H.   Water Treatment Chemical feeders, mixing tank, and other equipment
maybe required where the continuous addition of certain chemicals is deemed by
the department to be necessary for the treatment and filtration process.
   I.   Flow Indicator. An accurate rate-of-flow indicator shall be installed
and located so that the rate of recirculation will be indicated. Indicators
shall be accurate to five percent under all conditions of flow. The indicator
shall have a range of at least one hundred fifty percent of normal flow rate.
   J.   Sight Glass. Pressure filter systems shall be equipped with a sight
glass installed on the waste discharge pipe.
   K.   Air Relief Valves. Each pressure filter shall be equipped with an air
relief piping system connected at an accessible point near the crown. Automatic
air relief systems may be used in lieu of manual systems.
   L.   Access to Equipment. Filters shall be designed, located and constructed
to permit removal of filter manhole covers or heads for inspection purposes and
replacement or repair of the filter elements or media. No filter or filtration
system shall be installed beneath the surface of the ground or within any
enclosure without adequate provision of access for inspection and maintenance.
   M.   Filtration Rate—Sand. The rate of filtration in high-rate filters shall
not exceed an equivalent of twenty-five gallons per minute per square foot.
Sufficient surface area of filter media shall be provided to achieve this rate.
   N.   Filtration Rate—Diatomaceous Earth. The rate of filtration of
diatomaceous earth filters shall not exceed two gallons per minute per square
foot of effective surface area.
   O.   Filtration Rate—Cartridge Type. The rate of filtration of cartridge
filters shall not exceed 0.375 gallons per minute per square foot of effective
surface area.
   P.   Acceptable Filters. Only those filter types which meet the standards
set forth by the National Sanitation Foundation will be acceptable.
   Q.   Gauges. Pressure gauges shall be installed on the inlet and outlet
manifold of filters.
   R.   Cross-connection Control. Cross-connections between potable water and
the circulation system or water reservoir of any pool are prohibited. Potable
water for make-up water purposes may only be introduced into the reservoir
across an air gap of at least twice the diameter of the pipe, not less than six
inches above the overflow level, three inches above the overflow rim of a
float-controlled make-up water feed tank, or by a backflow prevention device
meeting American Water Works Association standards.
(Ord. 1990-81 § 7, 1990: Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.010(P))
8.32.170   Disinfection.
   A.   Disinfecting Agents. Effective water disinfection shall be provided and
maintained in all pools. This shall be accomplished by chlorination or other
approved methods which will effectively maintain in the pool water an adequate,
readily measurable residual amount of the disinfectant introduced into the
water. The use of chlorinated cyanurate for disinfection and stabilization is
permitted but chlorine-ammonia disinfection is not permitted. The addition of
undissolved or gaseous disinfectant directly into the pool is prohibited.
   B.   Gaseous Disinfectants. When gaseous chlorine is used, the following
additional features shall be provided: in addition to the requirements of
subsection A of this section, the use of gaseous chlorine is subject to all of
the requirements set forth in Appendix D of the ordinance codified in this
section, on file and available for public inspection with the county health
department, and the following:
      1.   The chlorine and chlorinating equipment shall be located in a
separate well-ventilated enclosure on or above the ground. The door of the
chlorine enclosure shall open to the outside and shall not open directly toward
the pool. If chlorination equipment is placed in a room, an exhaust fan or
gravity ventilation system shall be provided. Mechanical exhausters shall take
suction six inches or less above the floor and discharge to a safe outside
location. Gravity ventilation shall be constructed so as to discharge to the
outside from floor level. Fresh air intakes shall be located no closer than
three feet above the ventilation discharge. In all cases, the chlorine room
exhausts shall be directed away from the pool to an area which is normally
unoccupied. Chlorine room fans must run continuously and be capable of
completely changing the air in the room ten times per hour.
      2.   Chlorine cylinders shall be securely anchored to prevent their
falling. Keys shall be maintained on the chlorine cylinder so the supply can be
shut off quickly in the case of an emergency.
      3.   A sign must be placed on the outside of the door which reads
"DANGER, CHLORINE ROOM."
      4.   The device shall be a solution-feed type, capable of delivering
chlorine at its maximum rate without releasing chlorine gas to the atmosphere.
      5.   The chlorinators shall be designed to prevent the backflow of water
into the chlorine solution container.
   C.   Liquid Disinfectants. Hypochlorite solutions shall be fed by an
acceptable type of hypochlorinator.
   D.   Dry Disinfections. Granular, tablet, stick and other forms of dry
disinfectant shall be fed by an adjustable automatic feeding device.
(Ord. 1990-81 § 8, 1990: Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.010(Q))
8.32.180   Bathhouse and dressing facilities.
   For all swimming pools:
   A.   The general layout of bathhouses shall be such that bathers leaving the
dressing room pass the toilets and showers, in sequence, before entering the
pool.
   B.   Separate dressing rooms shall be provided for each sex and equipped
with baskets or other checking facilities adequate for the maximum number of
people to be accommodated.
   C.   All entrances to and exits from the dressing rooms shall be effectively
screened to interrupt the line of sight of persons outside the dressing rooms.
   D.   Walls and partitions of dressing rooms, locker rooms, toilets and
showers shall be light-colored, smooth, nonabsorbent and easily cleanable.
Concrete or pumice blocks used for interior wall construction in these
locations shall be finished and sealed to provide an easily cleanable surface.
   E.   Floors shall be of nonslip construction, free of open cracks and sloped
to adequate drains so that the surface will be free of standing water and
puddles.
   F.   All furniture shall be of simple character and easily cleanable. Locker
compartments, partitions, furniture, and other appurtenances to dressing rooms
shall be so installed or raised above the floor to permit thorough cleaning and
flushing down of the dressing rooms and bathhouse interior.
   G.   Hose bibbs shall be provided for flushing down the dressing rooms and
bathhouse interior.
   H.   Dressing rooms, toilets and showers shall be provided with adequate
lighting and ventilation.
   I.   Toilet facilities shall be provided for each sex in accordance with the
following table:
      MEN 
      One toilet for each one hundred bathers or fraction thereof.
      One urinal for each one hundred bathers or fraction thereof.
      WOMEN 
      One toilet for each fifty bathers or fraction thereof, but in no case
shall less than two toilets be provided.
   J.   Shower and handwashing facilities with hot and cold or tempered water
shall be provided for each sex in accordance with the following table. Tempered
water only shall be provided at all shower heads. The water heater and
thermostatic mixing valve shall be inaccessible to bathers and shall be capable
of providing two gpm of ninety-degrees-Fahrenheit water to each head.
      MEN OR WOMEN 
      One shower for each fifty bathers or fraction thereof.
      One lavatory with mirror for each one hundred bathers or fraction
thereof.
   K.   A supply of toilet paper shall be provided at all times.
(Ord. 1990-81 § 9, 1990: Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.010(R))
8.32.190   Public swimming pools.
   In addition to complying with the regulations in this chapter, public
swimming pools shall comply with the following regulations:
   A.   Design Standards and Specifications.
      1.   Public pools shall be constructed of concrete, or other material
impervious to water which is equivalent in strength and durability, with a
smooth surface and designed and built to withstand anticipated stresses. A
white or light-colored waterproof interior finish, which will withstand
repeated brushing, scrubbing and cleaning, shall be used. Pool linings not
totally bonded to the pool sides and bottom, such as plastic films and similar
linings and finishes, are prohibited.
      2.   No projections from the pool wall and floor surfaces shall be
allowed except for ladders, seats and steps. Seats and steps maybe constructed
only in the shallow end of the pool. The seat, bench and step edges shall be
outlined with a sharply contrasting colored tile or other suitable material
which is clearly visible from the edge of the pool adjacent to the steps.
      3.   Water depth shall be conspicuously and permanently marked at or
above the water surface on the vertical swimming pool wall, and on the top of
coping or edge of the deck or walk next to the swimming pool. Markings are
required at one-foot depth intervals to a depth of five feet, and at the
deepest point. Thereafter, markings shall be located in accordance with the
design of the pool for maximum protection of bathers. Such markings shall be
spaced at no more than twenty-five-foot intervals and shall be arranged to be
uniformly located on both sides of the pool, as well as both ends. In the case
of irregular shaped pools, such markings shall designate at all major
deviations in shape as well as conforming to the foregoing where possible.
Depth markers shall be in numerals of four-inch minimum height and of a uniform
color on a background of contrasting uniform color. Markings on the deck shall
be within eighteen inches of the water edge and positioned to be read while
standing on the deck facing the water. Deck markings shall be slip-resistant.
In pools utilized for competitive swimming and training, approach warning
markings must be installed under the water level on opposite walls at the end
of each swimming lane in the pool. Warning markings must be of uniform color
and size on a background of contrasting uniform color. In addition, they must
be clearly visible in or out of the water at all times from a distance of not
less than ten feet.
      4.   Floor Slope. No change of slope shall occur in depths less than five
feet, and the slope shall not exceed one foot in ten feet.
   B.   Overflow Collection System. An effective overflow collection system
consisting of automatic surface skimmers or other satisfactory overflow gutters
shall be installed in all public pools.
      1.   The overflow system shall be designed and constructed so that the
level of the pool is maintained at the midpoint operating range of the
skimmers.
      2.   Overflow gutters, where used, shall be installed continuously around
pools with the lip of the gutter level throughout its perimeter. They shall be
provided with sufficient opening at the top and width at the bottom to permit
easy cleaning. The gutter bottom shall be pitched one-quarter-inch per foot to
drainage outlets located not more than ten feet apart. The main drain shall be
sized to circulate one hundred percent of the capacity of the circulating
system and be properly covered by a drain gate. The surge tank-hall be equipped
with float controls regulating the main drain, fill line and overflow.
      3.   Skimming devices, where used, shall be recessed into the pool wall
and shall be installed to achieve effective skimming action throughout the
pool. Skimmers shall be provided on a basis of at least one skimmer for each
five hundred square feet of surface area. The overflow slot shall be set level
and shall not be less than eight inches in width at the narrowest section. The
rate of flow through the skimmer shall be a minimum of seventy-five percent of
the recirculation system capacity. Skimmers shall be designed to carry at least
thirty gallons per minute per lineal foot of weir throat. A minimum of two
skimmers are required in swimming pools. They must be on a closed-loop piping
system. Main drain piping shall be designed to carry a minimum of fifty percent
of the design flow.
   C.   Ladders and Steps. At least one ladder shall be provided in the deep
section of swimming pools. Where the deep section is greater than twenty feet
in width, two ladders located on opposite sides of the deep section are
required. There shall be at least one ladder or stair for each seventy-five
feet of perimeter. Preformed step holes and suitable handrails may be
substituted for ladders. At least one set of steps shall be provided in the
shallow end of each swimming pool. Steps must be permanently marked so as to be
clearly visible from above or below the pool surface and shall not project into
the pool in a manner which will create a hazard. Handrails shall be provided at
one side or in the center of all stairways.
   D.   Lighting. The pool and deck areas shall be well-lighted by natural or
artificial means when in use. Electric wires shall not extend across a pool.
Underwater pool lighting shall be designed, installed, grounded and maintained
so as to not be dangerous to bathers and to provide adequate underwater
Illumination. Lighting shall be designed and installed in accordance with the
provisions of the edition of the National Electrical Code referred to in
subsection D4 of Section 8.04.150.
   E.   Hose Bibbs. Hose bibbs shall be provided along the perimeter of the
deck so that all parts of the deck may be reached. Hose bibbs shall be
protected against back siphonage.
   F.   Diving Facilities. Diving facilities shall be rigidly constructed and
properly anchored with sufficient bracing to insure stability. Handrails shall
be provided at all steps and ladders leading to diving boards one meter or more
above the water. Diving facilities shall be finished with a durable nonslip
material maintained free of tears, splinters or cracks. Dimensions for diving
facilities shall conform to those in Appendix A of the ordinance codified in
this chapter, on file and available for public inspection with the county
health department.
   G.   Lifeguards.
      1.   A minimum of two guards shall be required to open and operate a
pool, an additional lifeguard is required for each additional, separate pool
such as a diving or wading pool at each facility. In addition to said minimum
number of lifeguards, there shall be one extra lifeguard for every twenty-five
swimmers or portion thereof in excess of fifty swimmers at each facility.
   Example: four lifeguards for ninety swimmers at a facility with one pool.
There shall be staffing of lifeguards according to the distribution of swimmers
in the pool so as to provide all areas of the pool with adequate lifeguard
coverage.
      2.   Lifeguards shall be in constant attendance during swimming hours and
no swimmers shall be permitted in a pool area unless lifeguards are present.
      3.   Lifeguards shall:
         a.   Be expert swimmers and be competent in current lifesaving
techniques;
         b.   Be trained in administration of C.P.R., and other first aid
measures;
         c.   Have satisfactorily completed a course in lifeguard training, as
offered by the American Red Cross. The valid and current certificate of
completion of the course of instruction shall be at the swimming pool when the
swimming pool is open for use;
         d.   Be suitably dressed to enter the water and act in an emergency;
         e.   Not engage in activities which would distract his/her attention
from proper supervision of persons using the swimming pool or prevent immediate
attention to a person in distress in the water;
         f.   Have the authority and responsibility to enforce rules pertaining
to safety and sanitation.
   H.   Lifeguard Chairs. Each public pool shall have at least one elevated
lifeguard chair for each two thousand square feet of pool surface area or one
hundred fifty bathers. The chair must be located close to the deeper portion of
the pool and provide a clear, unobstructed view of the pool bottom.
   I.   Safety Equipment. Safety equipment, consisting of at least one ring
buoy, with a length of one-quarter-inch rope attached to reach at least across
the pool and one rescue tube for each lifeguard chair and one shepherd's crook
mounted on a rigid sixteen-foot pole, shall be provided at each public pool.
Safety equipment shall be located and maintained ready for immediate use at all
times.
   J.   Drinking Water Supply. Drinking water from an approved source and
dispensed through one or more approved sanitary drinking fountains shall be
located on the deck of public pools.
   K.   Fencing.
      1.   All public pools and walkways adjacent to such pool shall be
enclosed by a durable fence or wall at least six feet high.
      2.   The only access to the pool by bathers shall be through the
bathhouse or dressing room facilities.
      3.   The mechanical filtering, disinfection and recirculating equipment
must be protected from tampering by a suitable enclosure or fence at least six
feet high.
   L.   Lifeline. A lifeline shall be installed across each public swimming
pool at the point where the floor slope begins to exceed one foot in ten feet
whenever the pool is open for use by the general public. The lifeline shall be
three-fourths-inch minimum diameter and supported by floats.
   M.   Wastewater Disposal. All sewage from plumbing fixtures, including
urinals, toilets, lavatories, showers, drinking fountains, floor drains, and
other sanitary facilities shall be disposed of in a sanitary manner. The
backwash from filters and wasted pool water must be disposed of in a manner
consistent with all codes but in no event shall it cause a nuisance. There
shall be no direct physical connections between the sewer system and any drain
from the pool or recirculation system.
   N.   Miscellaneous. Walkways shall be provided adjacent to the pool and
shall:
      1.   Be at least ten feet wide, except that where diving boards and
platforms are installed, the walkway shall extend at least five feet to each
side and behind the board or platform but not less than fifteen feet from the
pool wall;
      2.   Slope away from the pool with a pitch of at least one-quarter-inch
per foot to properly located deck drains or other approved points of disposal;
      3.   Be constructed of concrete or other material, as approved by the
department, with a nonslip finish, free of sharp or jagged edges or surfaces;
      4.   Be designed to conform to the dimensions shown in Appendix A of the
ordinance codified in this chapter, on file and available for public inspection
with the county health department.
   O.   Freeboard may not exceed eight inches.
   P.   Concessions. No drinks, candy, tobacco, popcorn, gum, or food of any
kind shall be permitted adjacent to the pool or within the pool enclosure.
(Ord. 1990-81 § 10, 1990: Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.020)
8.32.200   Semipublic swimming pools.
   In addition to complying with the regulations in Sections 832.010 through
8.32.180 and subsections A through F of Section
8.32.190, semipublic swimming pools shall comply with the following
regulations:
   A.   Safety Equipment Safety equipment consisting of at least one ring buoy
with a length of one-quarter-inch rope attached to reach across the pool and
one shepherd's crook mounted on a rigid sixteen-foot pole shall be located and
maintained ready for immediate use at each pool.
   B.   Fencing.
      1.   All swimming pools shall be protected by a fence, wall, or other
approved barrier from all parts of the premises not directly related to the
swimming pool. Fences, walls or artificial barriers shall be:
         a.   Of five-foot minimum height;
         b.   Equipped with a self-closing and positive self-latching closure
mechanism at a minimum height of four and one-half feet.
      2.   The mechanical filtering, disinfection and recirculating equipment
must be protected from tampering by a suitable enclosure or fence, at least
five feet high.
   C.   Walkways.
      1.   Walkways shall be provided immediately adjacent to semipublic pools
and shall be at least four feet wide, except that where diving boards and
platforms are installed, the walkway shall extend at least four feet to each
side and behind the board or platform.
      2.   Walkways shall slope away from the pool with a pitch of at least
one-quarter-inch per foot to properly located deck drains or other approved
points of disposal.
      3.   Walkways shall be constructed of concrete or other material as
approved by the department, with a nonslip finish, free of sharp or jagged
edges or surfaces.
      4.   Design of walkways shall conform to the dimensions shown in Appendix
A of the ordinance codified in this chapter, on file and available for public
inspection with the county health department.
   D.   Floor Slope. In water less than five feet in depth, the slope shall not
exceed one foot in ten feet.
   E.   Bathhouses and Dressing Room Facilities. Omission of part or all of the
poolside shower and toilet facilities may be approved for a pool at a hotel,
motel, apartment complex, condominium, mobile home park or the like when other
facilities are available near the pool.
   F.   Depth. The depth in the shallow portion of the pool shall have a
minimum depth of water in the shallow end of the main swimming area of between
three feet and three feet six inches with three feet six inches recommended for
racing lanes. Exceptions may be made in a recessed area of the main swimming
pool, outside of the competitive swimming course, when the pool is of irregular
shape. Pools intended for competitive diving and swimming shall be designed and
constructed so as to provide the water depths specified by the appropriate
activity (FINA, AAU, NCAA, N.F., etc.).
(Ord. 1990-81 § 11, 1990: Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.030)
8.32.210   Wading pools.
   In addition to complying with the regulations in Sections
8.32.010 through
8.32.200, wading pools shall comply with the following regulations:
   A.   Separation—Public. In public bathing places, wading pools shall be
separated from swimming pools by a minimum four-foot-high fence or partition
with a self-closing, self-latching gate to prevent the direct entrance of
waders into the swimming pool area.
   B.   Separation—Semipublic. Wading pools shall be separated from semipublic
swimming pools by a minimum four-foot-high fence or partition with a self-
closing, self-latching gate to prevent the direct entrance of waders into the
swimming pool areas.
   C.   Depth. Wading pools shall have a maximum water depth of twenty inches,
the slope of the bottom shall not exceed one foot in twelve feet, and a nonslip
surface shall be provided.
   D.   Circulation. Wading pools shall have a minimum turnover cycle of two
hours. All wading pools must have separate equipment for water recirculation
and disinfection and there shall be no cross-connection between a wading pool
and any other pool. A main drain waste outlet shall be provided at the deepest
point in a wading pool. Skimmers shall be provided on the basis of at least one
skimmer for each two hundred square feet of wading pool surface area. Skimmer
flow rates shall be the same as required for swimming pools. Where only one
skimmer is provided, the main drain shall be connected through the skimmer.
Inlets shall be provided on a basis of at least one for each fifteen feet of
periphery and they shall be on a closed loop piping system. Gaseous chlorine
shall not be used for disinfection of wading pool water.
   E.   Drinking Fountains. A sanitary drinking fountain at a height convenient
to small children shall be provided at one side or end of the area.
Alternately, a fountain with a raised step to enable small children to drink
without assistance may be provided.
   F.   Drains. All drains and outlets of wading pools must have plumbing
provisions so as to relieve any possibility of entrapping suction. The total
velocity through grate openings shall not exceed two feet per second.
(Ord. 1990-81 § 12, 1990: Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.040)
8.32.220   Hydrotherapy pools, hot tubs and spa pools.
   In addition to complying with the applicable regulations in Sections
8.32.010 through
8.32.200, hydrotherapy swimming pools shall comply with the following
regulations:
   A.   Depth. Hydrotherapy pools shall have a maximum depth of forty-two
inches. The bottom shall have a maximum slope of one foot in ten feet and be
finished with a nonslip surface. A set of entrance steps and handrails shall be
installed. The step riser height shall not be less than seven inches nor
greater than twelve inches. Where the bottom tread serves as a bench or seat,
the bottom riser may be a maximum of fourteen inches above the spa floor. All
steps, benches or other projections from the walls shall be outlined on the top
surface edges by a continuous line of contrasting colored tile or other
suitable material that is clearly visible from the edge of the pool.
   B.   Circulation. Hydrotherapy pools shall have a minimum turnover cycle of
thirty minutes. A separate water recirculation and disinfection system shall be
installed for hydrotherapy pools. Therapy heads or other devices which create
roiling water or other similar effects may not be connected to the
recirculation system but must be operated through a separate system. A waste
outlet main drain shall be provided. Skimmers shall be provided at the rate of
one skimmer for each two hundred square feet of pool surface. Skimmer flow
rates shall be the same as required for swimming pools. Where only one skimmer
is provided, the main drain shall be connected through the skimmer. Inlets
shall be provided on a basis of at least one for each fifteen feet of pool
periphery and shall be on a closed-loop piping system.
   C.   Lighting. All hydrotherapy pools, hot tubs and spa pools shall be
constructed with underwater pool lighting to provide adequate underwater pool
illumination.
   D.   Temperature. The maximum temperature of a hydrotherapy pool, hot tub or
spa pool shall not exceed one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit (forty (40)
degrees Celsius). A thermostatic control for the water temperature is required
on the pool heater.
   E.   Miscellaneous. Hydrotherapy pools, hot tubs, and spa pools shall be
separated from the main swimming pool by a minimum of four feet of walkway
unless located contiguous with the swimming pool. Where a hydrotherapy pool is
located contiguous with a swimming pool, the separating wall shall be designed
to preclude its use as a walkway.
   F.   Walkways. A minimum of four feet of deck shall be provided on at least
two contiguous sides of the pool and fifty percent of the periphery.
   G.   Drains. All drains and outlets of hydrotherapy pools must have plumbing
provisions so as to relieve any possibility of entrapping suction. The total
velocity through grate openings shall not exceed two feet per second.
   H.   Disinfection. Gaseous chlorine shall not be used for the disinfection
of hydrotherapy pools.
   I.   A fifteen minute timer shall be installed to operate the therapy
system. The timer shall be located at least eight feet from the edge of the
pool.
(Ord. 1990-81 § 13, 1990: Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.050)
8.32.230   Special-use pools.
   A.   Supplemental Standards and Requirements. Persons intending to construct
a special-use pool shall notify the department and provide plans,
specifications and a description of the intended use. The department will
determine which of the regulations in this chapter apply to the proposed
special-use pool. The department may, at its discretion, establish additional
standards or requirements for special-use pools, taking into consideration the
intended use of the pool, the conditions under which it will be operated and
any special circumstances.
   B.   Walkways. A minimum of four feet of deck shall be provided on at least
two contiguous sides of the pool and fifty percent of the periphery.
   C.   Exercise or Training Bars.
      1.   A pool designed with exercise or training bars in the pool shall be
restricted to special use when the bars are located in the pool.
      2.   Bars shall be constructed of durable material and be reasonably
resistant to corrosion under conditions of operation.
      3.   Bars shall be sealed, welded shut or capped at both ends to prevent
retention of water within the bar.
      4.   Bars may be removable. The bars shall then be wedge anchored in
place with a cover plate provided. Water-tight anchor plugs shall be provided
when the bars have been removed. For purposes of this subsection, an anchor
plug shall be considered water-tight if it achieves an efficiency of ninety-
five (95) percent.
      5.   Bars shall not extend more than four inches from the side of the
pool into the water. The minimum clear opening from the inside of the bar to
the side of the pool shall not be less than two inches.
   D.   Ramps.
      1.   Where a ramp is to be installed in a swimming pool, the ramp shall
be constructed:
         a.   Of non-slip material;
         b.   With a slope not exceeding one foot in eight;
         c.   With a width of at least three feet;
         d.   With a level platform at the top and bottom of the ramp;
         e.   With at least a three-and-one-half-foot-high guard rail installed
on the deck and extending the length of the ramp;
         f.   With returns to be located on the pool and ramp walls along the
length of the ramp;
         g.   With a continuous line of color-contrasting tile or similar
materials along both edges of the ramp which is visible from the pool as well
as on the ramp.
(Ord. 1990-81 § 14, 1990: Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.060)
8.32.240   Swimming pool service technicians and operators.
   A.   Certification of Swimming Pool Service Technicians.
      1.   Any person who commercially engages in the business of testing and
treating swimming pool water, cleaning pool filters and maintaining and/or
repairing pool equipment and appurtenances or any combination of such services
at public or semipublic swimming pools shall make application with the health
officer for certification.
      2.   Each application for technician's certification shall be accompanied
by a nonrefundable fee in an amount prescribed by Section
8.04.130. The certificate will expire three years from the date of issue, and
may be renewed for a successive three-year period by payment of the fee and
passing the examination.
      3.   Any person who commercially engages in the business of treating
swimming pool water, maintaining swimming pool motors, pumps, filters,
chlorinators or otherwise servicing any public, or semipublic or private
swimming pool shall prove by examination to the satisfaction of the health
officer that he/she is competent to do so in a safe, sanitary and healthful
manner and has received a certificate of competency from the health officer
prior to commencing such work. A score of seventy-five percent or more will be
considered passing.
      4.   The examination shall be designed to test the applicant's knowledge
of the safe handling of chemicals used in swimming pool water and their effect;
testing procedures for pH, chlorine, bromine; pool operation and cleaning
methods; a general knowledge of filters, flow rates, pumps, motors, heaters,
chemical feeders and pool codes. The applicant shall prove by an examination,
approved by the department, that he/she is competent to service the pool in a
safe, sanitary and healthful manner. A score of seventy-five percent or more
will be considered passing.
      5.   Should a technician be unable to provide pool services at a public
or semipublic pool, because of defective pool equipment or appurtenances which
are the responsibility of the pool owner, the technician shall promptly deliver
to the owner a written notice which describes any such defect and explains in
detail what repair or replacement is necessary in order to provide for adequate
servicing of the pool.
      6.   The health officer may suspend or revoke any certificate for
violation of these regulations, and shall notify all persons affected by the
action taken, and the reasons therefor, in writing, by certified mall. Appeals
shall follow the procedures set forth in Section
8.04.140 of this code.
   B.   Certification of Swimming Pool Operators.
      1.   Any person who engages in the operation of any public or semipublic
swimming pool shall obtain an operator's certificate issued by the health
officer.
         a.   An operator is a person who, for remuneration or voluntarily,
performs the duties of dally testing pool water, adds chlorine as necessary,
cleans the pool and performs any other duties associated with the operation of
a swimming pool. The operator shall be responsible for operating the pool in a
safe and healthful manner.
         b.   Each public pool, while in operation, must have a certified
operator on duty.
         c.   The owner(s) of each semipublic pool must designate a certified
operator, who will be on duty or on call while the pool is in operation.
         d.   Public Display. The swimming pool operator's certificate, or a
copy, must be available at all times for inspection by the health officer and
posted for public view within the pool area.
      2.   Each application for operator's certification shall be accompanied
by a nonrefundable fee in an amount prescribed by Section
8.04.130. The certificate will expire three years from the date of issue. Upon
examination, the pool operator's certificate may be renewed for a successive
three-year period by payment of the fee and passing the exam.
      3.   Any person who operates a public or semipublic swimming pool shall
prove by examination that he/she is competent to operate a pool in a safe,
sanitary, and healthful manner. A grade of seventy-five percent will be
considered passing.
      4.   A person failing to pass the certification exam will be required to
attend a pool certification training class offered by the health officer and
pass a subsequent exam prior to certification If an applicant passes the
certification exam, the class may be taken at the applicant's option.
      5.   Exemptions. Any person who owns a semipublic pool and is the
operator of the pool as defined in paragraph 1 subdivision a of this subsection
are exempt from the requirements of this subsection.
(Ord. 1992-7 § 4, 1992: Ord. 1990-81 § 15, 1990: Ord. 1990-40 § 5, 1990; Ord.
1987-14, 1987: Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.070)
8.32.250   Natural and semiartificial bathing places.
   A.   Water Quality.
      1.   Approval of natural and semiartificial bathing places will be based
upon the results of examination of bacteriological, chemical and physical
quality of the water in the proposed bathing area.
      2.   The water shall be considered acceptable for bathing purposes, from
a bacterial standpoint, when the average MPN of coliform organisms of a
representative number of samples is not greater than one thousand per
milliliter.
      3.   A bathing place shall be located so that it will not be adversely
affected by the discharge of sewage or objectionable industrial wastes; nor
shall it be so located that by its use it will affect the source of supply of a
public supply system.
   B.   Bathhouse. The provisions of Section
8.32.180 shall apply to all natural and semiartificial bathing places, except
that hot water for showers and lavatories may not be required.
(Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.080)
8.32.260   Inspection.
   The department will periodically inspect each bathing place to determine if
the installed facilities and operational procedures comply with these
regulations. If the department finds that an extreme safety or health hazard
exists, it may order the immediate suspension of the operation of the
establishment Such suspension shall continue until, in the opinion of the
department, the hazard has ceased to exist.
(Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.090(A))
8.32.270   Closing of bathing places—Reasons.
   The department may suspend operation for repeated or continued violations of
any of the department's rules and regulations, or until correction, for any of
the following reasons:
   A.   Failure of the swimming pool equipment, structure, area or enclosure
such as to jeopardize the health or safety of the persons using or operating
it;
   B.   Lack of properly functioning equipment or proper material for
recirculating, treating or testing the swimming pool water;
   C.   Lack of required lifeguards;
   D.   Presence of a pollutant or of a hazardous object or substance in the
swimming pool;
   E.   Failure to meet a water quality standard;
   F.   Failure to possess a valid department permit to operate a bathing
place.
(Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.090(B))
8.32.280   Violation—Penalty.
   Any person violating any rules adopted in this chapter shall be subject to
the penalties prescribed in Section 8.04.160 of this code.
(Ord. 1984-42 (part), 1984: prior code § 23.60.090(C))
8.32.290   Compliance required.
   A.   All bathing places constructed or substantially modified after the
effective date of Ordinance 1990-81* shall comply with all operational
requirements codified in this chapter by it and prior ordinances.
* Editor's note—Ord. 1990-81 was adopted July 3, 1990, to be effective 31 days
thereafter.
   B.   All bathing places regardless of the date of their construction shall
comply with all operational requirements codified in this chapter by Ordinance
1990-81 or prior ordinances.
(Ord. 1990-81 § 17, 1990)
Chapter 8.40
RODENTS, INSECTS, VERMIN, AND OTHER ANIMALS
Sections: 
8.40.010   Infestation prohibited.
8.40.020   Permit suspended when premises are infested.
8.40.030   Violation—Penalty.
8.40.010   Infestation prohibited.
   A.   No person, being the owner, or person in charge, or occupant of any
building, structure, place or premises, shall permit therein any unsanitary or
uncontrolled harborage or breeding of rodents or other animals declared by the
health officer to be dangerous to the public health.
   B.   The infestation by or harborage of rodents, lice, bedbugs, roaches,
flies, feral bees and wasps, vermin, or other animals in or about any premises
is declared to be a public nuisance dangerous to public health. No persons
shall cause, maintain or within his control permit such infestation.
   C.   Failure to keep bee hives in compliance with Pima County Code 18.07.030
(E)(1) or the keeping of a colony which exhibits unusually aggressive
characteristics by stinging or attempting to sting without due provocation or
which exhibits an unusual disposition towards swarming is declared to be a
public nuisance, dangerous to public health. No persons shall cause, maintain,
or permit such nuisance within Pima County.
   D.   Whenever the health officer notifies such person in writing of the
evidence of rodent or other animal harborage, he shall take immediate measure
to render and maintain such infested premises free of such harborage and
breeding places.
   E.   The owner, occupant or person in control of any place or premises where
infestation occurs or exists shall take all necessary and proper steps to
eliminate such infestation or harborage.
(Ord. 1998-77 § 1, 1998; Prior code § 23.16.010(A))
8.40.020   Permit suspended when premises are infested.
   No person may, for fee or other consideration, offer any premises or
trailers used for human habitation or sleeping accommodations, or use any
premises as a place where food or food products are stored, manufactured,
processed, served or offered for sale while those premises harbor rodents,
lice, bedbugs, roaches, flies, or other vermin. The health officer shall have
sufficient cause to suspend the permit to operate issued to any regulated
establishment when the permit holder falls to abate and eliminate such an
infestation within twenty-four hours after being ordered to do so by the health
officer.
(Prior code § 23.16.010(B))
8.40.030   Violation—Penalty.
   Any person violating any provisions adopted in this chapter shall be subject
to the penalties prescribed in
Chapter 8.04 of this code.
(Prior code § 23.16.020)
Chapter 8.50
SMOKING
Sections: 
8.50.010   Definitions.
8.50.020   Smoking prohibited.
8.50.030   Exemptions.
8.50.031   Exemptions for Smoking in Restaurants
8.50.032   Hardship Phase-In to Create a Designated Smoking Area
8.50.033   Hardship Smoking Exception
8.50.034   Application process and hearing
8.50.040   Control of property.
8.50.050   Applicability.
8.50.060   Penalties.
8.50.010   Definitions.
   In this chapter:
      1.   "Designated Smoking Area" means an area within a restaurant where
smoking is allowed pursuant to Section
8.50.031.
      2.   "Environmental Tobacco Smoke" means smoke from the burning of a
tobacco product and smoke exhaled by a smoker.
      3.   "Restaurant" means a business facility open for the primary purpose
of serving food prepared for consumption, either on or off the premises, for
compensation where annual state sales tax from the sale of food and nonalcohol
beverages exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the total annual state sales tax for
every consecutive twelve (12) month period.
      4.   "Seating Area" means all floor space of the restaurant except the
floor space of those areas which are:
         a.   Used exclusively for the preparation of food or beverages or both
(including alcoholic beverages);
         b.   Used exclusively for the storage of food, beverages, and
supplies;
         c.   Used exclusively for office space; and
         d.   Rest rooms.
      5.   "Smoke-free" means air that does not contain any emissions from
smoking.
      6.   "Smoking" or "smoke" means the act of burning any tobacco product,
weed, filler or plant of any kind in a cigarette, cigar, pipe or in any other
device.
(Ord. 2001-137 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 1992-9 § 2 (part), 1992)
8.50.020   Smoking prohibited.
   No person shall smoke within any enclosed structure or vehicle except as
permitted by this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-137 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 1992-9 § 2 (part), 1992)
8.50.030   Exemptions.
   A.   The following places or circumstances are exempt from the provisions of
this chapter:
      1.   Bowling alleys;
      2.   Pool halls;
      3.   Bars;
      4.   Restaurants for which an exemption has been granted pursuant to the
terms of this chapter;
      5.   Retail tobacco stores;
      6.   Hotel and motel rooms when rented to guests;
      7.   Hotel and motel conference and meeting rooms when being used for
private functions;
      8.   Assembly rooms when being used for private functions;
      9.   A private home;
      10.   A private, non-commercial vehicle;
      11.   A commercial vehicle occupied by only one person;
      12.   An office occupied by only one person;
      13.   Any area not within an enclosed structure or vehicle;
      14.   Smoking by performers when smoking is required by a script as an
integral part of a performance.
      15.   Nonprofit civic fraternal organizations, such as the Veterans of
Foreign Wars or the Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks.
   B.   No exemption set forth in subsection A of this section shall exist if
an area is placarded as "No Smoking" pursuant to Section
8.50.040.
(Ord. 2001-137 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 1992-9 § 2 (part), 1992)
8.50.031   Exemptions for Smoking in Restaurants
   A.   All restaurants shall be smoke-free. However, restaurants may allow
smoking under the following conditions:
      1.   In an area designated as a smoking area which meets all the
requirements of this section; or
      2.   If granted, and in compliance with, a hardship exception pursuant to
Section
8.50.033.
   B.   A designated smoking area must be:
      1.   Physically separated from all other areas of the restaurant;
      2.   Independently ventilated so that air is not vented into or does not
drift into any areas required to be smoke-free;
      3.   No greater in size than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total
square footage of the seating area of the restaurant;
      4.   Physically located so that customers can receive all services
provided by the restaurant without having to walk through the designated
smoking area or be exposed to environmental tobacco smoke;
      5.   Clearly marked as a designated smoking area by the posting of
legible warning sign(s) at all entrances to the designated smoking area which
read(s) "NOTICE: SMOKING AREA. Smoking is known to cause cancer, heart disease,
and lung diseases in smokers as well as nonsmokers." The sign(s) shall be black
letters on a white background and at least 8.5 inches by 11 inches in size.
   C.   A designated smoking area may include areas immediately adjacent to and
outside of the restaurant, if:
      1.   At least fifteen (15) feet from the smoke-free area and public
entrances and exits; and,
      2.   Smoke from the outdoor designated smoking area cannot enter the
smoke-free area of the restaurant.
   D.   A designated smoking area may not include:
      1.   An entry lobby;
      2.   Waiting areas;
      3.   Rest rooms and the pathway between the rest rooms and dining area;
or,
      4.   Areas where minors customarily congregate.
   E.   The department of development services is authorized to make
requirements consistent with the Pima County Building Code, to assure
compliance with this section.
(Ord. 2001-137 § 1 (part), 2001)
8.50.032   Hardship Phase-In to Create a Designated Smoking Area
   A.   The owner of an existing restaurant may apply for a hardship phase-in
to allow a period beyond the date prescribed to make the necessary
modifications to create a designated smoking area which meets the requirements
of Section
8.50.031, if completing those modifications within the date prescribed would
create an undue financial hardship.
   B.   For purposes of this section only, an "undue financial hardship" means
that the applicant does not have current funds, or the current ability to
borrow and repay funds, necessary and sufficient to remodel the restaurant to
create a designated smoking area which complies with Section
8.50.031. The owner bears the burden of showing that compliance would create an
undue financial hardship.
   C.   The time allotted for a hardship phase-in to create a designated
smoking area shall not exceed one (1) year.
   D.   A hardship phase-in to create a designated smoking area application
shall be submitted to the health department and shall contain the following:
      1.   An estimate from appropriately licensed contractor(s) of the costs
of modifying the seating area of the restaurant to be a designated smoking area
which meets the requirements of Section
8.50.031;
      2.   Financial statements prepared by a licensed certified public
accountant for the twelve (12) months immediately prior to the month in which a
hardship phase-in application is filed purporting to show an undue financial
hardship;
      3.   A time and task schedule for complying with all requirements of
Section
8.50.031 if a hardship phase-in is granted; and,
      4.   A sworn statement that, if a phase-in is granted, the applicant
shall complete the structural, HVAC, signage, and all other modifications
necessary to meet the requirements of Section
8.50.031(B) and (C) in accordance with the time and task schedule.
   E.   A restaurant owner must apply for a hardship phase-in to create a
designated smoking area within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this
ordinance. If application for hardship phase-in to create a designated smoking
area is not made within this time period, the restaurant must be smoke-free.
   F.   The entire restaurant shall remain smoke-free until the modifications
for the designated smoking area are completed.
   G.   Restaurants constructed, opened, or remodeled after the effective date
of this ordinance, must immediately comply with Section
8.50.031 and shall not be eligible for a hardship phase-in.
(Ord. 2001-137 § 1 (part), 2001)
8.50.033   Hardship Smoking Exception
   A.   The owner of an existing restaurant may apply for a hardship smoking
exception to allow smoking throughout the restaurant, if compliance creates an
undue financial hardship.
   B.   For purposes of this section only, an "undue financial hardship" for
the initial hardship smoking exception means at least a fifteen percent (15%)
reduction in state sales tax receipts from the sale of food and nonalcohol
beverages for two (2) consecutive months wherein the restaurant has operated
smoke-free as compared to the same two (2) consecutive months during the year
prior to compliance with this chapter. For restaurants which have not been open
for an entire year prior to the date of application for a hardship smoking
exception, an "undue financial hardship" for the initial hardship smoking
exception means at least a fifteen percent (15%) reduction in state sales tax
receipts from the sale of food and nonalcohol beverages for two (2) consecutive
months wherein the restaurant has operated smoke-free as compared to the two
(2) consecutive months immediately prior to those two (2) months of smoke-free
operation. For purposes of this section only, an "undue financial hardship" for
subsequent hardship smoking exceptions means at least a fifteen percent (15%)
reduction in state sales tax receipts from the sale of food and nonalcohol
beverages for two (2) consecutive months wherein the restaurant has returned to
operating smoke-free as compared to the same two (2) consecutive months of the
immediately preceding year during which the restaurant operated under a
hardship smoking exception. Such a showing shall constitute prima facie
evidence and a rebuttable presumption of an undue financial hardship.
   C.   The initial application for a smoking hardship exception must be made
within one hundred twenty (120) days from the effective date of this ordinance.
Subsequent applications for a smoking hardship exception shall be made as
indicated in this section. If application for a smoking hardship exception is
not made within the time periods set forth in this section, the restaurant must
be smoke-free.
   D.   An initial hardship smoking exception application shall be submitted to
the health department and shall contain the following:
      1.   A description of all efforts made, or which reasonably could be
made, to operate the restaurant successfully as a smoke-free environment; and,
      2.   Exact copies of state sales tax statements submitted by the
restaurant to the state of Arizona, which can serve to compare state sales
taxes of food and nonalcohol beverages for a two (2) consecutive month period
of smoke-free operation and the same two (2) consecutive month period in the
year immediately prior to smoke-free operation.
      3.   Evidence which demonstrates that the purported drop in state sales
tax between the year in which the exemption is sought and the prior comparison
year has occurred under similar circumstances and is not due to extraneous
factors. Evidence must show that the business operated in substantially the
same manner including, but not limited to, operating during the same number of
hours, being open the same number of days, being open on the same high business
days, such as holidays; and, serving from a menus similar in selection and
cost.
   E.   A hardship smoking exception, if granted, shall not exceed two (2)
years.
   F.   All entries to the restaurant must be clearly marked by the posting of
a legible warning sign(s) which read(s): "NOTICE: SMOKING PERMITTED. This
establishment permits smoking which is known to cause cancer, heart disease,
and lung diseases in smokers as well as non-smokers." The sign(s) shall be
black letters on a white background and at least 8.5 inches by 11 inches in
size.
   G.   The entire restaurant shall remain smoke-free unless and until a
hardship smoking exception is granted.
   H.   Upon the expiration of a hardship smoking exception, the restaurant
must be smoke-free, but may apply for a subsequent hardship smoking exception
no less than sixty (60) days and no more than one hundred twenty (120) days
after the expiration of a hardship smoking exception.
   I.   Subsequent hardship smoking exception applications shall be submitted
to the health department and shall contain the following:
      1.   A description of all efforts made, or which reasonably could be
made, to operate the restaurant successfully as a smoke-free environment; and,
      2.   State sales tax statements prepared by a licensed certified public
accountant, which compare state sales tax receipts for food and nonalcohol
beverages for a two (2) consecutive month period of smoke-free operation in the
year the application is made and the same two (2) consecutive month period in
the year immediately prior where the restaurant operated under a hardship
smoking exception.
   J.   Restaurants constructed, opened, or remodeled after the effective date
of this ordinance must immediately be smoke-free or in compliance with Section
8.50.031 and shall not be eligible for a hardship smoking exception.
(Ord. 2001-137 § 1 (part), 2001)
8.50.034   Application process and hearing
   A.   Applications for either a hardship phase-in to create a designated
smoking area or a hardship smoking exception shall be made to the health
department pursuant to procedures developed by the department director.
   B.   The county shall hold an administrative hearing, before a hearing
officer, to review the application for a hardship phase-in to create a
designated smoking area or a hardship smoking exception and to consider the
recommendations of appropriate county departments within thirty (30) days of
the health department's receipt of an application for hardship phase-in to
create a designated smoking area or a hardship smoking exception. The hearing
officer shall issue a ruling within seven (7) days after the hearing and to
mail a copy of his decision to the applicant and to the health department
within seven (7) days after the ruling is made.
(Ord. 2001-137 § 1 (part), 2001)
8.50.040   Control of property.
   A.   Unless an area is exempt from the provisions of this chapter pursuant
to Sections
8.50.030,
8.50.032, or
8.50.033, the owner or person in lawful control of property shall conspicuously
post "No Smoking" signs at all entrances to said property.
   B.   "No Smoking" signs shall depict letters of not less than one inch in
height or the international "No Smoking" symbol consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle of not less than
six inches in diameter and with a red bar across it.
   C.   Any owner or person in lawful control of property that would otherwise
be exempt from the provisions of this chapter pursuant to Section
8.50.030 may placard the property as "No Smoking."
   D.   The owner or person in lawful control of property shall keep all
nonexempt areas of the property smoke-free. If a nonexempt area cannot be kept
smoke-free due to smoking in an exempt area, the owner or person m lawful
control of the exempt area shall placard the exempt area as "No Smoking."
(Ord. 2001-137 § 3 (part), 2001; Ord. 1992-9 § 2 (part), 1992)
8.50.050   Applicability.
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the unincorporated areas
of Pima County.
   B.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all property owned or
controlled by Pima County.
   C.   The provisions of this chapter may apply to the incorporated areas of
Pima County pursuant to the provisions of Arizona Revised Statutes Section 11-
251.05, subsection C.
   D.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any place where
smoking is allowed pursuant to federal or state law.
   E.   Nothing in this chapter excuses noncompliance with any other Pima
County Code, state or federal law, or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto.
(Ord. 2001-137 § 3(part), 2001; Ord. 1992-9 § 2 (part), 1992)
8.50.060   Penalties.
   A.   Any person who smokes in an area placarded with a "No Smoking" sign is
guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor.
   B.   Any person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a
restaurant who commits any of the following is guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor:
      1.   Failing to placard property with "No Smoking" signs as required by
Section
8.50.040;
      2.   Failing to placard a designated smoking area with warning signs as
required by Section
8.50.031(B)(5);
      3.   Failing to comply with the terms of an order granting a hardship
phase-in to create a designated smoking area or hardship smoking exception.
      4.   Allowing a person to smoke in a restaurant area other than the
designated smoking area;
      5.   Allowing smoke from a designated smoking area to diffuse or drift
into the smoke-free areas of the restaurant.
   C.   Each day of a violation described in paragraphs A or B of this section
shall constitute a separate offense and is punishable as such.
   D.   For violations described in paragraphs B and C of this section, no
judge, magistrate, or justice of the peace may suspend the imposition of a
minimum fine of at least one-hundred dollars ($100). Fines may be assessed in
excess of one-hundred dollars ($100) to the maximum prescribed for a Class 3
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2001-137 § 3 (part), 2001; Ord. 1992-9 § 2 (part), 1992)
Chapter 8.54
VAPOR RELEASING SUBSTANCES CONTAINING TOXIC SUBSTANCES
Sections: 
8.54.010   Definitions.
8.54.020   Dispensing such substances prohibited
8.54.030   Exceptions.
8.54.040   Commercial establishments.
8.54.010   Definitions.
   A.   "Vapor releasing substances containing a toxic substance" means paints,
varnishes and like coating substances releasing vapors or fumes containing
benzene, toluene, volatile ketones, isophorone, acetone, chloroform, methylene
chloride, mesityl oxide, xylene, cumene, ethylbenzene, trichloroethylene, MIBK,
MIAK, MEK, and diacetone alcohol dispensed by the use of aerosol spray devices.
(Ord. 1993-167 (part), 1993)
8.54.020   Dispensing such substances prohibited
   A.   No person shall sell or offer for sale, deliver or provide, or give to
any person under eighteen years of age any vapor releasing substances
containing a toxic substance.
   B.   No sale or transfer of possession of any vapor releasing substances
containing a toxic substance shall be made except by a person who is at the
time of sale actively employed or engaged in operating a bona fide commercial
establishment at a fixed location.
(Ord. 1993-167 (part), 1993)
8.54.030   Exceptions.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be applicable to the transfer of any
vapor releasing substances containing a toxic substance, from a parent to a
child, from a guardian to a ward, from an employer to employee, from a teacher
to a student or in any other similar relationship when such transfer is for a
lawful and bona fide purpose.
(Ord. 1993-167 (part), 1993)
8.54.040   Commercial establishments.
   Every bona fide commercial establishment selling vapor releasing substances
containing a toxic substance shall conspicuously display an English/Spanish
bilingual sign of not less than eleven inches by fourteen inches in size which
states: "Warning—Deliberate Inhalation of Spray Paint Vapors Can Be Dangerous."
Such printed warning shall be easily legible.
(Ord. 1993-167 (part), 1993)
Chapter 8.56
ADULT AMUSEMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
Sections: 
8.56.020   Purpose.
8.56.030   Definitions.
8.56.040   Plan approval required.
8.56.050   Construction in compliance with approved plans.
8.56.060   Operating permit required.
8.56.070   Appeal from denial of certificate to construct or operating permit.
8.56.075   Assignment of probationary status to operating permit.
8.56.080   Revocation of operating permit.
8.56.090   Notices.
8.56.100   Inspections.
8.56.110   Sanitary requirements for adult amusement establishments.
8.56.120   Disease prevention and education.
8.56.130   Fees.
8.56.140   Violations and penalties.
8.56.150   Effect of compliance.
8.56.160   Applicability.
8.56.020   Purpose.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult amusement establishments
to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county.
(Ord. 1991-78 § 6 (part), 1991)
8.56.030   Definitions.
   In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
      1.   "Adult amusement establishment" means a peep show establishment or
other sexually-oriented establishment.
      2.   "Operator" means the owner of an adult amusement establishment or
any employee, agent or contractor of the owner who controls or is otherwise
responsible for conducting the business of an adult amusement establishment, or
any combination of such persons.
      3.   "Peep show device" means any device in which filmed or
electronically recorded or produced sexually-oriented images are projected or
produced and are intended to be viewed in private booths.
      4.   "Peep show establishment" means any place open to the public in
which a peep show device may be used by a member of the public.
      5.   "Sexually-oriented establishment" means any place open to the public
in which sexual entertainment may be viewed from private booths.
(Ord. 1991-78 § 6 (part), 1991)
8.56.040   Plan approval required.
   A.   No person shall construct or contract for the construction of an adult
amusement establishment unless proposed plans and specifications have been
submitted to the health officer and approved as being in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter. Upon approval of plans and specifications the
health officer shall issue a certificate of approval to construct. For the
purposes of this section, Section
8.56.050 and Section
8.56.130 construction includes any remodeling of an existing structure that
will result in the construction or modification of any private viewing booth or
areas immediately adjacent to private viewing booths.
   B.   An application for plan review pursuant to this section shall be made
on forms prescribed by the health officer requiring the submission of all
information that the health officer deems reasonably relevant and necessary to
evaluate whether a proposed construction can reasonably be expected to comply
with the provisions of this chapter. Application forms shall be completed in
full setting forth all information requested. An application shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an amount required by Section
8.56.130 and no application shall be complete until payment of said fee.
   C.   If an application for plan review is submitted that the health officer
finds to be incomplete, the health officer shall notify the applicant in
writing by first class mail within ten days after receipt of the application
and specify the deficiencies in the application.
   D.   Within thirty days of the submittal of a complete application for plan
review the health officer shall either issue a certificate of approval to
construct or deny the application and notify the applicant in writing by
registered mall specifying the grounds for denial and informing the applicant
of the appeal procedures available under Section
8.56.070. The only grounds for denial of a certificate to construct shall be
that the plans and specifications submitted do not demonstrate that the
proposed construction can reasonably be expected to comply with the provisions
of this chapter.
   E.   A certificate of approval to construct issued pursuant to this section
is valid for one year after which it is void if construction has not commenced.
The health officer may grant one six-month extension to a certificate of
approval to construct if the applicant submits information sufficient to
establish that construction has not commenced due to circumstances over which
the applicant has no control.
   F.   If the health officer denies an application for certificate of approval
to construct, the applicant may appeal the decision pursuant to Section
8.56.070.
(Ord. 1991-78 § 6 (part), 1991)
8.56.050   Construction in compliance with approved plans.
   A.   All work performed pursuant to a certificate of approval to construct
issued pursuant to Section
8.56.040 shall conform to the approved plans and specifications. If an
applicant desires to deviate from plans and specifications for which a
certificate of approval has been issued and the proposed deviation will affect
the construction or modification of private viewing booths or areas immediately
adjacent to private viewing booths in any manner then an application shall be
submitted and processed in the same manner as provided for original
applications for certificates of approval to construct pursuant to Section
8.56.04.
   B.   The health officer shall be permitted to inspect an adult amusement
establishment during all phases of construction to confirm that the work is
being completed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications.
   C.   The applicant shall notify the health officer in writing fifteen days
prior to the expected date of completion of construction pursuant to a
certificate to construct to allow final inspection by the health officer.
(Ord. 1991-78 § 6 (part), 1991)
8.56.060   Operating permit required.
   A.   No person shall operate an adult amusement establishment unless the
owner of the adult amusement establishment first applies for and receives a
valid operating permit from the health officer.
   B.   An application for an operating permit shall be made on forms
prescribed by the health officer requiring the submission of all information
that the health officer deems reasonably relevant and necessary to evaluate
whether the proposed operation can reasonably be expected to comply with the
provisions of this chapter. An application shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable fee in an amount required by Section
8.56.130 and no application shall be complete until payment of said fee. If an
application for an operating permit is submitted that the health officer finds
to be incomplete the health officer shall notify the applicant in writing by
first class mall within ten days after receipt of the application and specify
the deficiencies in the application.
   C.   Upon submittal of a complete application for an operating permit the
health officer shall issue a temporary operating permit to the applicant. The
temporary permit shall remain in effect until a regular operating permit is
issued, the application is denied without appeal by the applicant or the
application is denied and an appeal to a hearing officer pursuant to Section
8.56.070 is decided.
   D.   Within thirty days of the submittal of a complete application for an
operating permit the health officer shall either issue the permit or deny the
application and notify the applicant in writing by registered mail specifying
the grounds for denial and informing the applicant of the appeal procedures
available under Section
8.56.070. The only grounds for denial of a permit shall be that:
      1.   Based upon the information set forth in the application, it cannot
reasonably be expected that the proposed operation will comply with the
provisions of this chapter; or
      2.   The applicant has had an adult amusement establishment operating
permit revoked pursuant to this chapter within two years preceding the
submission of the complete application.
   E.   Regular operating permits are valid for a period of one year from the
date of issuance unless revoked pursuant to Section
8.56.080. Application for reissuance of expired or revoked permits shall be
made and processed in the same manner as an application for an initial
operating permit. No temporary or regular permit is transferable from person to
person or place to place. Only one operating permit shall be required for each
adult amusement establishment.
   F.   If the health officer denies an application for an operating permit the
applicant may appeal the decision pursuant to Section
8.56.070.
(Ord. 1991-78 § 6 (part), 1991)
8.56.070   Appeal from denial of certificate to construct or operating permit.
   A.   An applicant who has been denied a certificate to construct pursuant to
Section
8.56.040 or denied a regular operating permit pursuant to Section
8.56.060 may, within ten days of receipt of notice of denial, file a notice of
appeal with the health officer. The notice of appeal shall be in writing and
specifically set forth the grounds of the appeal. If no notice of appeal is
filed, the health officer's action becomes final when the time for filing a
notice of appeal has expired.
   B.   Within five days of receipt of a notice of appeal the health officer
shall appoint a hearing officer who shall schedule a hearing on the matter
within twenty days of receipt of the notice of appeal by the health officer.
The hearing officer shall be knowledgeable in the area of health law and may be
an employee of the county.
   C.   The hearing officer shall notify all parties by registered mail of the
date for hearing and appeal. If the applicant fails to appear as directed, a
default judgment shall be entered. The hearing shall be held in an informal
manner and the Arizona Rules of Evidence shall apply only to the extent the
hearing officer deems necessary to the fair administration of justice. Record
of the hearing shall be made by electronic tape recording or stenographic
transcription. The only basis for the hearing officer to overturn the decision
of the health officer shall be a finding that factual error exists as to the
basis of the health officer's decision or, if applicable, that based upon the
facts it can reasonably be expected that the applicant will comply with all
provisions of this chapter.
   D.   The hearing officer shall render a decision within five days of the
hearing and notify all parties by registered mail of the outcome.
   E.   Appeal of the decision of the hearing officer shall be by special
action to the Superior Court. No appeal shall be taken later than ten days
after the receipt of the hearing officer's written decision.
(Ord. 1991-78 § 6 (part), 1991)
8.56.075   Assignment of probationary status to operating permit.
   A.   Upon discovery by the health officer that an operator of an adult
amusement establishment other than a permittee has been convicted of violating
Section
8.56.110, subsections A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, or I with respect to a permitted
adult amusement establishment, the health officer shall assign probationary
status to the operating permit of such adult amusement establishment.
   B.   The health officer shall give written notice of the assignment of
probationary status to the permittee by registered mall and describe the
grounds for the assignment.
   C.   An assignment of probationary status shall become effective on the date
notice is received pursuant to subsection B of this section and shall remain in
effect for a period of three months.
(Ord. 1991-78 § 6 (part), 1991)
8.56.080   Revocation of operating permit.
   A.   The health officer shall revoke a temporary or regular operating permit
issued pursuant to this chapter if any of the following occur:
      1.   The permittee of the permitted establishment is convicted pursuant
to Section
8.56.140 of violating Section
8.56.110, subsections A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H or I of this chapter with respect
to the permitted adult amusement establishment.
      2.   An operator of an adult amusement establishment other than the
permittee is convicted pursuant to Section
8.56.140 of violating Section
8.56.110, subsections A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H or I with respect to the permitted
establishment and such violation occurred at a time when the operating permit
for the adult amusement establishment was assigned probationary status pursuant
to Section
8.56.075.
      3.   The health officer notifies the permittee or operator of the
permitted adult amusement establishment in writing of a violation of any
provision of this chapter and the permittee or operator fails to correct or
otherwise abate the violation within five business days of receipt of the
notice.
   B.   Upon determining that revocation of an operating permit is required
pursuant to subsection A of this section the health officer shall serve a
notice of revocation of operating permit on the permittee by registered mail
describing the procedures for appeal available to the permittee pursuant to
this chapter. The permittee may, within five days of receipt of notice of
revocation, file with the health officer a written notice of appeal of
revocation specifically setting forth the grounds of appeal. An appeal of
revocation shall occur in the same manner and within the same time periods as
prescribed for appeals of denial of an operating permit pursuant to Section
8.56.070 except that the sole basis for the hearing officer to overturn a
decision of the health officer to revoke a permit shall be that none of the
grounds set forth in subsection A of this section exist.
   C.   Revocation of an operating permit pursuant to this section shall be
effective:
      1.   Five days from receipt by the permittee of a notice of revocation
served pursuant to subsection B of this section if no notice of appeal has been
filed with the health officer; or
      2.   Upon receipt by the permittee of the decision of the hearing officer
denying the permittee's appeal.
   D.   The permittee's right to operate an adult amusement establishment under
the authority of the permit shall terminate immediately upon a revocation
becoming effective pursuant to subsection C of this section except that the
revocation may be stayed by the Superior Court pending a timely appeal of the
decision by special action in the manner prescribed by subsection E of Section
8.56.070.
(Ord. 1991-78 § 6 (part), 1991)
8.56.090   Notices.
   Any notice required or permitted to be made by the health officer pursuant
to this chapter may be served by personal service and may be served at the
address set forth on any relevant application or upon an applicant's or
permittee's attorney.
(Ord. 1991-78 § 6 (part), 1991)
8.56.100   Inspections.
   A.   The holder of an operating permit pursuant to this chapter shall permit
the health officer to enter the permitted adult amusement establishment at any
time it is operating for the purpose of determining compliance with this
chapter.
   B.   The health officer shall conduct not less than four inspections of each
adult amusement establishment per twelve month period. All inspections of adult
amusement establishments shall be conducted without prior notice to the
operator or permit holder.
   C.   A written report of each inspection of an adult amusement establishment
shall be served on the operator and may be served on a permit holder. The
report shall describe any violations of this chapter discovered by the health
officer and direct the operator to correct any violations within a reasonable
time not to exceed five business days.
(Ord. 1991-78 § 6 (part), 1991)
8.56.110   Sanitary requirements for adult amusement establishments.
   A.   No person shall knowingly operate an adult amusement establishment in
any manner which allows sexual intercourse or other sexual contact to occur
between two or more persons on the premises.
   B.   No operator of an adult amusement establishment shall knowingly allow
more than one person to be present in a private viewing booth of a peep show
device at any time.
   C.   No person shall enter a private viewing booth of a peep show device
that is occupied by another person.
   D.   No operator of an adult amusement establishment shall knowingly allow
openings of any kind to exist between private viewing booths of peep show
devices.
   E.   No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between
private viewing booths of peep show devices.
   F.   The operator of an adult amusement establishment who discovers two or
more persons in a private viewing booth or discovers any person making or
attempting to make an opening of any kind between private viewing booths of
peep show devices shall immediately escort such persons from the premises.
   G.   The operator of an adult amusement establishment who discovers an
opening of any kind between private viewing booths of peep show devices shall
immediately secure such private viewing booths and prevent entry into them by
any member of the public until such time as the booth wall has been repaired to
remove the opening. Removal and repair of openings between private viewing
booths shall be in a manner that is as structurally substantial as the original
booth wall construction.
   H.   The operator of an adult amusement establishment shall ensure that any
door, curtain, wall or other partition covering the doorway of a private
viewing booth of a peep show device shall end at least thirty inches above the
highest floor level of the booth and provide a view of the occupant from at
least the waist down when seated. The doorways of all private viewing booths
shall be visible from a continuous main aisle.
   I.   No operator of an adult amusement establishment shall knowingly allow
the doorway of any private viewing booth of a peep show device to be covered or
otherwise obscured in any manner such that the operator cannot monitor the
number of persons in the private viewing booth at any time.
   J.   The operator of an adult amusement establishment shall, during each
business day, regularly inspect the walls between private viewing booths of
peep show devices for openings of any kind.
   K.   The operator of an adult amusement establishment shall designate one or
more persons to monitor the number of occupants m a booth at least once every
thirty minutes. Said monitor(s) shall be on the premises at all times the
establishment is open to the public. For purposes of this subsection,
monitoring may be accomplished by use of television cameras and monitors that
provide an ability and frequency of booth inspection that is equal to or
greater than the monitoring that is otherwise required by this subsection.
   L.   The operator of an adult amusement establishment shall initiate and
enforce a no loitering policy in private viewing booth areas.
   M.   The operator of an adult amusement establishment shall post conspicuous
signs in well lighted entry areas stating all of the following:
      1.   That no loitering is permitted in private viewing booth areas;
      2.   That the occupancy of private viewing booths is limited to one
person;
      3.   That sexual contact between two or more persons on the premises is
prohibited;
      4.   That the making of openings between private viewing booths is
prohibited;
      5.   That violators will be required to leave the premises;
      6.   That violations of paragraphs 2 and 4 of this subsection are
unlawful.
   N.   The operator of an adult amusement establishment shall cause all floor
coverings in private viewing booths to be non-porous, easily cleanable
surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
   O.   The operator of an adult amusement establishment shall cause all wall
surfaces and seating surfaces in private viewing booths or any area or room
providing patron privacy to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, non-
porous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other
porous material shall be used within forty-eight inches of the floor.
   P.   The operator of an adult amusement establishment shall equip the
interior premises with lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate
the interior of the premises to an illumination of not less than one candle
foot as measured at the floor level.
   Q.   The operator of an adult amusement establishment shall cause the
premises to be clean and sanitary at all times.
   Cleaning procedures shall include:
      1.   The operator shall maintain a regular cleaning schedule, documented
by appropriate logs, and shall employ sufficient personnel to assure the
establishment is clean;
      2.   The operator shall provide a monitor to check all areas for garbage,
trash, body fluids and excrement and to remove and clean all areas with a
disinfectant approved by the health officer. All solid waste generated by an
adult amusement establishment shall be collected from the premises for disposal
at a lawful solid waste disposal facility at least twice each week. Prior to
collection solid waste shall be stored in a manner acceptable to the health
officer that prevents access by animals or members of the public and which will
not facilitate the creation of a health nuisance.
      3.   Thorough cleaning of the entire interior of any area, booth or room
providing patron privacy shall be done using a disinfectant approved by the
health officer. Cleaning shall include floors, walls, doors, seating, monitors/
TVs, windows and other surfaces.
   R.   The operator of an adult amusement establishment shall cause any
seating within a private viewing booth to be designed so as to accommodate one
person only.
(Ord. 1991-78 § 6 (part), 1991)
8.56.120   Disease prevention and education.
   An operator of an adult amusement establishment shall provide in a
conspicuous place on the premises free information relating to the prevention
of sexually transmitted diseases, including AIDS.
(Ord. 1991-78 § 6 (part), 1991)
8.56.130   Fees.
   The amount of fees required by this chapter shall be as prescribed in
Chapter 8.04.
(Ord. 1992-7 § 5, 1992: Ord. 1991-78 § 6 (part), 1991)
8.56.140   Violations and penalties.
   A.   Violation of Section
8.56.040(A),
8.56.050(A),
8.56.060(A),
8.56.100(A), or
8.56.110 subsection (A), (B), (C), (D), (E), (F), (G), (H) or (I) is a Class 3
misdemeanor. Any other violation of this chapter is a Class 3 misdemeanor if
the operator of an adult amusement establishment falls to correct the violation
within five business days after receiving written notice of the violation from
the health officer Each violation pursuant to this subsection is a separate
offense and each day of a violation is a separate offense.
   B.   In addition to revocation of an operating permit pursuant to Section
8.56.080 the health officer may seek injunctive relief to abate violations of
this chapter and take any actions otherwise provided by law to abate health
nuisances.
   C.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter it shall not be a
violation of this chapter for any person to do any act required by law or in
furtherance of enforcement of any law.
(Ord. 1991-78 § 6 (part), 1991)
8.56.150   Effect of compliance.
   Compliance with the provisions of this chapter in no way abrogates the
necessity of complying with all other laws affecting or regulating the
construction or operation of an adult amusement establishment.
(Ord. 1991-78 § 6 (part), 1991)
8.56.160   Applicability.
   The provisions of this chapter apply to the unincorporated areas of the
county.
(Ord. 1991-78 § 6 (part), 1991)
Chapter 8.60
BLASTING REGULATIONS
Sections: 
8.60.010   Scope.
8.60.030   Definitions.
8.60.040   Blasting permit requirements
8.60.060   Blasting operations procedures.
8.60.070   Penalties.
8.60.010   Scope.
   This chapter regulates the use and handling of explosive materials and the
conduct of blasting operations in the course of construction or demolition of
land improvements in unincorporated Pima County. This chapter does not modify
existing federal, state or local laws, ordinances or regulations that apply to
explosives or blasting operations, and does not apply to:
   A.   The use or handling of explosives or blasting for mining operations.
   B.   The manufacture or sale of explosives.
   C.   Blasting operations conducted by law enforcement agencies.
(Ord. 1997-58 § 1, 1997)
8.60.030   Definitions.
   The following terms apply to this chapter:
   A.   Approved blasting contractor. A blasting contractor who has been
licensed by the Pima County sheriff to conduct blasting operations in the
county and who has been placed on a list of approved blasting contractors.
   B.   Blasting contractor. A natural person who is responsible for the
blasting activities at the individual site. This person has responsible charge
of all the operations during the layout, drilling, loading of explosives, and
detonation of the explosives.
   C.   Blasting operations. The use of an explosive device or explosive
material to destroy, modify, obliterate or remove any obstruction of any kind
from a piece of property.
   D.   Blasting site. A geographically defined area shown on a project site
plan or a parcel map where blasting will occur. Distances for inspections and
notification purposes are measured from the perimeter boundary lines of the
parcel or project site on which the blasting site is located.
   E.   Blasting permit. The permit issued by the Pima County engineer wherein
the blasting contractor is given permission to blast within the county under
the terms and conditions specified in the permit, this chapter and as required
by any other applicable federal, state, and local law or regulation.
   F.   Certificate of insurance. A writing or document issued by an insurance
company authorized to do business in the state of Arizona stating that the
insurance company has issued a policy of liability insurance covering property
damage and bodily injuries that may result from blasting operations occurring
as a result of blasting operations.
   G.   Explosives. Any chemical compound, mixture or device, the primary or
common purposes of which is to function by explosion. The term includes, but is
not limited to, dynamite, nitroglycerine and other high explosives, including
plastic explosives, black powder, pellet powder, initiating explosives,
detonators, safety fuses, squibs, detonating cord, igniter cord and ignitors.
   H.   Scaled distance. The geographic distance, from a structure to the point
of the maximum charge weight per delay of the blast, divided by the square root
of the maximum charge weight per delay.
   Example: Given that you want to maintain a scaled distance of 100 feet and
the closest structure is 200 feet from the blast, your maximum charge weight
per delay would be 4 pounds.
(Ord. 1997-58 § 1, 1997)
8.60.040   Blasting permit requirements
   A.   Blasting Permit Required. No person shall conduct any blasting
operations in unincorporated Pima County without first obtaining a blasting
permit from the county engineer.
      1.   A blasting permit:
         a.   Must be applied for each blasting site a minimum of five work
days prior to the proposed blasting date.
         b.   Is valid only for the blasting site specified in the permit.
         c.   Is valid for a period not to exceed thirty calendar days.
      2.   An application for a blasting permit must be signed by the blasting
contractor and the owner(s) of the blasting site and include:
         a.   A blasting plan,
         b.   A valid certificate of insurance,
         c.   The form of notice to be given of proposed blasting operations,
         d.   The name and qualification of the independent testing agency who
will conduct seismic and air blast monitoring, if such testing agency is
required by this chapter.
      3.   A copy of the blasting permit shall be available at the blasting
site for public or official inspection at all times during blasting operations.
      4.   A blasting permit fee of $500 shall be paid at the time the permit
application is submitted to the county engineer.
   B.   Blasting Permit Renewal. The blasting contractor shall apply for
blasting permit renewal a minimum of five work days prior to approved permit
expiration.
   C.   Blasting Contractor Certification. Prior to applying for a blasting
permit, the blasting contractor shall obtain a blasting contractor
certification from the Pima County sheriff.
      1.   The blasting contractor's qualifications are reviewed by the
sheriff.
      2.   Certification and placement on the list of approved blasting
contractors shall be based on a review of the blasting contractor's
qualifications, past safety record, and history of complaints of job
performance.
      3.   Failure to comply with the terms and conditions under which approval
is granted may result in revocation of certification or suspension from the
list of approved blasting contractors.
      4.   Certification and placement on the approved blasting contractors
list is valid for three years from date of certification.
   D.   Qualifications. An approved blasting contractor must meet the following
minimum qualifications:
      1.   Be a minimum of twenty-one years of age.
      2.   Have a minimum of two years experience in the conduct of blasting
operations. Experience shall include the understanding of blasting designs,
drilling of holes, loading of holes, decking, stemming, and detonating methods.
      3.   Hold a valid Federal Explosives User's Permit or Federal Explosives
License.
      4.   Hold a license issued by the State of Arizona Registrar of
Contractors for the type of blasting operations proposed to be conducted by the
contractor as follows:
         a.   A, General Engineering. Construction in connection with fixed
works requiring specialized engineering knowledge and skill, including streets
and roads, power and utilities plants, dams and hydroelectric plants, sewage
and waste disposal plants, bridges, tunnels, and overpasses. Also included are
the scopes of work allowed by all other engineering classifications.
         b.   A-3, Blasting. The use of explosive and explosive devices for the
purposes of excavation, demolition, geological exploration, mining or any
related blasting. Included is any drilling, boring or earthwork required for
the placement of explosive charges, the erection of temporary shelters,
barricades and associated protective devices, equipment and enclosures.
         c.   AE, (as restricted by registrar.)
         d.   C-15, Blasting. Use of explosives for movement of earthen
materials or for demolition (residential in accordance with State of Arizona
Registrar of contractors' definition.)
   E.   Certificate of Insurance. Before a blasting permit is issued, the
blasting contractor must submit to the county engineer a certificate of
insurance evidencing that the blasting contractor has obtained a commercial
general liability policy:
      1.   In the amount of $5 million.
      2.   Which includes coverage for explosion, collapse and underground
damage.
      3.   In effect for the period covered by the blasting permit.
      4.   In an amount not less than $500,000 for each occurrence.
   F.   Blasting Plan. The contractor shall be required to submit to the county
engineer, an accurate drawing at a scale which adequately represents the
proposed blasting site, and which identifies:
      1.   All property lines.
      2.   All proposed blasting locations on the blasting site.
      3.   All structures within a 500-foot radius of the proposed blasting
site and the street address of the structure, if applicable. Greater distances
may be required under extraordinary circumstances, as determined by the county
engineer.
      4.   Location of all above ground and underground utilities, such as
natural gas piping and lines, electric lines, phone lines, water lines.
      5.   A general blasting plan detailing the proposed number of drill
holes, type of explosive, explosive data sheets, delay pattern, anticipated
peak particle velocity and scaled distance, the number of pounds of explosive
per delay, and the total number of pounds brought to the blast site.
   G.   Independent Inspector. If the blasting plan identifies structures
within 500 feet of the blasting site, the blasting contractor shall retain for
the purpose of independent technical review of the blasting plan, a
professional engineer, with expertise in blasting and approved by the county
engineer.
   H.   Additional Technical Information. Depending upon the geological
conditions of the blast site, or the complexity of the proposed blasting
operations, the blasting contractor may be required to furnish, at his own
expense, such additional information as may be required to evaluate the permit
application, as determined by the county engineer. This may include, but is not
limited to, the submission of a report prepared by a geological or geophysical
engineer registered in the state of Arizona.
   I.   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to
provide false or misleading information or documentation to the county or to
any of its departments during any phase of the permit process or blasting
operations.
(Ord. 1997-58 § 1, 1997)
8.60.060   Blasting operations procedures.
   All blasting operations shall be conducted as follows:
   A.   Compliance with this chapter and all applicable laws. No person shall
conduct any blasting operations in unincorporated Pima County except as
permitted under this chapter. Storage, transportation and blasting procedures
shall comply with this chapter, all applicable federal, state and local laws,
ordinances and regulations.
   B.   Blasting contractor to remain on-site.
      1.   The approved blasting contractor shall:
         a.   Personally supervise all aspects of the blasting operation.
         b.   Be physically present at the blasting site area when the
explosive materials are loaded into the ground and remain in attendance until
the blasting operation is completed.
      2.   There shall be no change in the blasting contractor for blasting
operations for which a blasting permit has been issued without the express
approval of the county engineer.
   C.   Blasting site supervision. Before a blast is initiated, the blasting
contractor shall make sure that surplus explosives are in a safe place, that
persons and vehicles are at a safe distance or under sufficient cover, and that
a loud warning signal has been sounded.
   D.   Blue-staking. Prior to conducting any blasting operations, the
contractor shall request that the blasting area be blue-staked.
   E.   Notices.
      1.   Notice of blasting operations shall be provided to:
         a.   Any and all utility companies servicing the blasting area. A copy
of the blasting plan shall be given sufficiently in advance to enable the
companies to advise the contractor of any precautions that should be taken to
protect their facilities from damage. Notice of specific blasts shall be given
a minimum of 24 hours prior to conducting the blasting operation.
         b.   The owner and occupant of each structure within a 500-foot radius
of the blasting site. The notification must be given not less than twenty-four
hours nor more than one week prior to any blasting operation and shall be in a
form approved by the county engineer.
         c.   Pima County sheriff's department bomb squad, the Pima County
sheriff's department communications, and the Pima County department of
transportation field engineering twenty-four hours prior to blasting.
         d.   The fire chief of the fire district within which the blasting
site is located and of any fire district within 500 feet of the blasting site
twenty-four hours prior to a scheduled blasting operation.
      2.   The minimum notice periods established by this chapter may be
reduced to a lesser period if the county engineer determines that special
circumstances warrant such reduction in time.
      3.   The blasting contractor shall erect special signs to warn the public
of ongoing blasting operations. Signs shall be located and maintained so as to
be clearly visible to the public during all critical blasting operations.
   F.   Hours of operations. Blasting operations shall be conducted on
weekdays, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., but in no event later
than one-half hour before sunset. No blasting operations shall be conducted at
any time on Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, except under extraordinary
circumstances and by special written permission of the county engineer.
   G.   Loading of explosives. Explosives shall not be loaded into the ground
until a valid blasting permit, issued by the Pima County, is available on site.
   H.   Precautions against accidental detonation. The following are required
as precautions against accidental detonation of explosives:
      1.   The posting of signs reading, "BLASTING ZONE 1000 FEET" and "TURN
OFF 2-WAY RADIOS" on all roads within 1,000 feet of blasting operations where
electric detonators are used.
      2.   Blasting operations shall not be conducted during the approach and
progress of an electrical storm.
      3.   The blasting contractor shall periodically check for electricity or
stray currents in areas where it is likely that such conditions may exceed safe
limits for blasting operations.
      4.   Except for the lighting of the safety fuse for blasting operations,
smoking, the carrying of matches, or the use of matches, lighters, spark
producing devices or the presence of any open flame are prohibited within 50
feet of where explosive materials are being stored or used.
   I.   Use of a blasting mat and flagmen. The county engineer may require use
of a blasting mat if blasting occurs within close proximity to a structure or
installation, such as a road or railway that could be damaged by rocks or other
projectiles. Where blasting occurs close to a road or railway, flagmen shall be
stationed at the time of the blast at a sufficient distance from the blasting
operation to halt approaching vehicles.
   J.   Seismic and air blast monitoring. Seismic and air blast monitoring
shall be conducted and recorded in the blasting log for each blast.
      1.   For blasts occurring farther than 500 feet from the nearest
structure, the blasting contractor may conduct the required monitoring.
      2.   For blasts occurring within 500 feet of any structure, the seismic
and air-blast monitoring shall be conducted by an independent testing agency
approved by the county engineer.
   K.   Blasting log. An accurate blasting log shall be maintained by the
blasting contractor.
      1.   The log shall contain the following information:
         a.   The blasting plan.
         b.   The county permit number.
         c.   The location of the blasting operation.
         d.   The date and time of each blasting occurrence.
         e.   The seismic and air blast readings received.
         f.   The name of the individual who conducted the seismic monitoring.
         g.   The type of explosive, pounds of explosive per delay, drill hole
layout, depths and diameters of drill holes, timing and delay pattern,
anticipated peak particle velocities, and scaled distance.
         h.   Any and all known damage or injury that occurred as a result of
the blast. If no known damage or injury occurred, the log shall so state.
         i.   Any other pertinent information required by the county engineer.
      2.   A current copy of the blasting log shall be available at the blast
site, and at the blasting contractor's office. If the blasting contractor does
not have a local office, the blasting log shall be kept at the office of the
general contractor for the project.
      3.   A copy of the blasting log shall be submitted to the county engineer
         a.   After each blast, if the blast site is within 500 feet of any
structure as identified on the blasting plan. No succeeding blasting shall
occur without the permission of the county engineer. Subsequent blasting shall
not proceed until compliance with all requirements of this ordinance are
demonstrated in the submitted log. Failure to submit the daily blasting log is
cause for the revocation of the blasting permit.
         b.   Within seven calendar days after the end of blasting operation,
the expiration of the blasting permit, or when requested by the county
engineer. Failure to submit the blasting log within the required time frame may
result in the revocation or suspension of the approved blasting contractor
certification.
   L.   Scaled distance. The following scaled distances shall apply when
structures are within 500 feet of the proposed blast:
 
Maximum Minimum Scaled Distance
500     300     75
300     100     100
100     —     express approval of the county engineer
 
   M.   No blasting within 100 feet of a structure. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this chapter, no blasting shall occur within 100 feet of a
residence without the specific permission of the county engineer.
   N.   No intoxicants. No person under the influence of intoxicants, narcotics
or controlled substances shall handle or use explosive materials in any manner.
   O.   Transportation of explosives. Explosives shall be transported to the
blasting site in a magazine which meet federal requirements for a type 2
explosives storage facility.
   P.   One-day supply of explosive materials on-site
      1.   No more than a one-day supply of explosives shall be brought on to
the blasting site. One-day supply of explosive materials means: the quantity
required to conduct one-day blasting operations only.
      2.   No explosive materials, including blasting wires and caps, shall be
permitted to be stored overnight on the blasting site.
      3.   Explosive materials shall not be left undetonated in the ground
overnight.
   Q.   On-site storage. Explosive materials shall be stored in type 3 magazine
(s) also known as a "day-box" as required under federal explosives storage
requirements.
      1.   Detonators shall not be stored with high explosives. Explosives and
detonating devices shall be stored in magazines separated by an earth
revetment.
      2.   Explosive material storage shall be located a minimum of a 300-foot
radius from the site of the blast.
      3.   At no time shall the explosive materials be left unattended. The
blasting contractor shall have, at all times, an unobstructed view of the on-
site explosive material storage, and shall ensure that the storage magazine is
locked and not accessible to unauthorized persons.
   R.   Post blast survey.
      1.   After a blast, all wires and or nonelectric leads shall be carefully
traced and a search made for any unexploded explosive materials.
      2.   All misfires shall be investigated by the blasting contractor who
shall determine a safe method of disposal.
(Ord. 1997-58 § 1, 1997)
8.60.070   Penalties.
   A.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be
guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor.
   B.   In addition to the penalties imposed in paragraph A of this section,
any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of the provisions of
this chapter is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated or remedied by
any appropriate action or proceedings.
(Ord. 1997-58 § 1, 1997)
Chapter 8.70
DROUGHT RESPONSE PLAN AND WATER WASTING
Sections: 
8.70.010   Purpose and applicability.
8.70.020   Definitions.
8.70.030   Water wasting prohibited.
8.70.040   Drought Stages—Required drought conservation measures.
8.70.050   Declaration of drought stage.
8.70.060   Variances.
8.70.070   Technical assistance.
8.70.080   Violation—Enforcement.
8.70.010   Purpose and applicability.
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to provide a drought response plan for
the unincorporated areas of Pima County.
   B.   Because of varying conditions related to water resource supply and
distribution system capabilities, it is necessary to establish and to enforce
methods and procedures to ensure that, in time of emergency shortage of the
local water supply, the water resources available to the residents of
unincorporated Pima County are put to the maximum beneficial use, that the
unreasonable use, or unreasonable method of use is prevented, and that
conservation of water is accomplished in the interests of the public health,
safety, and welfare.
   C.   This chapter applies to the unincorporated areas of Pima County.
(Ord. 2007-47 § 1 (part), 2007; Ord. 2006-43 § 1 (part), 2006)
8.70.020   Definitions.
   A.   "Arizona Drought Monitoring Report" means the long-term drought status
report issued by the Arizona Department of Water Resources' Monitoring
Technical Committee (MTC), created by the Governor's Drought Task Force, which
is responsible for gathering drought, climate, and weather data and
disseminating that information to land managers, policy-makers, and the public.
The MTC determines drought conditions based on monitoring data, tracks changes
in weather and physical conditions, forecasts likely future conditions, and
provides early detection of changes in drought severity. The MTC will also
assess local area impact assessment information provided by the Pima County
Local Drought Impact Group.
   B.   "Department" means the Pima County Health Department.
   C.   "Director" means director of the health department.
   D.   "Pima County Local Drought Impact Group" means a drought monitoring and
assessment group comprised of individuals skilled in monitoring climate, area
water supplies, ecosystems, and economic and social impacts as a result of
drought and facilitates the role of a Local Area Impact Assessment Group
prescribed in the Arizona Drought Preparedness Plan.
   E.   "Economic hardship" means a threat to an individual's or business'
primary source of income.
   F.   "Notification to the public" means notification through local media,
including interviews and issuance of news releases.
   G.   "Person" means a government or government subdivision or agency, the
county, a municipality, district or other political subdivision, a cooperative,
association, corporation, company, firm, partnership, individual, or other
legal entity.
   H.   The term "pool" applies to all pools regulated by Pima County's adopted
building or technical codes, regardless of whether the pool is installed above-
or below-ground or whether it is a temporary or permanent structure.
   I.   "Water" means potable or reclaimed water from all sources.
   J.   "Rainwater harvesting system" means a system or series of components or
mechanisms that are designed to provide for the collection and storage of
rainwater for use of the collected water on the same property.
(Ord. 2014-38, § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 2007-47 § 1 (part), 2007; Ord. 2006-43 §
1 (part), 2006)
8.70.030   Water wasting prohibited.
   At no time may a person waste water or use water unreasonably. Wasteful or
unreasonable uses of water include but are not limited to the following
practices:
   A.   Causing or permitting water to leave a property by drainage onto
adjacent property or public or private roadways or streets due to excessive
irrigation and/or uncorrected leaks.
   B.   Failing to repair a water leak following initial notification.
   C.   Washing driveways, sidewalks, parking areas, or other impervious
surface areas with an open hose or with a spray nozzle attached to an open hose
or, through other means, under regular or system pressure, except when required
to eliminate conditions that threaten the public health, safety, or welfare.
This restriction does not apply to residential customers.
(Ord. 2006-43 § 1 (part), 2006)
8.70.040   Drought Stages—Required drought conservation measures.
   Following the declaration of a drought stage, no person may make, cause,
use, or permit the use of water for residential, commercial, industrial,
agricultural, governmental or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any
provision of this section, or in an amount in excess of that use permitted by
the drought management stage. The water use restrictions in each less
restrictive stage apply to all more restrictive stages unless the higher stage
has a more stringent requirement on the same subject.
   A.   Stage 1, Water Alert. During a water alert, the department shall issue
one or more notifications to the public. The department shall ask all persons
to implement voluntary reductions in water use, ask restaurants to provide
water only upon request, urge hotels and motels to conserve water, and engage
in a campaign to increase public education to promote awareness about water
conservation issues.
   B.   Stage 2, Water Warning. During a water warning, the following
additional conservation measures will be implemented:
      1.   Persons may only irrigate landscaping between the hours of 7:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m.
      2.   Persons working in or operating restaurant-type uses may provide
water only upon request.
      3.   No person may operate outdoor misters;
      4.   No person may operate or use public fountains or water features;
      5.   No natural person may wash a car except with use of a bucket and a
shut-off nozzle;
      6.   No charity car washes may occur except at commercial car washes that
recycle water; and
      7.   No person may overseed turf areas. Areas to be irrigated exclusively
by a rainwater harvesting system are exempt from this measure.
   C.   Stage 3, Water Emergency. During a water emergency, the following
additional conservation measures will be implemented:
      1.   No person may fill a newly constructed residential pool. Pool
permits will remain in active status for three months after stage 3 is
downgraded to stage 2;
      2.   No person may operate a car wash unless it is equipped with a water
recirculation system; and
      3.   A person may top off a pool only to maintain water level; no person
may refill a pool.
   D.   Stage 4, Water Crisis. During a water crisis, the following additional
conservation measures will be implemented:
      1.   Landscape irrigation is restricted to only trees and shrubs; a
person may irrigate turf or ground cover with harvested rainwater only;
      2.   No person may fill a newly constructed pool. Pool permits will
remain in active status for three months after stage 4 is downgraded to stage
2;
      3.   No person may use water to wash a car except for water captured by a
rainwater harvesting system;
      4.   No person may use water to clean a parking lot or street; and
      5.   No person may use potable water in construction projects, either for
dust control or toward the erection of new improvements or structures.
(Ord. 2014-38, § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 2007-47 § 1 (part), 2007; Ord. 2006-43 §
1 (part), 2006)
8.70.050   Declaration of drought stage.
   A.   Drought Stage Trigger. The triggers defining each drought stage are
listed in
Table 8.70.050.
   B.   Declaration of Drought. A drought stage for all or any area of the
county may be declared by the board of supervisors upon a recommendation from
the county administrator and information developed by the local drought impact
group. A declaration by the U.S. Secretary of the Interior of either a shortage
on the Colorado River or a curtailment of water delivered through the Central
Arizona Project canal to any local water provider may increase the drought
level by one stage. If the severity of the drought lessens, the board of
supervisors may downgrade the drought stage to a lower stage.
Table 8.70.050
 
Indicator         Arizona Drought Monitor Report 1 Based on Findings Related to
                  Pima County
Stage 1 Alert     Moderate-Severe
Stage 2 Warning   Severe-Extreme
Stage 3 Emergency Extreme-Exceptional
Stage 4 Crisis    Exceptional
 
1 See http://www.azwater.gov/dwr/drought/MTC.html 
(Ord. 2014-38, § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 2007-47 § 1 (part), 2007; Ord. 2006-43 §
1 (part), 2006)
8.70.060   Variances.
   The director is authorized to review hardship cases and special cases within
which strict application of this chapter would result in serious hardship to a
person. A variance may be granted only for reasons involving health, safety or
economic hardship. Application for variance from requirements of this chapter
must be made on a form provided by the director.
(Ord. 2007-47 § 1 (part), 2007; Ord. 2006-43 § 1 (part), 2006)
8.70.070   Technical assistance.
   The director shall continually monitor and report the nature and severity of
the drought condition to the county administrator or designee.
(Ord. 2006-43 § 1 (part), 2006)
8.70.080   Violation—Enforcement.
   A.   In the event of any violation of this chapter, the department shall
post on the property where the violation occurred written notice and mail a
duplicate notice to the registered owner of the property and to any person
known to the department who is responsible for the violation or its correction.
Such notice shall describe the violation and order that it be corrected, ceased
or abated immediately or within such specified time as the department
determines is reasonable under the circumstances and shall further contain a
description of the fees and penalties associated with such violation. If the
cited person fails to comply with such order, the department will contact the
water provider who may disconnect the service where the violation occurs. The
property owner will be responsible for any reconnection charges in addition to
other fees or charges imposed by the water provider.
   B.   In addition to being grounds for discontinuation of service, violation
of any provision of this chapter is a civil infraction. Any person found to be
non-compliant with any provision of this chapter may be assessed a civil
penalty of not less than two hundred fifty dollars for a violation occurring
during drought management stage 2, not less than four hundred dollars for a
violation occurring during drought management stage 3, and not less than six
hundred dollars for a violation occurring during drought management stage 4.
Each act of violation and every day upon which such violation occurs shall
constitute a separate infraction. The Director may also seek injunctive relief.
(Ord. 2007-47 § 1 (part), 2007; Ord. 2006-43 § 1 (part), 2006)
Chapter 8.80
MEDICAL MARIJUANA
Sections: 
8.80.010   Purpose and scope.
8.80.020   Definitions.
8.80.030   Registration requirements.
8.80.040   Violation and enforcement.
8.80.050   Applicability.
8.80.010   Purpose and scope.
   To protect the public health, to the extent practicable, through the
discouragement and prevention of the abuse of marijuana and to control the
legitimate and illegitimate traffic in medical marijuana.
(Ord. 2010-58 § 1 (part), 2010)
8.80.020   Definitions.
   The terms, words, and phrases used in this ordinance have the same
definitions given them in Title 36 Chapters 27 and 28.1.
(Ord. 2010-58 § 1 (part), 2010)
8.80.030   Registration requirements.
   Any cardholder, designated caregiver, nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary
agent, nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary, qualifying patient or visiting
qualifying patient who manufactures, distributes, dispenses or prescribes
marijuana for medical use or who proposes to engage in the manufacture,
distribution, prescribing or dispensing of marijuana for medical use must first
comply with the registration requirements of A.R.S. Section 36-2522 and
maintain, and provide upon request by authorized county personnel, evidence of
continued compliance so long as engaged in the manufacture, distribution,
prescribing or dispensing of medical marijuana.
(Ord. 2010-58 § 1 (part), 2010)
8.80.040   Violation and enforcement.
   A.   Violation of this chapter is a class 1 misdemeanor and is subject to a
fine or imprisonment, or both.
   B.   In addition to the remedies set forth in subsection A the county may
seek injunctive relief and take any actions otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. 2010-58 § 1 (part), 2010)
8.80.050   Applicability.
   The provisions of this chapter apply to both the incorporated and
unincorporated areas of the county.
(Ord. 2010-58 § 1 (part), 2010)
Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Chapters: 
   
Chapter 9.04 - FIREWORKS
   
Chapter 9.08 - EMERGENCY VEHICLE PERMITS
   
Chapter 9.12 - OFF-ROAD RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLES
   
Chapter 9.13 - ALARMS*
   
Chapter 9.16 - TUCSON-PIMA COUNTY EMERGENCY SERVICES COMMISSION
   
Chapter 9.20 - CURFEW
   
Chapter 9.30 - REGULATION OF EXCESSIVE, UNNECESSARY AND ANNOYING NOISES
   
Chapter 9.40 - FINGERPRINTING AND CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK OF PROSPECTIVE
AND CURRENT ATTENDANT CARE WORKERS
   
CHAPTER 9.50 - FINGERPRINTING AND CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK OF PROSPECTIVE
AND CURRENT EMPLOYEES, CONTRACT INSTRUCTORS OR VOLUNTEERS OF PIMA COUNTY
NATURAL RESOURCES, PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT
   
CHAPTER 9.60 - FINGERPRINTING AND CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK OF PROSPECTIVE
AND CURRENT EMPLOYEES, CONTRACT INSTRUCTORS OR VOLUNTEERS OF PIMA COUNTY
COMMUNITY RESOURCES DEPARTMENT
   
Chapter 9.70 - UNDERAGE DRINKING
   
Chapter 9.80 - EXPLODING TARGETS
   9.85   Loss or Theft of Firearm—Mandatory Reporting
   
Chapter 9.90 - SEXUAL ORIENTATION CHANGE EFFORTS
Chapter 9.04
FIREWORKS
Sections: 
9.04.010   Short title.
9.04.020   Declaration of policy.
9.04.030   Definitions.
9.04.040   Fireworks prohibited.
9.04.050   Permit for public display.
9.04.060   Financial requirements of applicant.
9.04.070   Permitted uses.
9.04.080   Conduct of display.
9.04.090   Seizure.
9.04.100   Violation—Penalty.
9.04.010   Short title.
   This chapter may be cited and shall be known as the Pima County fireworks
ordinance.
(Prior code § 41.20.010)
9.04.020   Declaration of policy.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the general public from the
hazardous use, sale and display of fireworks and to require competent operators
in the display of fireworks.
(Prior code § 41.20.020)
9.04.030   Definitions.
   A.   "Fireworks" shall be defined as in A.R.S. Section 36-1601(1).
   B.   "Governing body" means the board of supervisors of Pima County as to
the area within the county but without the corporate limits of an incorporated
city or town.
   C.   "Person" includes individual, partnership, firm, corporation or
association.
   D.   "Pyrotechnic operator" means a person, of good character, who has shown
to the board of supervisors and/or the sheriff that they have the ability and
knowledge through experience or training to safely and properly handle
fireworks.
(Prior code § 41.20.030)
9.04.040   Fireworks prohibited.
   A.   Except as otherwise provided by this section, it is unlawful to sell,
offer, or expose for sale; use; explode or possess any fireworks.
   B.   This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit or restrict the
manufacture or possession, by a qualified pyrotechnic operator, of aerial set
pieces designed for use in pyrotechnical displays, or the display of such set
pieces in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
(Prior code § 41.20.040)
9.04.050   Permit for public display.
   A.   Application for a permit shall be made in writing not less than 45 days
prior to the date of the display. Each applicant must notify any neighbors
within 1,000 feet of the site by any effective means of notification including,
but not limited to, direct mail, door flyers, signs or communication through
homeowners or neighborhood associations. The means of notice shall be specified
on the application for a permit. Every display shall be handled by a
pyrotechnic operator, and shall be of a character and located, discharged and
fired so that it will not be hazardous to property or endanger any person.
Before a permit is granted, the operator, location and handling of the display
shall be approved by the board of supervisors after investigation and approval
by the sheriff. After a permit is granted, the sale, possession, use and
distribution of fireworks for the display shall be lawful for that purpose
only. No permit is transferable or assignable and will be void if transferred
or assigned.
   B.   Public displays of fireworks may only be set off:
      1.   Between sunset December 31 to 1:00 a.m. January 1; and
      2.   Between sunset and 10:00 p.m. on all other days in which public
displays of fireworks are allowed.
(Prior code § 41.20.050) (Ord. 2025-11 §§ 1 - 3, 2025)
9.04.060   Financial requirements of applicant.
   A.   The board of supervisors shall require each applicant to give a
satisfactory bond in a principal amount not less than five hundred dollars,
conditioned upon payment of all damages which may be caused to persons or
property by reason of the display.
   B.   Each applicant shall be required to hold harmless the county for any
and all damages or injury occurring as a result of the possession, use or
display of fireworks, and each permittee shall defend all actions brought
against the county with relation to the permit for fireworks, and shall pay all
judgments against the county in relation to the permit and shall appeal at the
option of the county all judgments against the county resulting from the
granting of the permit.
   C.   Each applicant shall include with the application a copy of the
certificate of liability insurance for a minimum of ten million dollars with
Pima County listed as additional insured.
(Prior code § 41.20.060) (Ord. 2025-11 § 4, 2025)
9.04.070   Permitted uses.
   This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit:
   A.   The sale at wholesale by a resident wholesaler, dealer or jobber of
fireworks which are not prohibited by this chapter;
   B.   The sale of fireworks which are to be and are shipped directly out of
the state;
   C.   The use of fireworks by railroads or other transportation agencies for
signal purposes or illumination;
   D.   The use of fireworks or explosives, or both, by farmers, ranchers and
their employees, and by state and federal employees who manage wildlife
resources, to rally, drive or otherwise disperse concentrations of wildlife for
the purpose of protecting property or wildlife;
   E.   No fireworks display shall occur for longer than thirty minutes.
   F.    No fireworks display shall be held if the wind reaches a velocity of
more than ten miles per hour at the scheduled display time or at any time
during the display, verified by the appropriate fire department/district.
   G.   No public fireworks displays shall be held if the USDA Forest Service
fire restriction is at a stage three.
   H.   A firework display that occurs during a USDA Forest Service fire
restriction stage one or stage two fire restriction shall require a minimum of
one dedicated brush truck with sufficient staffing to operate said vehicle at
the site of the display both prior to and throughout the event. The total
number of equipment and staffing shall be approved by the chief of the
appropriate fire department/district. Firework displays are prohibited during
designated periods of extreme fire danger or red flag warning conditions.
   I.   All fireworks, articles and items at places of display shall be stored
in a manner and in a place secure from fire, accidental discharge, and theft or
other potential hazards, and in a manner approved by the governmental agency
having jurisdiction.
   J.   The applicant must:
      1.   Notify the appropriate fire department/district and schedule on-site
standby fire suppression equipment as necessary for the site as determined by
the appropriate fire chief during the display.
      2.   Clear a firing area and a drop area for spent fireworks as
designated by the local fire department/district.
      3.   Cancel any display scheduled if the wind speed within ten feet of
ground level, is higher than ten miles per hour at the scheduled display time
or at any time during the display, verified by the appropriate fire department/
district.
      4.   Remedy any fire or property damage including native ground cover and
tree and shrub replacement based on what existed previously including planting
and irrigation as appropriate.
(Prior code § 41.20.080) (Ord. 2025-11 §§ 5, 6, 2025)
9.04.080   Conduct of display.
   A.   No permit shall be granted for any display of fireworks where the
discharge, failure to fire, faulty firing, or fallout of any fireworks or other
objects would endanger persons, buildings, structures, forests, or brush, nor
in any case where the point at which the fireworks are to be fired is less than
two hundred feet from the nearest permanent building, public highway, railroad,
or other means of travel, or fifty feet from the nearest above ground telephone
or telegraph line, tree or other overhead obstruction, or one hundred feet from
a high-tension wire. In no case shall a display be fired within five hundred
feet of a school, theater, church, hospital, or similar institution without
written approval by the institution and special approval by the board of
supervisors.
   B.   Spectators at a display of fireworks shall be restrained behind lines
or barriers as designated by local authorities but in no case less than two
hundred feet from the point at which the fireworks are to be discharged. Only
authorized persons and those in actual charge of the display shall be allowed
inside these lines or barriers during the unloading, preparation, firing and
clean-up period of fireworks.
   C.   All fireworks that fire a projectile shall be so set up that the
projectile will go into the air as nearly as possible in a vertical direction.
   D.   Any fireworks that remain unfired after the display is concluded shall
be immediately disposed of or removed in a manner safe for the particular type
of fireworks. The debris from the discharged fireworks shall be properly
disposed of by the operator before he leaves the premises. The operator, upon
conclusion of the display, shall make a complete and thorough search for any
unfired fireworks or pieces which have failed to fire or function and shall
dispose of them in a safe manner. Such search shall be instituted at the
earliest possible time following the conclusion of the display but in no event
later than the first period of daylight which follows.
   E.   No fireworks display shall be held during any storm or wind in which
the wind reaches a velocity of more than ten miles per hour.
   F.   All fireworks, articles and items at places of display shall be stored
in a manner and in a place secure from fire, accidental discharge, and theft or
other potential hazards, and in a manner approved by the governmental agency
having jurisdiction.
(Prior code § 41.20.080)
9.04.090   Seizure.
   The Arizona Highway Patrol or any sheriff or other peace officer shall
seize, remove, or cause to be removed, at the expense of the owner, all
fireworks or combustibles offered or exposed for sale, stored or possessed in
violation of this chapter.
(Prior code § 41.20.090)
9.04.100   Violation—Penalty.
   A person violating a provision of this chapter is guilty of a class three
misdemeanor.
(Prior code § 41.20.100)
Chapter 9.08
EMERGENCY VEHICLE PERMITS
Sections: 
9.08.010   Purpose.
9.08.020   Definitions.
9.08.030   Emergency equipment standards.
9.08.040   Emergency management director.
9.08.050   Emergency vehicle permit required.
9.08.060   Application for emergency vehicle permit.
9.08.070   Issuance of emergency vehicle permit.
9.08.080   Displaying of emergency vehicle permit.
9.08.090   Expiration and renewal of emergency vehicle permit.
9.08.100   Transfer or replacement of emergency vehicle permit.
9.08.110   Responsibility of emergency vehicle permit holders.
9.08.120   Denial, suspension or revocation of emergency vehicle permit.
9.08.130   Right of appeal.
9.08.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the issuance of emergency vehicle
permits pursuant to Title 28, Sections 101 and 624, Arizona Revised Statutes.
(Ord. 1996-5 (part), 1996)
9.08.020   Definitions.
   The following definitions, in addition to those in Section
10.04.020, shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
   A.   "Authorized emergency vehicle" means:
      1.   Vehicles of a fire department;
      2.   Vehicles of a police department;
      3.   Ambulance and emergency vehicles of municipal departments and public
service corporations designated or authorized by the Department or local
authorities, or other ambulances, fire trucks and rescue vehicles authorized at
the sole discretion of the Department and that meet liability insurance
requirements prescribed by the Department.
   B.   "Department" is the Arizona Department of Transportation.
   C.   "Director" is the director of the Tucson/Pima County office of
emergency management as designated by the county administrator and city
manager.
   D.   "Permit" refers to emergency vehicle permits.
(Ord. 1996-5 (part), 1996)
9.08.030   Emergency equipment standards.
   A.   The vehicle for which the emergency vehicle permit is issued shall at
all times when in use as such be equipped with at least one of the following: a
red or red and blue lighted lamp; a red or red and blue lighted lens visible
under normal conditions from a distance of five hundred feet to the front of
the vehicle. The vehicle must also be equipped with, and while in motion must,
as reasonably necessary, activate a bell, siren or exhaust whistle.
   B.   The vehicle for which the emergency vehicle permit is issued is subject
to inspection by the director upon notice duly given.
(Ord. 1996-5 (part), 1996)
9.08.040   Emergency management director.
   The director may make rules and regulations concerning the issuance of
emergency vehicle permits.
(Ord. 1996-5 (part), 1996)
9.08.050   Emergency vehicle permit required.
   No person, with the exception of any federal, state, county, city or town
vehicles, shall operate an emergency vehicle without first obtaining an
authorized emergency vehicle permit.
(Ord. 1996-5 (part), 1996)
9.08.060   Application for emergency vehicle permit.
   A.   An application for an emergency vehicle permit shall be made to the
director.
   B.   The application for an emergency vehicle permit shall be made upon a
form furnished by the director. It shall contain such information concerning
the applicant's background and experience as the director prescribes, in
addition to other information required by law.
(Ord. 1996-5 (part), 1996)
9.08.070   Issuance of emergency vehicle permit.
   The director may issue emergency vehicle permits only for authorized
emergency vehicles.
(Ord. 1996-5 (part), 1996)
9.08.080   Displaying of emergency vehicle permit.
   The emergency vehicle permit identification sticker must be displayed on the
rear bumper of the vehicle at all times. The emergency vehicle permit
certificate shall be carried in the vehicle at all times.
(Ord. 1996-5 (part), 1996)
9.08.090   Expiration and renewal of emergency vehicle permit.
   All emergency vehicle permits issued shall expire on December 31st of the
year issued. Emergency vehicle permit renewal is by application annually by
form and manner determined by the director.
(Ord. 1996-5 (part), 1996)
9.08.100   Transfer or replacement of emergency vehicle permit.
   A.   Emergency vehicle permits shall not be transferable to any other
person, company or vehicle.
   B.   In the event of a name change, not involving a change of an address of
the permittee, the emergency vehicle permit shall be returned to the director
for cancellation and a new emergency vehicle permit application form shall be
submitted. A new emergency vehicle permit for the unexpired term will be
issued.
   C.   In the event the vehicle for which the emergency vehicle permit is
issued is disposed of, the emergency vehicle permit shall be removed from the
vehicle and the emergency vehicle permit returned to the director for
cancellation.
   D.   In the event of loss, destruction or mutilation of the emergency
vehicle permit, the permittee to whom it was issued may obtain a duplicate upon
application to the director.
(Ord. 1996-5 (part), 1996)
9.08.110   Responsibility of emergency vehicle permit holders.
   A.   The person, persons or corporation to which an emergency vehicle permit
is issued shall be responsible for the actions of the driver of the permitted
vehicle when operated under emergency conditions.
   B.   Should a provision of the Arizona Revised Statutes or the terms under
which the emergency vehicle permit was issued be violated, the emergency
vehicle permit will be subject to suspension or revocation by the director upon
notice given.
(Ord. 1996-5 (part), 1996)
9.08.120   Denial, suspension or revocation of emergency vehicle permit.
   An emergency vehicle permit may be denied, suspended or revoked by the
director for failure to comply with any provision of this chapter, any
provision of the Arizona Revised Statutes, or regulations promulgated pursuant
to this chapter upon due notice being given.
(Ord. 1996-5 (part), 1996)
9.08.130   Right of appeal.
   If in the opinion of the applicant or permittee the act of denial,
suspension or revocation of an emergency vehicle permit by the director was
unjust, arbitrary or capricious, he may request in writing within sixty days of
denial, suspension or revocation a public hearing before the Pima County board
of supervisors.
(Ord. 1996-5 (part), 1996)
Chapter 9.12
OFF-ROAD RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLES
Sections: 
9.12.010   Definitions.
9.12.020   Prohibited vehicle uses.
9.12.030   Identification and proof of vehicle ownership.
9.12.040   Exempt vehicle uses.
9.12.050   Exempt locations.
9.12.060   Government property.
9.12.070   Civil penalties.
9.12.010   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter:
   A.   "Off-road recreational motor vehicle" or "vehicle" means three and four
wheel vehicles manufactured for recreational nonhighway all terrain travel.
   B.   "Operate" means driving or having actual physical control over the
vehicle.
   C.   "Wash" or "riverbed" means a watercourse having beds, banks, sides and
channels through which either waters currently flow or through which
floodwaters flow periodically.
(Reso. 1988-43 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1987-209 § 1 (part), 1987)
9.12.020   Prohibited vehicle uses.
   No person shall operate an off-road recreational motor vehicle:
      1.   Upon any portion of any publicly owned washes or riverbeds within
the county except to cross such washes or riverbeds from one bank to another
within the boundaries of an existing, clearly defined highway, street, road,
primitive roadway, trail or traveled way; or
      2.   Upon privately owned lands without notarized written consent of the
owner, the owner's agent or the person in lawful possession of such property.
Such written consent shall be kept within a person's possession while operating
a vehicle and shown upon the request of a peace officer; or
      3.   In such a way as to knowingly cause or contribute to visible dust
emissions which then cross property lines into a residential, recreational,
institutional, educational, retail, sales, hotel or business premises; or
      4.   At a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the
circumstances, conditions and actual and potential hazards then existing. In
every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid
colliding with any object, person, animal life or other vehicle so as to comply
with the duty of all persons to exercise reasonable care for the protection of
others.
(Reso. 1988-43 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1987-209 § 1 (part), 1987)
9.12.030   Identification and proof of vehicle ownership.
   A.   All operators of off-road recreational vehicles shall carry proof of
vehicle ownership, or a rental agreement, and a driver's license while
operating such vehicles and shall show such documents upon the request of a
peace officer. If an operator is unlicensed then recent picture identification
shall be carried.
   B.   For the purpose of this section, identification for minors may include
a school picture identification with school or home address or a notarized
statement consisting of a minor's physical description and home address which
is signed by a parent or guardian.
(Reso. 1988-43 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1987-209 § 1 (part), 1987)
9.12.040   Exempt vehicle uses.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a vehicle being used for:
      1.   Ranching or agricultural purposes;
      2.   Grading, construction or building trade purposes;
      3.   Mining purposes;
      4.   Licensed off-road business operations such as land surveying, public
utility companies, sand and gravel operations and other similar enterprises;
      5.   Authorized emergency vehicle including towing services;
      6.   Governmental purposes by a government employee;
      7.   Golf carts and golf courses.
(Reso. 1988-43 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1987-209 § 1 (part), 1987)
9.12.050   Exempt locations.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply:
   A.   To vehicle operators on their own property, except when creating dust
emissions as set forth in subsection (3) of Section
9.12.020;
   B.   On any dedicated public highway, street, road or alley or parking lot
generally open to the public for the purpose of vehicular travel;
   C.   Within the limits of any incorporated city or town.
(Reso. 1988-43 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1987-209 § 1 (part), 1987)
9.12.060   Government property.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to interfere with the right of any
government agency to regulate, prohibit or permit the use of off-road
recreational vehicles on property owned by it or under its control and
jurisdiction, nor to permit or authorize any trespass or nuisance.
(Reso. 1988-43 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1987-209 § 1 (part), 1987)
9.12.070   Civil penalties.
   Violation of this chapter shall constitute a civil offense and shall be
punishable by a fine, fixed by the court, of not less than fifty dollars nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars. In the case of actual damage to person
or property or a third offense within a twelve-month period, the court shall
assess a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars. The imposition of a fine under this section shall not be
suspended.
(Reso. 1988-43 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1987-209 § 1 (part), 1987)
Chapter 9.13
ALARMS*
Sections: 
9.13.010   Purpose and intent.
9.13.020   Findings.
9.13.030   Definitions.
9.13.040   Excessive false alarms prohibited.
9.13.050   False robbery alarms prohibited.
9.13.060   Penalties.
9.13.070   Common cause exception.
9.13.080   Alarm operator.
9.13.090   Alarm company duties.
9.13.100   Penalties.
9.13.110   Corrective measures.
9.13.120   Recent installations.
9.13.130   Exemptions.
9.13.140   Evidence.
9.13.010   Purpose and intent.
   This section is intended to encourage the improvement in reliability of
alarm systems and devices and ensure that sheriff's personnel will not be
diverted from responding to actual criminal activity as a result of responding
to false alarms. The regulation is malum prohibitum ; no knowledge or lack of
due care is required to prove a violation.
(Ord. 1994-36 § 1 (part), 1994)
9.13.020   Findings.
   False alarms and false robbery alarms constitute a substantial public danger
and a substantial public expense. Of alarm notice received by the Pima County
sheriff's department, experience has shown that overwhelming majority are
false. Law enforcement resources are diverted from other duties by these
alarms. Law enforcement personnel and the public are endangered by the need for
urgent response to these alarms.
(Ord. 1994-36 § 1 (part), 1994)
9.13.030   Definitions.
   The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be
construed as defined in this section, unless the context requires otherwise:
   A.   "Act of nature" means unusual, extraordinary, sudden and unexpected
manifestation of the forces of nature, the effects of which cannot be prevented
by reasonable human care, skill or foresight.
   B.   "Alarm system" means any mechanical or electrical device which is used
to help protect persons, building or premises in emergencies through the
emission of a sound or the transmission of a signal or message.
   C.   "False alarm" means an alarm signal or message, other than a robbery
alarm, indicating an emergency and causing a deputy to respond which is not
caused by or the result of an actual emergency entry, or an act of nature.
   D.   "False robbery alarm" means a message or signal which indicates a
robbery, causing a deputy to respond, which is not caused by or the result of
an actual or attempted robbery or act of nature.
   E.   "Person" means any natural person, employee, firm, partnership,
association or corporation.
   F.   "Common cause" means a technical difficulty or malfunction which causes
an alarm system to generate a series of false alarms.
   G.   "Emergency" means the commission or attempted commission of an offense
in violation of A.R.S. Title 13 or a medical emergency.
(Ord. 1994-36 § 1 (part), 1994)
9.13.040   Excessive false alarms prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful and constitute a civil violation for any person to own,
purchase, lease, contract for or otherwise obtain, or operate an alarm system
which had five or more false alarms within any consecutive three-hundred-sixty-
five-day period. Each false alarm generated in excess of five within any
consecutive three-hundred-sixty-five-day period is a separate violation of this
section.
(Ord. 1994-36 § 1 (part), 1994)
9.13.050   False robbery alarms prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful and constitute a civil violation for any person to own,
purchase, lease, contract for or otherwise to operate an alarm system which
generated five or more false robbery alarms within any consecutive three-
hundred-sixty-five-day period. Each false alarm generated in excess of five
within any consecutive three-hundred-sixty-five-day period is a separate
violation of this section.
(Ord. 1994-36 § 1 (part), 1994)
9.13.060   Penalties.
   A.   A person found responsible for a fifth false alarm in violation of
Section
9.13.040 shall be punished by a minimum civil penalty of one hundred twenty-
five dollars; a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars may be imposed.
False alarm incidents may form the basis of more than one violation of Section
9.13.040.
   B.   A person found responsible for a sixth false alarm in violation of
Section
9.13.040 shall be punished by a minimum civil penalty of two hundred fifty
dollars; a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars may be imposed. False
alarm incidents may form the basis of more than one violation of Section
9.13.040.
   C.   A person found responsible for a seventh false alarm in violation of
Section
9.13.040 shall be punished by a minimum civil penalty of three hundred seventy-
five dollars; a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars may be imposed.
False alarm incidents may form the basis of more than one violation of Section
9.13.040.
   D.   The fine amount for a person found responsible for each false alarm
occurring thereafter within the same three-hundred-sixty-five-day period shall
increase by increments of not less that one hundred twenty-five dollars nor
more than one thousand dollars for each violation.
   E.   A person found responsible for a violation of Section
9.13.050 shall be punished by a minimum civil penalty of five hundred dollars;
a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars may be imposed.
   F.   No penalty imposed under this chapter may be suspended, waived or
otherwise made conditional in sanctioning a person found responsible of
violations of the offenses set out in this chapter.
   G.   A report from the Pima County sheriff's department documenting a
sheriff's response to an alarm and an investigation which revealed no emergency
shall constitute prima facie evidence of a false alarm.
(Ord. 1994-36 § 1 (part), 1994)
9.13.070   Common cause exception.
   False alarms generated by a common cause shall be counted as one false alarm
if, and only if, the false alarms occurred within a seventy-two-hour period and
corrective action is taken and immediate notice of such action is provided to
the sheriff's department, and during the next thirty-day period there are no
false alarms generated by that documented cause.
(Ord. 1994-36 § 1 (part), 1994)
9.13.080   Alarm operator.
   A.   The operator of any alarm system, whether at a business or residence,
shall be responsible for instructing all persons who are authorized to place
the device or system into operation in the appropriate method of operation,
advising them of the provisions of this chapter, and emphasizing the importance
of avoiding false alarms.
   B.   The operator of any alarm system, whether at a business or residence,
shall conspicuously place on the premises a notice identifying the alarm
company or service to whom the premises subscribes and who is available to
respond to an alarm activation, or a notice provided by the sheriff's
department designed to allow notification of the operator or an authorized
representative available to respond to an alarm activation, or other such
notice which shall include the name, address and telephone number of the
primary person and at least one alternate available to respond to an alarm
activation.
(Ord. 1994-36 § 1 (part), 1994)
9.13.090   Alarm company duties.
   A.   When the sheriff's department is notified of an alarm activation by an
alarm company, service or operator, the notifying party shall advise the
sheriff's department if an authorized representative will respond to the alarm
and, if so, if the representative will arrive within thirty minutes at the
location of the alarm. If the department is advised there will be a response
within thirty minutes, it shall constitute a civil infraction to fail to
respond within the thirty-minute period.
   B.   If an alarm signal is received at a central station, the alarm company
or service operating the central station shall, when it advises the sheriff's
department of the alarm, also immediately notify the operator of the alarm
system of the alarm.
   C.   An alarm company or service shall inform purchasers of alarm systems or
services of the provision of this chapter. This provision shall not apply to
alarm systems which generate only an audible alarm at the location of the
alarm.
   D.   The alarm company or service shall maintain a record of alarm
activation notification for a one-year period following notification. Records
shall include the name and phone number of the person notified of the alarm
activation, and the time notification was given.
   E.   It shall constitute a civil infraction for an alarm company, service,
or operator to fail to comply with any of the provisions of Sections
9.13.080 and
9.13.090.
(Ord. 1994-36 § 1 (part), 1994)
9.13.100   Penalties.
   Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, when a violation of Sections
9.13.080 and
9.13.090 is determined, the following penalties shall be imposed:
   A fine of not less than fifty dollars nor more than one thousand dollars per
violation. The imposition of a fine under this chapter shall not be suspended.
(Ord. 1994-36 § 1 (part), 1994)
9.13.110   Corrective measures.
   It shall be a defense to any incident prohibited in this chapter that a
deputy did not actually respond to an alarm as a result of notice to the Pima
County sheriff's department from the owner, lessee, purchaser or operator of
the alarm system that the alarm was false.
(Ord. 1994-36 § 1 (part), 1994)
9.13.120   Recent installations.
   New installed and reinstalled alarm systems shall not be subject to the
provision of these section relating to the county assessment of false alarms
for a period of thirty days from the date the alarm system becomes operational
if the alarm owner notifies the Pima County sheriff's department in writing
within ten days of the completion of the installation or reinstallation. The
written notice shall specify the date the system was installed or reinstalled;
and if reinstalled, the notice shall also describe the nature and extent of the
reinstallation.
(Ord. 1994-36 § 1 (part), 1994)
9.13.130   Exemptions.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to audible alarms
affixed to automobiles or to alarm systems operated by governmental units.
(Ord. 1994-36 § 1 (part), 1994)
9.13.140   Evidence.
   In any court action to enforce this chapter, official law enforcement
records shall be received in evidence without other foundation.
(Ord. 1994-36 § 1 (part), 1994)
Chapter 9.16
TUCSON-PIMA COUNTY EMERGENCY SERVICES COMMISSION
Sections: 
9.16.010   Created—Membership.
9.16.020   Terms of office.
9.16.030   Vacancies.
9.16.040   Members to serve without compensation.
9.16.050   Duties, powers, and functions.
9.16.060   Chairperson.
9.16.070   Emergency services agency—Director of emergency services generally.
9.16.080   Method of commission operation.
9.16.090   Definition, responsibilities and duties of the director of emergency
services.
9.16.100   Future participation in Tucson-Pima County emergency services plan.
9.16.010   Created—Membership.
   There is created a joint municipal and county agency, to be called "The
Tucson-Pima County Emergency Service Commission." The voting members of the
commission consist of ten persons originally selected in the following manner:
the chairperson of the Pima County board of supervisors submits a list of ten
names and the mayor submits a list of ten names. Ten persons are selected from
among the twenty names submitted. Each of the supervisors of Pima County has
one and four-tenths votes; however, the total number of supervisor votes
remains at seven in the event the number of supervisors is changed. The mayor
has one vote. However, the total number of votes for the mayor and council
remains at seven votes in the event the number of councilmen is changed.
(Reso. 1990-135 § 1, 1990; Ord. 1985-142 § 1 (part), 1985)
9.16.020   Terms of office.
   The terms of office of the members of the Tucson-Pima County emergency
services commission are as follows: four members are appointed for a term of
one year commencing as of the date of the original Ordinance No. 1963-21 passed
by the Pima County board of supervisors and the passage of a corresponding
ordinance by the mayor and council, whichever is the later date; three members
are appointed for a term of two years commencing on such date; three members
are appointed for a term of three years from the expiration of the original
term of office.
(Reso. 1990-135 § 1, 1990; Ord. 1985-142 § 1 (part), 1985)
9.16.030   Vacancies.
   Whenever there are vacancies, the Tucson-Pima County emergency services
commission, by absolute majority vote, shall submit one name for each vacancy
to be filled to the Pima County board of supervisors, the mayor and council of
the city of Tucson, and the appropriate governmental body of any future
participating political subdivisions. In order that the nominee be appointed, a
majority vote of each of the above governing bodies will be required. All such
appointments made subsequent to the original appointment will be for a term of
four years.
(Ord. 1991-45 § 1, 1991: Reso. 1990-135 § 1, 1990; Ord. 1985-142 § 1 (part),
1985)
9.16.040   Members to serve without compensation.
   Voting members of the commission serve without compensation, but may be
reimbursed for traveling and other necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties as provided for public officers.
(Reso. 1990-135 § 1, 1990; Ord. 1985-142 § 1 (part), 1985)
9.16.050   Duties, powers, and functions.
   A.   The commission shall advise the director of emergency services on the
following:
      1.   The development of disaster control and post-disaster recovery;
      2.   The development of emergency services policies and recommendations
for implementation of these plans insofar as city, county, state and federal
means are available.
   B.   The commission is considered an advisory and planning body only. It has
no operational functions other than those which may, from time to time, be
delegated to it by ordinance or other means.
(Reso. 1990-135 § 1, 1990; Ord. 1985-142 § 1 (part), 1985)
9.16.060   Chairperson.
   There is a chairperson of the commission who is chosen by an absolute
majority vote of the voting members of the commission. The chairperson shall
serve for a one (1) year term. The term shall start at midnight on the date of
his appointment. The chairperson may be elected for additional terms.
(Reso. 1990-135 § 1, 1990; Ord. 1985-142 § 1 (part), 1985)
9.16.070   Emergency services agency—Director of emergency services generally.
   The director of the Tucson-Pima County emergency services agency will select
and appoint a manager to assist the director in carrying out the
responsibilities and duties of the director of emergency services. The manager
of emergency services will be selected and appointed by the director through
Pima County merit system procedures. The director, or the manager of emergency
services when instructed by the director, also is the eleventh member and vice-
chairperson of the commission, in order to insure continuity of purpose and
direction between the agency and the commission. The director, however, has no
vote. The director shall assume the chairperson's position in case the
chairperson is absent or temporarily unable to assume duties. In the event of
the death or resignation of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson will assume
the chairperson's office until a new chairperson can be elected as provided in
Section
9.16.060. The director will also serve as secretary of the commission.
(Reso. 1990-135 § 1, 1990; Ord. 1985-142 § 1 (part), 1985)
9.16.080   Method of commission operation.
   A.   Any five voting members of the commission constitutes a quorum. The
chairperson may delegate to the vice-chairperson or any members of the
commission the authority to call a meeting of the commission.
   B.   Regular commission meetings will be held at the call of the chairperson
or, in his absence, by the vice-chairperson.
   C.   The director of emergency services, with approval of the chairperson,
shall prepare an agenda before each meeting listing all known items of business
expected to be transacted. If possible, the agenda shall be prepared and mailed
to each member of the commission five days before the meeting date.
   D.   At the first regularly scheduled monthly meeting, or as soon thereafter
as possible, the commission shall adopt by-laws and regulations governing the
conduct of the commission's operations and business. Said by-laws and
regulations shall be effective as soon as approved by the Pima County board of
supervisors and the mayor and council of the city of Tucson.
   E.   Meetings of the commission shall be conducted pursuant to the Arizona
Open Meeting Law, A.R.S. § 38-431, et seq., and any applicable federal statutes
and regulations.
   F.   A special meeting of the commission may be called at any time by the
chairperson of the Pima County board of supervisors, the mayor of the city of
Tucson, or by the appropriate officials of any other future participating
political subdivision.
   G.   The chairperson shall conduct commission meetings according to Robert's
Rules of Order, except as modified by written by-laws of this Chapter.
(Reso. 1990-135 § 1, 1990; Ord. 1985-142 § 1 (part), 1985)
9.16.090   Definition, responsibilities and duties of the director of emergency
services.
   A.   The director is the chief executive for Tucson-Pima County department
of emergency services.
   B.   The director is responsible for emergency services administration for
Pima County and the city of Tucson. The director's responsibilities include,
but are not limited to, the following:
      1.   Development of plans for the survival of the maximum number of
people living in Tucson and Pima County in the event of natural or man-made
disaster;
      2.   Development of plans for the reconstruction of the community and its
institutions in the period following such disasters.
(Reso. 1990-135 § 1, 1990; Ord. 1985-142 § 1 (part), 1985)
9.16.100   Future participation in Tucson-Pima County emergency services plan.
   If, in the future, any other political subdivision within Pima County wishes
to enter the joint Tucson-Pima County emergency services effort, it may do so
by petition of its governing body to the Pima County board of supervisors and
to the mayor and council of the city of Tucson; the approval of both bodies
being necessary for acceptance. Upon such approval, the newly admitted
political subdivision shall share in the costs of the emergency services
program in terms of a per capita share based on its total population relative
to that of the city of Tucson. This sum will be prorated from the time of
acceptance until the end of the fiscal year.
(Reso. 1990-135 § 1, 1990; Ord. 1985-142 § 1 (part), 1985)
Chapter 9.20
CURFEW
Sections: 
9.20.010   Definitions.
9.20.020   Curfew for minors.
9.20.030   Parent, guardian or custodian.
9.20.010   Definitions.
   The following definitions shall apply throughout this chapter:
   A.   "Custodian" means any person, not a minor, who is in loco parentis to a
minor.
   B.   "Guardian" means any person, other than a parent, who has legal
guardianship of the person of a minor.
   C.   "Minor" means any person who has not yet reached eighteen years of age.
   D.   "Parent" means any natural or adoptive parent of a minor.
(Ord. 1996-65 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 1993-103 § 1 (part), 1993)
9.20.020   Curfew for minors.
   A.   It is unlawful for any minor, prior to his or her sixteenth birthday,
to be, remain, loiter or cruise in any vehicle in, about or upon any place in
the unincorporated area of the county away from his or her dwelling house or
usual place of abode between the hours of ten p.m. and five a.m. of the
following day.
   B.   It is unlawful for any minor, on or after his or her sixteenth
birthday, but prior to his or her eighteenth birthday, to be, remain, loiter or
cruise in any vehicle in, about or upon any place in the unincorporated area of
the county away from his or her dwelling house or usual place of abode between
the hours of twelve midnight and five a.m. of the following day.
   C.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any minor when he or
she is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, custodian or adult having
supervisorial custody, or when he or she is lawfully married, or when he or she
is on an emergency errand, or when he or she has been specifically directed to
the location on reasonable, legitimate business or some other activity by the
parent, guardian, custodian or adult having supervisorial custody.
   D.   Any minor violating this section is an incorrigible child.
(Ord. 1996-65 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 1993-103 § 1 (part), 1993)
9.20.030   Parent, guardian or custodian.
   A.   It is unlawful for the parent, guardian, custodian or adult having
supervisorial custody of any minor to permit the minor to be, remain, loiter or
cruise in any vehicle in, about or upon any place in the unincorporated area of
the county away from the dwelling house or usual place of abode of the minor in
violation of this chapter.
   B.   Any parent, guardian, custodian or adult having supervisorial custody
violating this section shall be guilty of a petty offense.
(Ord. 1996-65 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 1993-103 § 1 (part), 1993)
Chapter 9.30
REGULATION OF EXCESSIVE, UNNECESSARY AND ANNOYING NOISES
Sections: 
9.30.010   Applicability.
9.30.020   Purpose.
9.30.030   Definitions.
9.30.040   Impermissible sound levels.
9.30.050   Loud radios, sound sets, etc.
9.30.060   Vehicular noise.
9.30.070   Construction of buildings and other projects.
9.30.080   Exemptions.
9.30.090   Penalty.
9.30.100   Severability.
9.30.110   Effective date.
9.30.010   Applicability.
   This chapter shall not apply to any incorporated city, town or Indian
reservation. It shall apply only within the unincorporated areas of the county.
9.30.020   Purpose.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of Pima County to prohibit excessive,
unnecessary and annoying noises from all sources. At and above certain level,
noises are detrimental to the health and welfare of the citizens of the county,
and it is in the best interest of the citizens of Pima County that such noises
be systematically eliminated.
(Ord. 1999-61 § 1 (part), 1999)
9.30.030   Definitions.
   The following definitions shall apply throughout this chapter unless a
different meaning is clearly indicated by the context:
   A.   Commercial property means any property occupied by business which sell,
rent, trade or store goods, or which provide a service.
   B.   Industrial property means any property occupied by land uses whose
primary operation involves manufacturing, assembling, processing or otherwise
treating raw materials, semi-finished products, or finished products for
packaging and distribution to either wholesale or retail markets.
   C.   Property line means the line which represents the legal limits of
property (including an apartment, condominium, room or other dwelling unit)
owned, leased or otherwise occupied by a person, business, corporation or
institution. In cases involving sound from an activity on a public street or
other public right-of-way, the property line shall be the nearest boundary of
the public right-of-way.
   D.   Residential property means any property, the dominant use of which is
nontransient occupancy of residential dwelling units.
   E.   Motor vehicle means any self-propelled vehicle operated within the
county, including but not limited to licensed or unlicensed vehicles,
automobiles, minibikes, go-carts, all terrain vehicles, and motorcycles.
   F.   Emergency work means any work performed to prevent or alleviate
physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency which
has or may result in a disruption of service and which is necessary to protect
the health, safety and welfare of persons or property.
   G.   Emergency vehicle means vehicles of the fire, police and public service
departments and legally authorized ambulances and emergency vehicles of state
departments or any political subdivisions thereof and vehicles of public
service corporations.
   H.   Person means a human being and, as the context requires, an enterprise,
a public or private corporation, an unincorporated association, a partnership,
a firm, a society, a government, a governmental authority or an individual or
entity capable of holding a legal or beneficial interest in property.
(Ord. 2001-127 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 1999-61 § 1 (part), 1999)
9.30.040   Impermissible sound levels.
   In addition to the prohibited noises described in
9.30.050,
9.30.060 and
9.30.070, it shall be unlawful for any person to make or continue, or cause or
permit to be made or continued, any excessive, unnecessary or offensive noise
which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes
discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing
in the area.
(Ord. 2001-127 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 1999-61 § 1 (part), 1999)
9.30.050   Loud radios, sound sets, etc.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, including the owner or manager of
a restaurant, bar, inn, or resort of any kind, to operate or permit to be
operated any radio receiving set, phonograph, musical instrument, or sound
producing or sound reproducing mechanism, at any time in such a manner as to
permit the same to be hear at a distance of more than one hundred twenty-five
(125) feet from the property line or motor vehicle where such radio receiving
set, phonograph, or sound producing or sound reproducing mechanism is located,
when the sound of such radio receiving set, phonograph, musical instrument, or
sound producing or sound reproducing mechanism is operated in such a manner as
to create an excessive, unnecessary or offensive noise that a reasonable person
of normal sensitivity residing in the area is caused discomfort or annoyance.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person, including the owner or manager of
a restaurant, bar, inn, or resort of any kind, to operate or permit to be
operated any radio receiving set, phonograph, musical instrument, or sound
producing or sound reproducing mechanism, between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and
7:00 A.M. in such a manner that the sound from such radio set, phonograph,
musical instrument, sound producing or sound reproducing mechanism may be heard
beyond the property line from which it is operated or outside the motor vehicle
in which it is operated in such a manner as to create an excessive, unnecessary
or offensive noise that a reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in
the area is caused discomfort or annoyance.
(Ord. 2001-127 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 1999-61 § 1 (part), 1999)
9.30.060   Vehicular noise.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person within any residential area of this
county to repair, rebuild or test any motor vehicle between the hours of 10:00
p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. of the next day in such a manner as to create an
excessive, unnecessary or offensive noise that a reasonable person of normal
sensitivity residing in the area is caused discomfort or annoyance.
   B.   No person shall operate or cause to operate any motor vehicle unless
the exhaust system of such vehicle:
      1.   Is free from defects which may cause sound level magnification,
      2.   Is equipped with a muffler,
      3.   Has not been modified in such a manner which will amplify or
increase the sound level emitted by the motor of such vehicle above that
emitted by a muffler originally installed on the vehicle as manufactured for
initial sale.
   C.   No person shall operate a motor vehicle in such a manner which creates
the squealing of tires in the roadway.
(Ord. 1999-61 § 1 (part), 1999)
9.30.070   Construction of buildings and other projects.
   A.   Noise limitations: Subject to the provisions of section
9.30.040, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate equipment or perform
any outside construction or repair work on buildings, structures or projects,
or to operate any pile driver, power shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, power
hoist or any other construction type device except within the time periods
specified below unless an appropriate permit has been obtained beforehand from
the county.
   B.   Construction start/stop times:
      1.   Concrete work: From April fifteenth to October fifteenth, inclusive,
concrete may be poured each day between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or
at such other times as authorized by permit. From October sixteenth to April
Fourteenth, inclusive, concrete may be poured each day between the hours of 6:
00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. or at such times as authorized by permit.
      2.   Other type construction (residential zones): From April fifteenth to
October fifteenth, inclusive, all other construction or repair work shall not
begin prior to 6:00 a.m. and must stop by 7:00 p.m. each day in, or within five
hundred (500) feet of, a residential zone or at such other times as authorized
by permit. From October sixteenth to April fourteenth, inclusive, all other
construction or repair work shall not begin prior to 7:00 a.m. and must be
stopped by 7:00 p.m. each day in, or within five hundred (500) feet of, a
residential property or at such other times as authorized by permit.
      3.   Other type construction (commercial and industrial zones):
Construction and repair work in commercial and industrial zones, not within
five hundred (500) feet of a residential property, shall not begin prior to 5:
00 a.m. and must stop by 7:00 p.m. or at such other times as authorized by
permit.
      4.   Weekends and holidays excluded: Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary herein, construction or repair work shall not begin prior to 7:00 a.m.
and must stop by 7:00 p.m., and concrete pouring should not begin prior to 6:00
a.m. and must stop by 7:00 p.m. on any Saturday, Sunday or state or federal
holiday, unless such other times are authorized by permit.
   C.   Permits: Construction and repair work may be conducted at different
times and at higher noise levels than otherwise permitted, if upon written
application, a permit is obtained beforehand from the county administrator or
his designee. The permit shall be kept on the work site and shown to county
officials on request. In granting such permit, the county administrator or his
designee shall consider if construction noise in the vicinity of the proposed
work site would be less objectionable at night than during the daytime because
of different population levels or different neighboring activities; if
obstruction and interference with traffic, particularly on streets of major
importance, would be less objectionable at night than during the daytime; if
the kind of work to be performed emits noises at such a low level as to not
cause significant disturbance in the vicinity of the work site; if the
neighborhood of the proposed work site is of such a character wherein sleep
could be disturbed; if great economic hardship would occur if the work was
spread over a longer time; if the work will abate or prevent hazards to life or
property; if proposed early morning or night work is in the general public
interest; and, he shall prescribe such conditions, working times, types of
construction equipment to be used, and permissible noise emissions as he deems
to be required in the public interest. No permit shall be required to perform
emergency work as defined in section
9.30.030.
   D.   Revocation of permits: The county administrator or his designee may
revoke any permit granted hereunder upon complaint based upon substantial
evidence that the construction activity caused significant disturbance in the
vicinity of the work site.
(Ord. 1999-61 § 1 (part), 1999)
9.30.080   Exemptions.
   The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the provisions
contained in this article:
   A.   Heating and cooling equipment when it is functioning in accordance with
manufacturer's specifications and is in proper operating condition provided
that no unit may create an excessive, unnecessary or offensive noise causing
annoyance or discomfort to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity within any
sleeping or living area inside any dwelling unit;
   B.   Landscape maintenance equipment when it is functioning in accordance
with the manufacturer's specifications and with all mufflers and noise-reducing
equipment in use and in proper operating condition;
   C.   Nonamplified crowd noises resulting from activities such as those
planned by school, governmental or community groups, or organized sports except
for such noises generated at restaurants, bars, inns, or resorts of any kind;
   D.   Noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure relief
valves;
   E.   Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when responding
to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency;
   F.   Noises resulting from emergency work as defined in section
9.30.030;
   G.   Noises from the normal operation of railroad trains;
   H.   Noises from church chimes;
   I.   Power plant equipment during normal operation;
   J.   Noise created by any county vehicle, equipment or facility while being
operated for official use;
   K.   Operation of agricultural equipment in connection with farming
operations;
   L.   Any aircraft operated in conformity with, or pursuant to, federal law,
federal air regulations or air traffic control instructions issued pursuant to
or within duly adopted federal air regulations, together with any noise created
by aircraft operated under, or pursuant to, declaration of an emergency under
federal air regulations.
(Ord. 2001-127 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 1999-61 § 1 (part), 1999)
9.30.090   Penalty.
   A violation of any provision of this article shall be deemed and is declared
to be a public nuisance and any person who violates any of the provisions of
this article shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Each day a violation
continues or exists shall be a separate offense subject to punishment as a
separate class 1 misdemeanor.
(Ord. 1999-61 § 1 (part), 1999)
9.30.100   Severability.
   If any provisions of this ordinance, or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance, is invalid, that invalidity shall not effect other
provisions or applications of this ordinance which can be given effect without
the invalid provisions or applications, and to this end the provisions of this
ordinance are severable.
(Ord. 1999-61 § 1 (part), 1999)
9.30.110   Effective date.
   This ordinance will be in full force and effective after thirty days from
the date of enactment.
(Ord. 1999-61 § 1 (part), 1999)
Chapter 9.40
FINGERPRINTING AND CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK OF PROSPECTIVE AND CURRENT
ATTENDANT CARE WORKERS
Sections: 
9.40.010   Authority to receive criminal history record information.
9.40.020   Fingerprinting of prospective and current attendant care workers.
9.40.030   Persons authorized to receive criminal history record information.
9.40.040   Annual sworn statement.
9.40.050   Persons prohibited from providing services.
9.40.010   Authority to receive criminal history record information.
   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750, pima health system is hereby authorized to
receive state and federal criminal history record information for the purpose
of evaluating the fitness of prospective and current attendant care workers.
(Ord. 2000-33 § 1, 2000)
9.40.020   Fingerprinting of prospective and current attendant care workers.
   As a condition of employment or continued employment with Pima County's pima
health system as an attendant care worker, in accordance with subparagraphs (1)
and (2) below, prospective and current attendant care workers shall submit a
full set of fingerprints on a standard fingerprint card to pima health system
for a state and federal criminal history records check pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-
1750 and Public Law 92-544. Pima health system shall forward those
fingerprints, accompanied by the appropriate fees, which shall be paid by pima
health system, to the Arizona department of public safety for the purpose of
obtaining a state and federal criminal history record check. The Department of
Public Safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the Federal
Bureau of Investigation.
      1.   As of the effective date of this chapter, each prospective attendant
care worker shall, within ten (10) business days of the successful completion
of the attendant care worker training program, furnish a full set of
fingerprints on a standard fingerprint card to the manager of human resources
for pima health system.
      2.   Within 45 days of the effective date of this chapter, each attendant
care worker currently employed by pima health system shall, as a condition of
continued employment, furnish a full set of fingerprints on a standard
fingerprint card to the manager of human resources for pima health system.
(Ord. 2000-33 § 1, 2000)
9.40.030   Persons authorized to receive criminal history record information.
   The manager of human resources for pima health system and the quality
management manager of pima health system are authorized to receive state and
federal criminal history record information for the purposes of evaluating the
fitness of prospective and current attendant care workers. Criminal history
record information received by either pima health system's manager of human
resources or quality management manager shall be used only for the purpose of
evaluating the fitness of prospective or current attendant care workers.
Secondary dissemination of such information is strictly prohibited. Pima health
system personnel shall comply with any relevant state and federal rules and
regulations regarding the dissemination of criminal history record information.
(Ord. 2000-33 § 1, 2000)
9.40.040   Annual sworn statement.
   A.   A prospective attendant care worker shall, with the full set of
fingerprints, complete and submit a notarized form, provided by pima health
system, indicating whether he has ever been convicted of, or is awaiting trial
on, any of the following criminal offenses in the state of Arizona or similar
offenses in any other state or jurisdiction:
      1.   Abuse of a vulnerable adult as defined in A.R.S. § 13-3623.
      2.   Sexual abuse.
      3.   Incest.
      4.   First or second degree murder.
      5.   Kidnapping.
      6.   Arson.
      7.   Sexual assault.
      8.   Sexual exploitation of a minor.
      9.   Contributing to the delinquency of a minor.
      10.   Commercial sexual exploitation of a minor.
      11.   Felony offenses involving distribution of marijuana or dangerous or
narcotic drugs.
      12.   Theft.
      13.   Robbery.
      14.   A dangerous crime against children as defined in A.R.S. § 13-
604.01.
      15.   Child abuse.
      16.   Sexual conduct with a minor.
      17.   Molestation of a child.
      18.   Manslaughter.
      19.   Aggravated assault.
      20.   Domestic violence.
      21.   Fraud or fraudulent schemes.
      22.   Assault within the last five years from the date of submitting a
full set of fingerprints to pima health system.
      23.   Possession or use of marijuana or a dangerous or narcotic drug
within the last five years from the date of submitting a full set of
fingerprints to Pima Health System.
   B.   A current attendant care worker shall, with the full set of
fingerprints submitted pursuant to Section
9.40.020(2), complete and submit a notarized form, provided by pima health
system, indicating whether he has ever been convicted of, or is awaiting trial
on, any of the criminal offenses enumerated in paragraph A of this section in
the state of Arizona or similar offenses in any other state or jurisdiction.
   C.   Each attendant care worker shall, as a condition of continued
employment, annually complete and submit a notarized form, provided by pima
health system, indicating whether, since the date of submitting his last sworn
statement, he has been convicted of, or is awaiting trial on, any of the
criminal offenses enumerated in paragraph A(1) through A(21) of this section,
or either of the following criminal offenses, in the state of Arizona or
similar offenses in any other state or jurisdiction:
      1.   Assault.
      2.   Possession or use of marijuana or a dangerous or narcotic drug.
(Ord. 2000-33 § 1, 2000)
9.40.050   Persons prohibited from providing services.
   Pima health system shall not allow any person to provide or continue to
provide services as an attendant care worker, if any of the following occur:
      1.   The criminal history records check or the sworn statement required
pursuant to Section
9.40.040 indicates that he is awaiting trial on, or has been convicted of, any
offense listed in Section
9.40.040(A); or,
      2.   The prospective or current attendant care worker fails or refuses to
submit fingerprints pursuant to Section
9.40.020; or
      3.   The prospective or current attendant care worker fails or refuses to
submit the sworn statement pursuant to Section
9.40.040; or,
      4.   The prospective or current attendant care worker submits a false
notarized statement regarding criminal offenses.
(Ord. 2000-33 § 1, 2000)
CHAPTER 9.50
FINGERPRINTING AND CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK OF PROSPECTIVE AND CURRENT
EMPLOYEES, CONTRACT INSTRUCTORS OR VOLUNTEERS OF PIMA COUNTY NATURAL RESOURCES,
PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT
Sections: 
9.50.010   Authority to receive criminal history record information.
9.50.020   Fingerprinting of prospective and current Pima County Natural
Resources, Parks and Recreation department employees, contract instructors and
volunteers who work directly with children under the age of eighteen (18).
9.50.030   Persons authorized to receive criminal history record information.
9.50.040   Sworn statement and annual sworn statement.
9.50.050   Persons prohibited from providing services.
9.50.010   Authority to receive criminal history record information.
   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750, Pima County Natural Resources, Parks and
Recreation department is hereby authorized to receive state and federal
criminal history record information for the purpose of evaluating the fitness
of prospective and current Pima County Natural Resources, Parks and Recreation
department employees, contract instructors and volunteers who work directly
with children under the age of eighteen (18).
(Ord. 2004-39 § 1 (part), 2004)
9.50.020   Fingerprinting of prospective and current Pima County Natural
Resources, Parks and Recreation department employees, contract instructors and
volunteers who work directly with children under the age of eighteen (18).
   As a condition of employment or continued employment with Pima County's
Natural Resources, Parks and Recreation department, in accordance with
subparagraphs (1) and (2) below, prospective and current Natural Resources,
Parks and Recreation department employees, contract instructors and volunteers
in the following job classifications shall submit a full set of fingerprints,
on a standard fingerprint card to Pima County Natural Resources, Parks and
Recreation department for a state and federal criminal history records check
pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750 and Public Law 92-544:
      Neighborhood Recreation Center Coordinator (Class Code 6242);
      Recreation Leader (Class Code 6245);
      Aquatics Supervisor (Class Code 6235);
      Principal Lifeguard (Class Code 6233);
      Senior Recreation Specialist (Class Code 6256);
      Recreation Specialist (Class Code 6255);
      Recreation Aide (Class Code 6214);
      Water Safety Instructor (Class Code 6232); and
      Lifeguard (Class Code 6231)
   and any other employee, contract instructor or volunteer having direct
contact with children under the age of eighteen (18).
   Pima County Natural Resources, Parks and Recreation department shall forward
those fingerprints, accompanied by the appropriate fees, which shall be paid by
Pima County Natural Resources, Parks and Recreation department, to the Arizona
Department of Public Safety for the purpose of obtaining a state and federal
criminal history record check. The Department of Public Safety is authorized to
exchange this fingerprint data with the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
      1.   As of the effective date of this chapter, each prospective Pima
County Natural Resources, Parks and Recreation department employee, contract
instructor or volunteer (in the positions listed above) shall, as a condition
of hire, furnish a full set of fingerprints on a standard fingerprint card to
the director of Pima County Natural Resources, Parks and Recreation department.
      2.   Within 45 days of the effective date of this chapter, each employee,
contract instructor or volunteer who works directly with children under the age
of eighteen (18) with the Natural Resources, Parks and Recreation department
shall, as a condition of continued employment, furnish a full set of
fingerprints on a standard fingerprint card to the director of Pima County
Natural Resources, Parks and Recreation department.
(Ord. 2005-79 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 2005-46 § 1 (part), 2005; Ord. 2004-39 § 1
(part), 2004)
9.50.030   Persons authorized to receive criminal history record information.
   The director of Pima County Natural Resources, Parks and Recreation
department, his/her deputy or designee, is authorized to receive state and
federal criminal history record information for the purposes of evaluating the
fitness of prospective and current employees and volunteers with the Natural
Resources, Parks and Recreation department who work directly with children
under the age of eighteen (18). Criminal history record information received by
the Pima County Natural Resources, Parks and Recreation department shall be
used only for the purpose of evaluating the fitness of prospective or current
employees, and volunteers, who work directly with children under the age of
eighteen (18). Secondary dissemination of such information is strictly
prohibited provided, however, Pima County Natural Resources, Parks and
Recreation department personnel shall comply with any relevant state and
federal rules and regulations regarding the dissemination of criminal history
record information.
(Ord. 2005-79 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 2005-46 § 1 (part), 2005; Ord. 2004-39 § 1
(part), 2004)
9.50.040   Sworn statement and annual sworn statement.
   A.   A prospective employee, contract instructor or volunteer shall, with
the full set of fingerprints, complete and submit a notarized form, provided by
Pima County Natural Resources, Parks and Recreation Department, indicating
whether he or she is subject to registration as a sex offender in this state or
any other jurisdiction or is awaiting trial on or has ever been convicted of
committing, or attempting or conspiring to commit, one or more of the following
offenses in this state or the same or similar offenses in another state or
jurisdiction:
      1.   First or second degree murder.
      2.   Kidnapping.
      3.   Arson.
      4.   Contributing to the delinquency of a minor.
      5.   Felony offenses involving distribution of marijuana or dangerous or
narcotic drugs.
      6.   Theft.
      7.   Robbery.
      8.   Manslaughter.
      9.   Aggravated assault.
      10.   Domestic violence.
      11.   Fraud or fraudulent schemes.
      12.   Assault within the last five years from the date of submitting a
full set of fingerprints to Pima County Natural Resources, Parks and Recreation
Department.
      13.   Possession or use of marijuana or a dangerous or narcotic drug
within the last five years from the date of submitting a full set of
fingerprints to Pima County Natural Resources, Parks and Recreation Department.
      14.   Sexual Abuse of a Minor.
      15.   Sexual Abuse of a Vulnerable Adult.
      16.   Incest.
      17.   Sexual Assault.
      18.   Sexual Exploitation of a Minor.
      19.   Sexual Exploitation of a Vulnerable Adult.
      20.   Commercial Sexual Exploitation of a Minor.
      21.   Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Vulnerable Adult.
      22.   Child Prostitution as defined in A.R.S. § 13-3212.
      23.   Child Abuse.
      24.   Abuse of a Vulnerable Adult.
      25.   Sexual Conduct with a Minor.
      26.   Molestation of a Child.
      27.   Molestation of a Vulnerable Adult.
      29.   A Dangerous Crime Against Children, as defined in A.R.S. § 13-
604.01.
      29.   Exploitation of Minors Involving Drug Offenses.
      30.   Taking a Child for the Purposes of Prostitution, as described in
A.R.S. § 13-3206.
      31.   Neglect or Abuse of a Vulnerable Adult.
   B.   A current employee, contract instructor or volunteer shall, at the time
such person submits the full set of fingerprints pursuant to Section
9.50.020, complete and submit a notarized form, provided by Pima County Natural
Resources, Parks and Recreation department, indicating whether he or she has
ever been convicted of, or is awaiting trial on, any of the criminal offenses
enumerated in paragraph A of this section in the state of Arizona or similar
offenses in any other state or jurisdiction.
   C.   Each employee, contract instructor or volunteer shall, as a condition
of continued employment, annually complete and submit a notarized form,
provided by Pima County Natural Resources, Parks and Recreation department,
indicating whether, since the date of submitting his or her last sworn
statement, he or she has been convicted of, or is awaiting trial on, any of the
criminal offenses enumerated in paragraph A(1) through A(31) of this section,
in the state of Arizona or similar offenses in any other state or jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2005-79 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 2005-46 § 1 (part), 2005; Ord. 2004-39 § 1
(part), 2004)
9.50.050   Persons prohibited from providing services.
   Pima County Natural Resources, Parks and Recreation department shall not
allow any person to provide or continue to provide services as a person working
directly with children under the age of eighteen (18), if any of the following
occur:
      1.   The criminal history records check or the sworn statement required
pursuant to Section
9.50.040 indicates that he or she has been convicted of any offense listed in
Section
9.50.040(A); or
      2.   The person fails or refuses to submit fingerprints pursuant to
Section
9.50.020; or
      3.   The person fails or refuses to submit the sworn statement pursuant
to Section
9.50.040; or
      4.   The person submits a false notarized statement regarding criminal
offenses.
(Ord. 2005-79 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 2005-46 § 1 (part), 2005; Ord. 2004-39 § 1
(part), 2004)
CHAPTER 9.60
FINGERPRINTING AND CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK OF PROSPECTIVE AND CURRENT
EMPLOYEES, CONTRACT INSTRUCTORS OR VOLUNTEERS OF PIMA COUNTY COMMUNITY
RESOURCES DEPARTMENT
Sections: 
9.60.010   Authority to receive criminal history record information.
9.60.020   Fingerprinting of prospective and current Pima County Community
Resources Department employees, contract instructors and volunteers who work
directly with children under the age of eighteen (18).
9.60.030   Persons authorized to receive criminal history record information.
9.60.040   Sworn statement and annual sworn statement.
9.60.050   Persons prohibited from providing services.
9.60.010   Authority to receive criminal history record information.
   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750, Pima County Community Resources Department is
hereby authorized to receive state and federal criminal history record
information for the purpose of evaluating the fitness of prospective and
current Pima County Community Resources employees, contract instructors and
volunteers who work directly with children under the age of eighteen (18).
(Ord. 2004-103 § 1 (part), 2004)
9.60.020   Fingerprinting of prospective and current Pima County Community
Resources Department employees, contract instructors and volunteers who work
directly with children under the age of eighteen (18).
   As a condition of employment or continued employment with Pima County
Community Resources Department, in accordance with subparagraphs (1) and (2)
below, prospective and current Community Resources employees, contract
instructors and volunteers in the following job classifications shall submit a
full set of fingerprints, on a standard fingerprint card to Pima County
Community Resources for a state and federal criminal history records check
pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750 and Public Law 92-544:
Class Code: Title
Class Code: Title
0010        Office Support Level I
1171        Administrative Support Specialist
1351        Accountant
1722        Reemployment Development Specialist
1728        Reemployment Counseling Supervisor
1845        Program Coordinator
1847        Program Manager
4131        Licensed Practical Nurse
4148        Patient Care Services Level IV
4512        Health Educator
4561        Public Health Aide
5224        Case Manager
6214        Recreation Aide
6243        Community Recreation Center Coordinator
6245        Recreation Leader
6255        Recreation Specialist
6263        Recreation Program Manager
6285        Sports Official
7010        Senior Clerk-unclassified
7115        Education Service Coordinator
7120        Program Coordinator-unclassified
 
   And any other contract instructor or volunteer having direct contact with
children under the age of eighteen (18).
   Pima County Community Resources Department shall forward those fingerprints,
accompanied by the appropriate fees, which shall be paid by Pima County
Community Resources Department, to the Arizona Department of Public Safety for
the purpose of obtaining a state and federal criminal history record check. The
Department of Public Safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data
with the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
      1.   As of the effective date of this chapter, each prospective Pima
County Community Resources Department employee, contract instructor or
volunteer (in the positions listed above) shall, as a condition of hire,
furnish a full set of fingerprints on a standard fingerprint card to the
Director of Pima County Community Resources.
      2.   Within 45 days of the effective date of this chapter, each employee,
contract instructor or volunteer who works directly with children under the age
of eighteen (18) with the Community Resources Department shall, as a condition
of continued employment, furnish a full set of fingerprints on a standard
fingerprint card to the Director of Pima County Community Resources.
(Ord. 2004-103 § 1 (part), 2004)
9.60.030   Persons authorized to receive criminal history record information.
   The Director of Pima County Community Resources and his/her Deputy is
authorized to receive state and federal criminal history record information for
the purposes of evaluating the fitness of prospective and current employees and
volunteers with the Community Resources Department who work directly with
children under the age of eighteen (18). Criminal history record information
received by the Director of Pima County Community Resources shall be used only
for the purpose of evaluating the fitness of prospective or current employees
and volunteers who work directly with children under the age of eighteen (18).
Secondary dissemination of such information is strictly prohibited provided,
however, Pima County Community Resources Department personnel shall comply with
any relevant state and federal rules and regulations regarding the
dissemination of criminal history record information.
(Ord. 2004-103 § 1 (part), 2004)
9.60.040   Sworn statement and annual sworn statement.
   A.   A prospective employee, contract instructor or volunteer shall, with
the full set of fingerprints, complete and submit a notarized form, provided by
Pima County Community Resources Department, indicating whether he or she has
ever been convicted of, or is awaiting trial on, any of the following criminal
offenses in the State of Arizona or similar offenses in any other state or
jurisdiction:
      1.   Abuse of a vulnerable adult as defined in A.R.S. § 13-3623.
      2.   Sexual abuse.
      3.   Incest.
      4.   First or second-degree murder.
      5.   Kidnapping.
      6.   Arson.
      7.   Sexual assault.
      8.   Sexual exploitation of a minor.
      9.   Contributing to the delinquency of a minor.
      10.   Commercial sexual exploitation of a minor.
      11.   Felony offenses involving distribution of marijuana or dangerous or
narcotic drugs.
      12.   Theft.
      13.   Robbery.
      14.   A dangerous crime against children as defined in A.R.S. § 13-
604.01.
      15.   Child abuse.
      16.   Sexual conduct with a minor.
      17.   Molestation of a child.
      18.   Manslaughter.
      19.   Aggravated assault.
      20.   Domestic violence.
      21.   Fraud or fraudulent schemes.
      22.   Assault within the last five years from the date of submitting a
full set of fingerprints to Pima County Community Resources Department.
      23.   Possession or use of marijuana or a dangerous or narcotic drug
within the last five years from the date of submitting a full set of
fingerprints to Pima County Community Resources Department.
   B.   A current employee, contract instructor or volunteer shall, at the time
such person submits the full set of fingerprints pursuant to Section
9.60.020, complete and submit a notarized form, provided by Pima County
Community Resources Department, indicating whether he or she has ever been
convicted of, or is awaiting trial on, any of the criminal offenses enumerated
in paragraph A of this section in the State of Arizona or similar offenses in
any other state or jurisdiction.
   C.   Each employee, contract instructor or volunteer shall, as a condition
of continued employment, annually complete and submit a notarized form,
provided by Pima County Community Resources Department, indicating whether,
since the date of submitting his or her last sworn statement, he or she has
been convicted of, or is awaiting trial on, any of the criminal offenses
enumerated in paragraph A (1) through A (23) of this section in the State of
Arizona or similar offenses in any other state or jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2004-103 § 1 (part), 2004)
9.60.050   Persons prohibited from providing services.
   Pima County Community Resources Department shall not allow any person to
provide or continue to provide services as a person working directly with
children under the age of eighteen (18), if any of the following occur:
      1.   The criminal history records check or the sworn statement required
pursuant to Section
9.60.040 indicates that he or she is awaiting trial on, or has been convicted
of, any offense listed in Section
9.60.040(A); or,
      2.   The person fails or refuses to submit fingerprints pursuant to
Section
9.60.020; or
      3.   The person fails or refuses to submit the sworn statement pursuant
to section
9.60.040; or,
      4.   The person submits a false notarized statement regarding criminal
offenses.
(Ord. 2004-103 § 1 (part), 2004)
Chapter 9.70
UNDERAGE DRINKING
Section: 
9.70.010   Permitting or encouraging underage drinking.
9.70.010   Permitting or encouraging underage drinking.
   A.   No person eighteen years of age or older may knowingly permit or fail
to take reasonable action to prevent the illegal consumption of spirituous
liquor by an underage person on premises owned by the person or under the
person's control. This section does not apply to spirituous liquor used
exclusively as part of a religious service.
   B.   A person who violates this section is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
   C.   Spirituous liquor has the same meaning as in Title 4 of the Arizona
Revised Statutes.
(Ord. 2016-34, § 1, 2016: Ord. 2009-15 § 1, 2009)
Chapter 9.80
EXPLODING TARGETS
9.80.010   Short title.
9.80.020   Declaration of policy.
9.80.030   Definitions.
9.80.040   Mixed exploding targets prohibited; restrictions on sale.
9.80.050   Exceptions.
9.80.060   Violations; restitution required.
9.80.070   Seizure.
9.80.080   Violation—Penalty.
9.80.090   Severability.
9.80.010   Short title.
   This chapter may be cited and shall be known as the "Pima County Exploding
Target Ordinance."
(Ord. 2017-21 § 1 (part), 2017)
9.80.020   Declaration of policy.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the general public from the
hazardous use, sale, and unintended effects of mixed exploding targets. It is
further the policy of Pima County that any mixed exploding target be safely
used or destroyed in accordance with manufacturer recommendations.
(Ord. 2017-21 § 1 (part), 2017)
9.80.030   Definitions.
   A.   "Minor" means a person under the age of eighteen.
   B.   "Mixed exploding target" means a mixture or combination of chemicals
that can explode, detonate, or deflagrate upon impact by firearms ammunition
projectile. This includes commercial or homemade binary mixtures or synthesized
energetic material.
   C.   "Outdoor shooting range" means a permanently located and improved area
that is designed and operated for the use of rifles, shotguns, pistols,
silhouettes, skeet, trap, black powder, or any other similar sport shooting in
an outdoor environment.
   D.   "Person" means any individual, corporation, association, partnership,
firm, trustee, or legal representative.
(Ord. 2017-21 § 1 (part), 2017)
9.80.040   Mixed exploding targets prohibited; restrictions on sale.
   A.   Except as otherwise provided by this section, it is unlawful to sell,
offer, or expose for sale; use; explode; or possess any mixed exploding target.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to sell any product marketed for use as a
mixed exploding target, or marketed for use as a component of a mixed exploding
target (1) to a minor or (2) to a person who reasonably appears to be a minor
without first requiring that person to display government-issued identification
proving that the person is not a minor.
(Ord. 2017-21 § 1 (part), 2017)
9.80.050   Exceptions.
   Section
9.80.040 does not apply to the use of mixed exploding targets:
   A.   On private land, provided that (1) any person using the mixed exploding
target obeys all applicable state laws regarding the discharge of firearms and
(2) there are no active fire restrictions in effect, as defined in A.R.S. § 37-
1303(B) or 36 C.F.R. § 261.50 on any land located in Pima County;
   B.   At a regulated outdoor shooting range as defined in Section
9.80.030, provided that the mixed exploding target is used immediately by the
person possessing it, and with the written permission of the owner, manager,
managing authority, or agency.
   C.   On any public land (1) that is not actively under a fire restriction as
defined in A.R.S. § 37-1303(B) or 36 C.F.R. § 261.50, and (2) on which the use
of mixed exploding targets is not prohibited by state or federal law, rule, or
policy.
(Ord. 2017-21 § 1 (part), 2017)
9.80.060   Violations; restitution required.
   A.   Upon a defendant's conviction for a violation of this chapter that
causes economic loss to any person, the court shall order that, in addition to
any monetary fine imposed, restitution to be paid by the defendant to any
person who suffered an economic loss caused by the defendant's conduct.
   B.   Restitution shall include any economic loss for which restitution may
be ordered for a misdemeanor offense under Arizona law.
(Ord. 2017-21 § 1 (part), 2017)
9.80.070   Seizure.
   The sheriff or other peace officer shall seize, remove, or cause to be
removed, at the expense of the owner, any product marketed for use as a mixed
exploding target, or marketed for use as a component of a mixed exploding
target that was offered or exposed for sale in violation of this chapter, or
any mixed exploding targets that were stored or possessed in violation of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2017-21 § 1 (part), 2017)
9.80.080   Violation—Penalty.
   A person violating a provision of this chapter is guilty of a class one
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2017-21 § 1 (part), 2017)
9.80.090   Severability.
   If any provision of this chapter, or the application of any provision of
this chapter, is invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or
applications of this chapter. The provisions of this chapter are severable.
(Ord. 2017-21 § 1 (part), 2017)
Chapter 9.85
LOSS OR THEFT OF FIREARM—MANDATORY REPORTING
Sections:
9.85.010    Declaration of policy.
9.85.020    Definitions.
9.85.030    Mandatory reporting of loss or theft of firearm.
9.85.040    False reporting.
9.85.050    Exemptions.
9.85.060     Violation—Penalty.
9.85.010 Declaration of policy.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the inhabitants of Pima County by
aiding local law enforcement and the County Attorney in the enforcement of
A.R.S. § 13-3102(A)(5) and preventing the commission of crimes using firearms
obtained in violation of that statute. This chapter in no way affects the
possession, transfer, or storage of firearms because this chapter does not
provide means by which firearm possession could be revoked or transferred, nor
does it seek to regulate the storage of firearms.
(Ord. 2024-2 § 1 (part), 2024)
9.85.020 Definitions.
   A.   "Firearm" is defined as in A.R.S. § 13-3101.
   B.   "Person" is defined as in A.R.S. § 13-105.
(Ord. 2024-2 § 1 (part), 2024)
9.85.030 Mandatory reporting of loss or theft of firearm.
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any
person to fail to report to a local law enforcement agency the knowing loss or
theft of a firearm.
   B.   The report of a loss or theft of a firearm pursuant to subsection A.
must be made in the jurisdiction in which the loss or theft occurred and within
forty-eight hours of the time the person knew or reasonably should have known
that the firearm had been lost or stolen.
   C.   Every person reporting a lost or stolen firearm pursuant to subsection
A. must report the make, model, and serial number of the firearm, if known by
the person, and any additional relevant information required by the local law
enforcement agency taking the report.
(Ord. 2024-2 § 1 (part), 2024)
9.85.040 False reporting.
   It is unlawful for any person to report to a local law enforcement agency
that a firearm has been lost or stolen, knowing the report to be false.
(Ord. 2024-2 § 1 (part), 2024)
9.85.050 Exemptions.
   This chapter does not apply to:
   A.   Any law enforcement agency or peace officer acting within the course
and scope of his or her employment or official duties if he or she reports the
loss or theft to his or her employing agency.
   B.   Any United States marshal or member of the Armed Forces of the United
States or the National Guard, while engaged in his or her official duties.
   C.   Any firearms dealer or manufacturer licensed under federal law and
subject to the reporting requirements of 18 U.S.C. 923(g)(6).
(Ord. 2024-2 § 1 (part), 2024)
9.85.060 Violation—Penalty.
   A person violating a provision of this chapter is guilty of a petty offense
and is subject to a penalty of up to one thousand dollars for each violation.
(Ord. 2024-2 § 1 (part), 2024)
Chapter 9.90
SEXUAL ORIENTATION CHANGE EFFORTS
9.90.010   Declaration of policy.
9.90.020   Definitions.
9.90.030   Prohibited conduct.
9.90.040   Violation; penalty.
9.90.050   Severability.
9.90.010   Declaration of policy.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and wellbeing
of minors in Pima County.
(Ord. 2017-22 § 1 (part), 2017)
9.90.020   Definitions.
   A.   "Minor" means a person under eighteen years of age.
   B.   "Person" means a natural person or, if the context permits it, any
corporation, association, partnership, firm, trustee, or other entity.
   C.   "Sexual orientation change efforts" means any practice in which a
person seeks to change another person's sexual orientation or gender identity.
"Sexual orientation change efforts" include efforts to change behaviors, sexual
or gender identities, or gender expressions, or to eliminate or reduce sexual
or romantic attractions or feelings toward persons of the same sex. "Sexual
orientation change efforts" do not include any communication that does not
itself seek to change the sexual orientation or gender identity of the person
who is the recipient of the communication.
(Ord. 2017-22 § 1 (part), 2017)
9.90.030   Prohibited conduct.
   No person may engage in sexual orientation change efforts with a minor in
exchange for a fee.
(Ord. 2017-22 § 1 (part), 2017)
9.90.040   Violation; penalty.
   A.   A violation of Section
9.90.030 is a civil infraction.
   B.   A person who violates Section
9.90.030 is subject to a civil penalty of up to two thousand five hundred
dollars for each violation.
(Ord. 2017-22 § 1 (part), 2017)
9.90.050   Severability.
   If any provision of this chapter, or the application of any provision of
this chapter, is invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or
applications of this chapter. The provisions of this chapter are severable.
(Ord. 2017-22 § 1 (part), 2017)
Title 10 TRAFFIC AND HIGHWAYS
Chapters: 
   
Chapter 10.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
Chapter 10.08 - SPEED LIMITS
   
Chapter 10.12 - TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS
   
Chapter 10.16 - STOP INTERSECTIONS
   
Chapter 10.20 - YIELD CONTROLLED INTERSECTIONS
   
Chapter 10.24 - THROUGH STREETS
   
Chapter 10.28 - ONE-WAY STREETS
   
Chapter 10.32 - TURNING RESTRICTIONS
   
Chapter 10.34 - USE OF HANDHELD ELECTRONIC DEVICES WHILE OPERATING A MOTOR
VEHICLE
   
Chapter 10.36 - OVERSIZE AND OVERWEIGHT SPECIAL PERMITS AND WEIGHT LIMITS
   
Chapter 10.40 - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING RESTRICTIONS
   
Chapter 10.41 - PARKING FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH PHYSICAL DISABILITIES;
DESIGNATION; ENFORCEMENT
   
Chapter 10.42 - PARKING VEHICLES FOR SALE OR FOR DISPLAYING ADVERTISING OR
GOODS FOR SALE WITHIN RIGHT-OF-WAY AND PARKING VEHICLES FOR SALE ON PUBLIC
LANDS
   
Chapter 10.43 - USE OF BICYCLE HELMETS BY MINORS
   
Chapter 10.44 - CONSTRUCTION IN COUNTY RIGHTS-OF-WAY
   
Chapter 10.45 - SPECIAL EVENTS IN COUNTY RIGHTS OF WAY
   
Chapter 10.46 - PRIMITIVE ROADS
   
Chapter 10.48 - UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
   
Chapter 10.50 - REGULATIONS FOR THE USE OF THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
   
Chapter 10.52 - NEWSPAPER COLLECTION BINS IN RIGHT-OF-WAY
   
Chapter 10.56 - COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION AND MITIGATION
Chapter 10.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections: 
10.04.010   Title for reference—Highway department references.
10.04.020   Definitions.
10.04.030   Road maintenance.
10.04.035   Acceptance of subdivision streets into the maintenance system.
10.04.040   Removal of signs effecting repealed provisions.
10.04.010   Title for reference—Highway department references.
   A.   This title shall be known as the Pima County Traffic and Highway Code."
   B.   There shall be established the county department of transportation and
flood control district. All reference to the Pima County highway department
shall be considered as reference to the county department of transportation and
flood control district. For the purpose of clarifying the applicable areas
covered in this code, the department of transportation and flood control
district shall be split into two separate titles. This title shall be referred
to as Traffic and Highways and Title 16 shall be known as Floodplain
Management."
(Prior code § 35.04.010)
10.04.020   Definitions.
   The following definitions apply to this title unless the context otherwise
requires:
   A.   "Alley" means any highway, as defined in this section, having a width
of twenty-five feet or less and not provided with a sidewalk or sidewalks.
   B.   "Board" means the board of supervisors of the county.
   C.   Code.
      1.   "This code" means the entire Pima County Code unless some other code
is specified.
      2.   "This title" means the Pima County Traffic and Highway Code unless
some other code is specified.
   D.   "County engineer" means the director of the Pima County department of
transportation or designee.
   E.   "Highway" means the entire width between boundary lines of every way
set apart for public travel when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
   F.   "Pedestrian" means any person afoot.
   G.   "Road" has the same meaning as "highway."
   H.   "Street" has the same meaning as "highway."
   I.   "Time" means Mountain Standard Time.
   J.   "Traffic engineer" means the county engineer.
   K.   "Vehicle" means every device or animal by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn on a street or highway, excepting devices
used exclusively on rails.
(Ord. 2016-53 § 1, 2016; Prior code § 35.04.020)
10.04.030   Road maintenance.
   The board of supervisors, acting through the county engineer, shall expend
public funds for such maintenance of public roads and streets located without
the limits of an incorporated city or town in the county other than legally
designated state and county highways as is vital to the public safety. In no
event shall any maintenance he performed unless the road or street is laid out,
opened and constructed as defined in this title without cost to the county, and
in no event shall any rock products, cement or petroleum-product materials be
purchased or used in performing such maintenance.
(Prior code § 35.04.030)
10.04.035   Acceptance of subdivision streets into the maintenance system.
   After plat approval by the board of supervisors under Section
18.69.070(F) (Subdivision Standards), the county engineer, upon finding that
the streets, highways, bicycle facilities or other ways are laid out, opened
and constructed as defined in this title and in accordance with the approved
plat and written specifications made by the board of supervisors, shall accept
the streets into the county maintenance system within one year of completion.
(Ord. 2021-11 § 1, 2021)
10.04.040   Removal of signs effecting repealed provisions.
   In the event restrictions and regulations are changed, modified or repealed
on any street, highway, alley or intersection designated in this title, the
restrictions and regulations shall remain in effect until the signs, signals,
marker and buttons previously erected and maintained are modified, removed or
obliterated.
(Prior code § 35.04.050)
Chapter 10.08
SPEED LIMITS
Sections: 
10.08.010   State provisions adopted.
10.08.020   Recommendation by engineer.
10.08.030   Effective upon posting.
10.08.040   Index.
10.08.050   Temporary reduced construction zone speed limits.
10.08.055   Violation.
10.08.056   Penalty.
10.08.010   State provisions adopted.
   The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles apply upon all
streets and highways within the county, except in any incorporated city or
town, upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation that certain
speed regulations apply upon specified streets, highways or certain areas. It
shall be prima facie unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in
excess of any speed so declared by ordinance when signs are in place giving
notice thereof.
(Prior code § 35.28.010)
10.08.020   Recommendation by engineer.
   A.    The county engineer, upon finding on the basis of an engineering study
and engineering judgment that the maximum speed permitted by state law is
greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist
upon any part of a street or highway under county jurisdiction, subject to
subsection B of this section, shall approve a reasonable safe and prima facie
speed limit at such location. At the county engineer's discretion, the county
engineer may alternately recommend to the board of supervisors a reasonable and
safe prima facie speed limit at such location based on such engineering study
and engineering judgement. The board shall study such recommendations and shall
approve, reject or modify them and shall note its action by ordinance.
   B.   Alteration of maximum speed limits on state highways or extensions
thereof shall not be effective until the alteration has been approved by the
director of the department of transportation and flood control district as
prescribed by A.R.S. Section 28-703D.
(Ord. 2021-11 § 2 (part), 2021; Prior code § 35.28.020)
10.08.030   Effective upon posting.
   All speed limits approved by the board of supervisors or county engineer
shall take effect when and to the extent that signs are posted on the highways,
giving notice of the reasonable and safe prima facie speed limit.
(Ord. 2021-11 § 2 (part), 2021; Prior code § 35.28.030)
10.08.040   Index.
   The director of the department of transportation and flood control district
shall keep an accurate listing of all speed limits set upon county highways by
the board of supervisors. When existing limits are changed or new limits set by
the board, the listing shall be immediately updated to reflect such action.
(Prior code § 35.28.040)
10.08.050   Temporary reduced construction zone speed limits.
   A.   The traffic engineering division manager of the Pima County department
of transportation is hereby authorized to establish temporary reduced speed
limits within temporary construction traffic control zones. The temporary
reduced speed limits shall be implemented when the traffic engineering division
manager determines, based on an engineering and traffic investigation conducted
by the Pima County department of transportation, that the permanent speed
limits set for the area under construction are not reasonable nor safe under
the existing conditions.
   B.   Any temporary reduced speed limit established by the traffic
engineering division manager shall be effective only for the duration of the
roadway construction. Construction shall mean the construction, reconstruction,
or maintenance of any road by county forces or any contractor or subcontractor
performing such construction, reconstruction, or maintenance at the direction
of the county.
   C.   The reduced speed limits shall become effective when
      1.   A construction traffic control zone speed limit authorization
memorandum is filed with the office of the Pima County recorder,
      2.   The regulatory speed limit signs (black text on a white background)
stating the temporary control zone speed limit have been erected upon or around
the temporary construction traffic control zone in a clearly visible manner,
and
      3.   The permanent speed limit signs are temporarily removed, covered or
turned.
(Ord. 2000-85 § 1 (part), 2000)
10.08.055   Violation.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to drive in a temporary construction
traffic control zone at a speed greater than the speed posted for that zone.
Construction shall mean the construction, reconstruction, or maintenance of any
road by county forces or any contractor or subcontractor performing such
construction, reconstruction, or maintenance at the direction of the county.
(Ord. 2000-85 § 1 (part), 2000)
10.08.056   Penalty.
   A.   In a temporary construction traffic control zone in which a reduced
construction zone speed limit has been posted, violators of the reduced
construction zone speed limit shall be subject to a $250 fine per violation.
Such fines shall only be assessed when
      1.   A construction traffic control zone speed limit authorization
memorandum is filed with the office of the Pima County recorder,
      2.   The regulatory speed limit signs (black text on a white background)
stating the temporary control zone speed limit have been erected upon or around
the temporary construction traffic control zone in a clearly visible manner,
and
      3.   The permanent speed limit signs are temporarily removed, covered or
turned.
   B.   In a temporary construction traffic control zone in which a reduced
construction zone speed limit has not been posted, violators of the permanent
regulatory speed limit shall be subject to a $250 fine per violation.
(Ord. 2000-85 § 1 (part), 2000)
Chapter 10.12
TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS
Sections: 
10.12.010   State provisions adopted.
10.12.020   Recommendation by county engineer—Signal installation and
maintenance.
10.12.030   Effective upon erection.
10.12.040   Index.
10.12.010   State provisions adopted.
   The state traffic laws regulating traffic-control signals apply upon all
county streets and highways, except in any incorporated city or town. Vehicular
traffic and pedestrians shall obey the instructions of traffic-control signals
applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions of A.R.S. Sections
28-641 through 28-648, as amended, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or
law enforcement officer.
(Prior code § 35.20.010)
10.12.020   Recommendation by county engineer—Signal installation and
maintenance.
   A.   The county engineer, upon finding on the basis of an engineering study
and engineering judgment that a traffic-control signal is reasonably necessary
for the protection and convenience of the traveling public of the county, shall
approve the traffic-control signal and install and maintain the proper traffic-
control signal at the designated location or make a recommendation for the
traffic-control signal to the board of supervisors, and upon approval by the
board, shall install and maintain the proper traffic-control signal at the
designated location.
   B.   The county engineer, upon finding that a pedestrian crosswalk signal,
also know as a High Intensity Activated Crosswalk Signal (HAWK), is reasonably
necessary for the protection and convenience of pedestrians of the county, may
install and maintain HAWK signals at locations throughout the county as needed.
(Ord. 2021-11 § 3 (part), 2021; Ord. 2003-34 § 1 (part), 2003; Prior code §
35.20.020)
10.12.030   Effective upon erection.
   All traffic-control signals approved by the board of supervisors or county
engineer shall take effect when and to the extent that the proper devices are
erected on the roadways.
(Ord. 2021-11 § 3 (part), 2021; Prior code § 35.20.030)
10.12.040   Index.
   The director of the department of transportation and flood control district
shall keep an accurate listing of all traffic-control signals designated by the
board of supervisors and shall update the listing upon the removal or addition
of new traffic-control signal by the board.
(Prior code § 35.20.040)
Chapter 10.16
STOP INTERSECTIONS
Sections: 
10.16.010   State provisions adopted.
10.16.020   Recommendation by engineer—Sign maintenance.
10.16.030   Effective upon posting.
10.16.040   Index.
10.16.010   State provisions adopted.
   The state traffic laws regulating stop intersections apply upon all county
streets and highways, except in any incorporated city or town. Every driver of
a vehicle approaching a designated and signposted stop intersection shall stop
as required by A.R.S. Sections 28-855 and 28-773, as amended, before entering
or crossing the intersection.
(Prior code § 35.12.010)
10.16.020   Recommendation by engineer—Sign maintenance.
   The county engineer, upon finding on the basis of an engineering study and
engineering judgment that a stop intersection is reasonably necessary for the
protection and convenience of the traveling public of the county, shall approve
the stop intersection and install and maintain proper stop signs at one or more
entrances to the designated stop intersection. At the county engineer's
discretion, the county engineer may alternately make a recommendation for the
stop intersection to the board of supervisors, and upon approval by the board,
is directed to install and maintain proper stop signs at one or more entrances
to the designated stop intersection.
(Ord. 2021-11 § 4 (part), 2021; Prior code § 35.12.020)
10.16.030   Effective upon posting.
   All stop intersection restrictions approved by the board of supervisors or
county engineer shall take effect when and to the extent that stop signs are
posted at the intersections.
(Ord. 2021-11 § 4 (part), 2021; Prior code § 35.12.030)
10.16.040   Index.
   The director of the department of transportation and flood control district
shall keep an accurate listing of all stop intersections designated by the
board of supervisors and shall update the listing upon the removal or addition
of new stop intersections by the board.
(Prior code § 35.12.040)
Chapter 10.20
YIELD CONTROLLED INTERSECTIONS [1] 
10.20.005   Definitions.
10.20.010   State provisions adopted.
10.20.020   Recommendations by engineer—Conventional and roundabout
intersection installation and maintenance.
10.20.030   Effective upon posting or construction.
10.20.040   Index.
10.20.005   Definitions.
      1.   "Conventional intersection" means a yield controlled intersection of
a roadway that directly intersects another roadway at an angle, typically in
the shape of a T, Y or cross.
      2.   "Roundabout intersection" means a yield controlled intersection of a
roadway that indirectly intersects another roadway by a circular road that has
a circular raised island. Vehicles entering the circular roadway must yield to
vehicles already in the circular roadway.
      3.   "Yield controlled intersection" means a conventional intersection or
roundabout intersection at which one or more drivers is legally required to
yield the right-of-way to another driver on which yield signs have been posted.
(Ord. 2016-53 § 3, 2016)
10.20.010   State provisions adopted.
   The state traffic laws regulating yield controlled intersections apply upon
all streets and highways within the county, except in any incorporated city or
town. The driver of a vehicle shall yield as required by ARS Section 28-855, as
amended, at the intersecting roadways when and to the extent that yield signs
are posted.
(Ord. 2016-53 § 3, 2016)
10.20.020   Recommendations by engineer—Conventional and roundabout
intersection installation and maintenance.
   The county engineer, upon finding on the basis of an engineering study and
engineering judgment that a conventional or roundabout intersection designation
is reasonably necessary for the ordinary protection and convenience of the
traveling public of the county; shall approve the intersection to be designated
as such or, in the county engineer's discretion, make recommendations for the
intersection to be designated as such to the board of supervisors.
   Upon approval, the county engineer is directed to install and maintain yield
signs at one or more entrances to the designated conventional intersection or
roundabout intersection. These signs shall be erected, when appropriate, and
maintained so as to require the traffic at the designated intersection to yield
before entering or crossing the conventional intersection or entering the
roundabout.
(Ord. 2021-11 § 5 (part), 2021; Ord. 2016-53 § 3, 2016)
10.20.030   Effective upon posting or construction.
   The conventional intersection (yield signs only) or roundabout intersection
(circular intersection geometry and yield signs) restrictions approved by the
board of supervisors or county engineer shall take effect when and to the
extent that signs are posted at the intersection listed as provided in this
chapter giving notice thereof.
(Ord. 2021-11 § 5 (part), 2021; Ord. 2016-53 § 3, 2016)
10.20.040   Index.
   The county engineer shall keep an accurate listing of all conventional
(yield signs only) intersections and roundabout intersections (circular
intersection geometry and yield signs) and shall update the listing upon the
removal or addition of new yield controlled intersections by the board.
(Ord. 2016-53 § 3, 2016)
   FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-53, § 2, adopted October 18, 2016, repealed the
former
Chapter 10.20, §§ 10.20.010—10.20.040, and § 3 of Ord. No. 2016-53 enacted a
new
Chapter 10.20 as set out herein. The former
Chapter 10.20 pertained to yield intersections and derived from prior code §§
35.16.010—35.16.040. (Back)
Chapter 10.24
THROUGH STREETS
Sections: 
10.24.010   State provisions adopted.
10.24.020   Recommendation by engineer—Sign maintenance.
10.24.030   Effective upon posting.
10.24.040   Index.
10.24.010   State provisions adopted.
   The state traffic laws regulating through streets apply upon all streets and
highways within the county, except in any incorporated city or town. The driver
of a vehicle shall stop or yield as required by A.R.S. Sections 28-773 and 28-
855, as amended, at the intersecting roadways when and to the extent that stop
or yield signs are posted on intersecting roadways.
(Prior code § 35.08.010)
10.24.020   Recommendation by engineer—Sign maintenance.
   The county engineer, upon finding on the basis of an engineering study and
engineering judgement that a through street designation is necessary for the
protection and convenience of the traveling public of the county, shall approve
the through street or, in the county engineer's discretion, make a
recommendation for the through street to the board of supervisors. Upon
approval, the county engineer will install and maintain stop signs or yield
signs at all streets that intersect the through street on the course designated
in the recommendation, and these signs shall be erected and maintained so as to
require the traffic on the intersecting street to stop or yield before entering
or crossing the through street.
(Ord. 2021-11 § 6 (part), 2021; Prior code § 35.08.020)
10.24.030   Effective upon posting.
   All through street restrictions approved by the board of supervisors or
county engineer shall take effect when and to the extent that stop or yield
signs are posted on the intersecting roadways.
(Ord. 2021-11 § 6 (part), 2021; Prior code § 35.08.030)
10.24.040   Index.
   The director of the department of transportation and flood control district
shall keep an accurate listing of all through streets designated by the board
of supervisors and shall update the listing upon the removal or addition of new
through streets by the board.
(Prior code § 35.08.040)
Chapter 10.28
ONE-WAY STREETS
Sections: 
10.28.010   State provisions adopted.
10.28.020   Recommendation by engineer—Sign maintenance.
10.28.030   Effective upon posting.
10.28.040   Index.
10.28.010   State provisions adopted.
   The state traffic laws regulating one-way streets apply upon all streets and
highways of the county, except in any incorporated city or town. A vehicle
shall be driven only in the direction indicated on a designated roadway
signposted for one-way traffic.
(Prior code § 35.24.010)
10.28.020   Recommendation by engineer—Sign maintenance.
   The county engineer, upon finding on the basis of an engineering study and
engineering judgement that a one-way street designation is reasonably necessary
for the protection and convenience of the traveling public of the county, shall
approve the one-way street and install and maintain proper one-way signs along
the designated roadway or make a recommendation for the one-way street to the
board of supervisors and, upon approval by the board, is directed to install
and maintain proper one-way signs along the designated roadway.
(Ord. 2021-11 § 7 (part), 2021; Prior code § 35.24.020)
10.28.030   Effective upon posting.
   All one-way street designations approved by the board of supervisors or
county engineer shall take effect when and to the extent that proper signs are
posted on the roadways.
(Ord. 2021-11 § 7 (part), 2021; Prior code § 35.24.030)
10.28.040   Index.
   The director of the department of transportation and flood control district
shall keep an accurate listing of all one-way streets designated by the board
of supervisors and shall update the listing upon the removal or addition of new
one-way streets by the board.
(Prior code § 35.24.040)
Chapter 10.32
TURNING RESTRICTIONS
Sections: 
10.32.010   State provisions adopted.
10.32.020   Recommendation by engineer—Sign maintenance.
10.32.030   Effective upon posting.
10.32.040   Index.
10.32.010   State provisions adopted.
   The state traffic laws regulating the turning of vehicles apply upon all
county streets and highways, except in any incorporated city or town. A vehicle
shall be driven only in the manner prescribed upon a roadway designated and
signposted for a turning restriction.
(Prior code § 35.36.010)
10.32.020   Recommendation by engineer—Sign maintenance.
   The county engineer, upon finding on the basis of an engineering study and
engineering judgment that a turning restriction is reasonably necessary for the
protection and convenience of the traveling public of the county, shall approve
the turning restriction and install and maintain proper markers, buttons or
signs along the designated roadway or intersection. At the county engineer's
discretion, the county engineer may alternately make a recommendation for the
turning restriction to the board of supervisors and, upon approval by the
board, is directed to install and maintain proper markers, buttons or signs
along the designated roadway or intersection.
(Ord. 2021-11 § 8 (part), 2021; Prior code § 35.36.020)
10.32.030   Effective upon posting.
   All turning restrictions approved by the board of supervisors or county
engineer shall take effect when and to the extent that proper signs, markers or
buttons are installed along the designated roadway or intersection.
(Ord. 2021-11 § 8 (part), 2021; Prior code § 35.36.030)
10.32.040   Index.
   The director of the department of transportation and flood control district
shall keep an accurate listing of all turning restrictions designated by the
board of supervisors and shall update the listing upon the removal or addition
of new turning restrictions by the board.
(Prior code § 35.36.040)
Chapter 10.34
USE OF HANDHELD ELECTRONIC DEVICES WHILE OPERATING A MOTOR VEHICLE
10.34.010   Purpose and intent.
10.34.015   Definitions.
10.34.020   Prohibited conduct.
10.34.030   Exemptions.
10.34.040   Classification and penalty.
10.34.050   Severability.
10.34.010   Purpose and intent.
   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to promote public safety in Pima
County by restricting the use of handheld electronic devices while operating a
motor vehicle on Pima County highways.
(Ord. 2016-31 § 1 (part), 2016)
10.34.015   Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter:
      1.   "Handheld electronic device" means a wireless communication device
that is designed to engage in calls or receive and transmit text, image
messages, or data.
      2.   "Hands-free use" means the use of a handheld electronic device
without the use of either hand by employing an internal feature of, or an
attachment to, the device.
      3.   "Motor vehicle" has the same meaning given that term in Arizona
Revised Statutes Title 28, Chapter 1.
      4.   "Operating" means being in actual physical control of a motor
vehicle on a highway or street and includes being temporarily stopped because
of traffic, a traffic light, a stop sign, or otherwise, but excludes being in
actual physical control of a motor vehicle when the motor vehicle has stopped
on a highway or street at a location that is both not within a travel lane and
safe for the motor vehicle to remain stationary.
(Ord. No. 2017-13 § 1 (part), 2017)
10.34.020   Prohibited conduct.
   A person may not use a handheld electronic device while operating a motor
vehicle on a street or highway unless that device is specifically designed or
configured to allow hands-free use and is used in that manner.
(Ord. No. 2017-13 § 1 (part), 2017; Ord. 2016-31 § 1 (part), 2016)
10.34.030   Exemptions.
   Section
10.34.020 does not apply to any of the following:
      1.   Use of a handheld electronic device for the sole purpose of
reporting an emergency situation and continued communication with emergency or
medical personnel during the emergency situation.
      2.   Use of handheld electronic devices by authorized law enforcement or
emergency personnel in the performance of official duties.
      3.   A person operating a school bus or transit vehicle that is subject
to Arizona or United States Department of Transportation regulations.
      4.   Use of a handheld electronic device on property that is not open to
vehicular travel by the general public.
      5.   The activation or deactivation of hands-free use, as long as the
handheld electronic device is securely configured and attached to the motor
vehicle or integrated into the motor vehicle.
(Ord. No. 2017-13 § 1 (part), 2017; Ord. 2016-31 § 1 (part), 2016)
10.34.040   Classification and penalty.
   A.   A violation of Section
10.34.020 is civil traffic violation.
   B.   A peace officer may stop and issue a citation to a person operating a
motor vehicle on a highway if the peace officer has reasonable cause to believe
that a violation of Section
10.34.020 has occurred.
   C.   A person who violates Section
10.34.020 and is not involved in a motor vehicle crash is subject to a civil
penalty of one hundred dollars plus any other penalty assessments authorized by
law.
   D.   A person who violates Section
10.34.020 and is involved in a motor vehicle accident is subject to a civil
penalty of two hundred fifty dollars, plus any other penalty assessments
authorized by law.
(Ord. 2016-31 § 1 (part), 2016)
10.34.050   Severability.
   If any provision of this chapter, or the application of any provision of
this chapter, is invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or
applications of this chapter. The provisions of this chapter are severable.
(Ord. 2016-31 § 1 (part), 2016)
Chapter 10.36
OVERSIZE AND OVERWEIGHT SPECIAL PERMITS AND WEIGHT LIMITS [2] 
   
Article 1. - General Provisions
   
Article 2. - Special Permits and Fees
   
Article 3. - Safety Requirements
   
Article 4. - Transport Provisions
   
Article 5. - Envelope Permit Special Provisions
   FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-47, § 1, adopted December 12, 2017, repealed
Chapter 10.36, §§ 10.36.010—10.36.050, and § 2 of Ord. No. 2017-47 enacted a
new
Chapter 10.36 as set out herein. The former
Chapter 10.36 pertained to load limits and derived from prior code §§
35.40.010—35.40.050. (Back)
Article 1. General Provisions
10.36.010   General provision—Definitions—Time of day.
10.36.020   Threshold dimensions—Special permit exemptions.
10.36.030   General application procedure for special permits.
10.36.040   Additional special permit requirements and restriction—Engineering
analysis.
10.36.050   Special permit limitation.
10.36.060   Special permit extension—Confiscation.
10.36.070   Traffic control plan.
10.36.080   Special permit denial.
10.36.090   Liability.
10.36.100   Administrative appeal.
10.36.110   Emergency operation provision.
10.36.120   Recommendation by engineer.
10.36.130   Effective upon posting.
10.36.010   General provision—Definitions—Time of day.
   A.   The Department shall issue and regulate oversize and overweight special
permits as provided under this chapter.
   B.   Definitions. In addition to the definitions prescribed under A.R.S. §
28-101 and § 28-601, the following terms apply to this chapter:
      1.   "AAC" means Arizona Administrative Code.
      2.   "AASHTO" means the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials.
      3.   "PCDOT" means the Pima County department of transportation.
      4.   "Applicant" means a person or entity seeking to obtain a special
permit or envelope permit from the department.
      5.   "Certified law enforcement officer" means a person who is an active
duty Arizona peace officer standards and training board certified peace
officer.
      7.   "Combination vehicle" means a truck or truck tractor and semitrailer
and any trailer that it tows but does not include a forklift designed for the
purpose of loading or unloading the truck, trailer or semitrailer excluding
mobile homes.
      8.   "Department" means the Pima County department of transportation.
      9.   "Director" means the county engineer.
      11.   "Envelope" has the same meaning as prescribed under A.R.S. § 28-
1141 encompassing the outermost dimensions of a load or vehicle as prescribed
under A.R.S. § 28-1144, without exceeding the maximum permitted weight
computations for overweight axle group weight distribution as provided under
Section
10.36.450.
      12.   "Envelope permit" has the same meaning as prescribed under A.R.S. §
28-1141, which:
         a.   Restricts the loads to non-reducible only,
         b.   Allows unlimited trips within the permit's validity period,
         c.   Allows the permitted carrier unlimited load changes,
         d.   Requires a transported load to meet envelope dimensional
criteria,
         e.   Restricts operation to certain routes, and
         f.   Excludes the transporting of a mobile home.
      13.   "Established place of business" means a permanent site or location
where an oversize or overweight special permit holder conducts business.
      14.   "Highway" has the same meaning as prescribed under A.R.S. § 28-101,
"street" or "highway."
      15.   "Highway feature" means a roadway, structure, traffic control
device, right-of-way, or any item connected with highway travel.
      16.   "Law enforcement escort" means a uniformed certified law
enforcement officer in a fully marked patrol vehicle that accompanies an
oversize or overweight special permitted vehicle.
      17.   "Legal weight" means within the maximum gross weight limitations
prescribed under A.R.S. § 28-1100 and Section
10.36.020, Table 1.
      18.   "Mobile home" has the same meaning as prescribed under A.R.S. § 28-
2001, which encompasses both a mobile home and a manufactured home as more
specifically prescribed under A.R.S. § 41-2142.
      19.   "Mountain Standard Time" means the standard time in Arizona as
prescribed under 49 CFR 71 and A.R.S. § 1-242.
      20.   "Non-reducible load or vehicle" has the same meaning as prescribed
under 23 CFR 658.5, "nondivisible load or vehicle".
      21.   "Oversize" means a size of vehicle, combination of vehicles, or
vehicle and load combination that exceeds a maximum size limitation provided
under A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 3, Article 18 or 19.
      22.   "Overweight" means a weight of vehicle, combination of vehicles, or
vehicle and load combination that exceeds a maximum weight limitation provided
under A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 3, Article 18 or 19.
      23.   "Permittee" means a person or entity to whom the department issues
an oversize or overweight special permit or envelope permit under this chapter,
and who is responsible for meeting the obligations, responsibilities, and
specifications indicated on the permit.
      24.   "Person" has the same meaning as prescribed under A.R.S. § 28-5201.
      25.   "Pounds per inch of tire width" means a measure of load restriction
based on rated tire size, which is determined by dividing the weight carried by
an axle group, in pounds, by the number of tires in the group and dividing that
result by the manufacturer's rated tire width indicated on the sidewall of the
tire, or in the absence of sidewall marking, the load rating specified in any
publication of an organization listed under 49 CFR 571.119, Federal Motor
Carrier Safety Standard No. 119.
      26.   "Power unit" has the same meaning as prescribed under A.R.S. § 28-
1141.
      27.   "Public weighmaster" has the same meaning as prescribed under
A.R.S. § 41-2051.
      28.   "Special permit" means a document issued by the department under
A.R.S. § 28-1103, which authorizes the permittee to operate or transport an
oversize, overweight, or oversize and overweight vehicle, combination of
vehicles, or vehicle and load combination on a county highway, subject to the
terms and conditions of the permit.
      29.   "Special permitted vehicle" means the vehicle, combination of
vehicles, or vehicle and load combination described to the department, as
required under A.R.S. § 28-1104, on application for a special permit.
      30.   "Specified load" means the dimensions and weights a special permit
applicant declares to the department, as provided under A.R.S. § 28-1104,
regarding any item or series of items to be transported throughout an entire
permit period.
      31.   "Sunrise" and "sunset" have the same meaning and daily calculation
as prescribed by the United States Naval Observatory (USNO), which: The
Department uses to determine normal permit transport start and stop times as
provided under Section
10.36.410; and an interested person may access on the Internet from the USNO at
http://aa.usno.navy.mil, or in hard copy format from the Arizona Central
Commercial Permits office.
   C.   In this chapter, a time of day prescribed is Mountain Standard Time as
defined under subsection B except where a county highway traverses a tribal
nation that adopts Daylight Saving Time under 49 CFR 71.2.
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
10.36.020   Threshold dimensions—Special permit exemptions.
   A.   Unless exempt under this Section or A.R.S. § 28-1091(C), § 28-1093(D),
or § 28-1095(A)(6), a person shall obtain and carry an oversize or overweight
special permit issued by the department under this chapter if transporting a
vehicle or load exceeding any dimension provided under Table 1 on a county
highway under the jurisdiction of the department.
   B.   A permittee and a driver of an oversize or overweight special permitted
vehicle shall comply with all applicable:
      1.   Safety requirements provided under
Article 3, and
      2.   Transport provisions provided under
Article 4.
   C.   An oversize or overweight special permit is not required if crossing a
county highway at a level grade and no highway structures are involved.
   D.   An oversize or overweight special permit is not required for snow
removal equipment operated by one of the following:
      1.   An Arizona state agency,
      2.   An Arizona county,
      3.   An Arizona city, or
      4.   An Arizona municipality other than a city.
   E.   The special permit exemption provided under subsection D applies only
to snow removal equipment traveling on its own wheels and:
      1.   Operating for the purpose of clearing snow or ice,
      2.   Traveling to a facility for repair, or
      3.   Traveling to a location used for the purpose of loading or unloading
de-icing materials.
   F.   The operator of an oversize or overweight vehicle exempt from the
special permit requirement under this section shall comply with all applicable
safety requirements provided under
Article 3 unless otherwise prescribed by statute.
Table 1. Threshold Dimensions 
   The department shall issue a special permit, as provided under
Article 2, for each vehicle, or vehicle and load combination, exceeding any of
the following maximum limits:
Width (A.R.S. § 28-1093) 
Vehicles operating on the county highway system                             8' 6"
Height (A.R.S. § 28-1094) 
Vehicles operating on the county highway system                             13' 6"
Length (A.R.S. §§ 28-1095 and 28-1097) 
Straight trucks                                                                        40'
Truck tractor — Semitrailer combination; or Truck tractor - semitrailer - Interstate 57' 6"
forklift combination                                                        system     semitrailer
                                                                                       53'
                                                                                       semitrailer;
Truck tractor — Semitrailer combination; or Truck tractor - semitrailer - Other      or 65'
forklift combination                                                        highways   overall
                                                                                       combination
                                                                                       if more than
                                                                                       53'
Truck tractor — Semitrailer — Full trailer combination                             28' 6" per
                                                                                       trailer
Vehicle transporter combination                                                        75'
                                                                            Front of
                                                                            vehicle    3'
Overhang                                                                    Rear of    6'
                                                                            vehicle or
                                                                            trailer
Weight (A.R.S. § 28-1100) 
Allowable weight shall be determined using the listed limits or the manufacturer's weight rating,
whichever is less.
Single axle                                                                            20,000 lbs.
Tandem axle                                                                            34,000 lbs.
Steering axle                                                                          20,000 lbs.
Gross weight; five axles or more
Maximum allowable axle group weights are computed using the formula prescribed under   80,000 lbs.
A.R.S. § 28-1100(A)(4)
 
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
10.36.030   General application procedure for special permits.
   A.   An applicant shall apply to the department using one of the following
methods:
      1.   For an oversize or overweight special permit:
         a.   Complete an oversize/overweight special permit application form,
available on the Department's web site at http://webcms.pima.gov/cms/
One.aspx?portalId_=169&pageId=67525 and submit the written application by fax,
mail, or deliver to the Pima County department of transportation; or
         b.   Complete an oversize/overweight special permit application form
and submit the written application via email to
oversizeoverweightpermit@pima.gov.
      2.   For an envelope permit:
         a.   Complete an envelope permit application form, available on the
department's website at http://webcms.pima.gov/cms/One.aspx?portalId=
169&pageId=67525 and fax, mail, or deliver the written application to the Pima
County Department of Transportation; or
         b.   Complete an envelope permit application form, available on the
department's website and submit the written application via email to
oversizeoverweightpermit@pima.gov.
   B.   Unless otherwise provided under this chapter, an applicant for an
oversize or overweight special permit or envelope permit shall provide to the
department, at the time of application, all applicable fees and information
required by the department including:
      1.   Company related information:
         a.   Name and address of the applicant's principal or established
place of business; and
         b.   Name, phone number, and email address of an official company
representative;
      2.   Power unit related information:
         a.   Vehicle make, body style, and year;
         b.   Vehicle identification number;
         c.   License plate number; and
         d.   Base jurisdiction—State of registration.
      3.   Vehicle and load combination related information:
         a.   Trailer plate number(s);
         b.   Total number of axles;
         c.   Overall gross weight;
         d.   Overall length, width, and height; and
         e.   Length of front and rear overhang if applicable.
      4.   Load related information:
         a.   Specific load description;
         b.   Route description including but not limited to street names,
direction, and distances along each street;
         c.   Route survey identifying all obstructions that may be subject to
disturbance or damage and measures to mitigate the disturbance or damage. No
county improvement shall be altered in anyway without approval of the
department;
         d.   Starting and ending location within the county;
         e.   If the load is overweight:
            i.   Axle spacing measurements,
            ii.   Axle width measurements,
            iii.   Number of tires per axle,
            iv.   Weight measurements per axle, and
            v.   Width of each tire;
            vi.   If the load is a mobile home:
            vii.   Complete serial number;
            viii.   Evidence of payment of all applicable ad valorem taxes, as
required under A.R.S. § 28-1104, in the form of a 504 tax clearance permit
issued by the county in which the mobile home is currently located; and
      5.   Proof of valid registration that complies with the requirements of
A.R.S. § 28-2153.
      6.   ADOT permit number and copy of state permit (if applicable).
   C.   An applicant for an oversize or overweight special permit shall certify
to the department that all information provided on the application is true and
correct.
   D.   An applicant requesting a special permit for transport of a specific
non-reducible vehicle and load combination that exceeds two hundred fifty
thousand pounds the maximum permitted weight computations for overweight axle
group weight distribution as provided under Section
10.36.450, shall follow the application procedures provided under Section
10.36.040.
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
10.36.040   Additional special permit requirements and restriction—Engineering
analysis.
   A.   To promote safe transport of oversize and overweight vehicles, or
vehicle and load combinations, the department shall evaluate each special
permit application on a case-by-case basis, whether additional permit
requirements or restrictions are appropriate and necessary as a condition of
permit approval. The department's decision to require additional permit
restrictions shall be based on its consideration of:
      1.   Bridge capacities;
      2.   Load size and weight;
      3.   Pavement stress;
      4.   Road width, grade, and condition; and
      5.   Traffic dynamics of the proposed route.
   B.   The department shall require a special permit applicant to obtain an
engineering analysis for transport of an overweight vehicle or vehicle and load
combination:
      1.   Exceeding two hundred fifty thousand pounds;
      2.   Exceeding the maximum permitted weight computations for overweight
axle group weight distribution as provided under Section
10.36.450; or
      3.   Exceeding a bridge weight restriction provided under Section
10.36.460, Table 4.
   C.   If the department requires an engineering analysis of a structure as a
condition of permit approval, a special permit applicant shall obtain an
analysis prepared by an engineer at the applicant's own expense.
      1.   An engineer registered by the Arizona State Board of Technical
Registration in structural or civil engineering, as prescribed under A.R.S.
Title 32, Chapter 1, shall prepare an engineering analysis of the proposed
structure according to industry standards.
      2.   The special permit applicant shall submit to the department for
review any engineering analysis prepared by an engineer.
      3.   An engineering analysis that complies to industry standards and
prepared in accordance with the following publications:
         a.   The most recently published edition of the AASHTO Manual for
Bridge Evaluation, including all interims, standards, or guidelines;
         b.   The most recently published edition of the AASHTO Load and
Resistance Factor Design (LRFD) — Bridge Design Specifications, including all
interims, standards, or guidelines; and
         c.   The ADOT Bridge Load Rating Guidelines and Bridge Design
Guidelines.
      4.   The engineer shall certify that an applicant's overweight vehicle
will not overstress or damage any element of:
         a.   A highway structure, or
         b.   Any other county property.
   D.   An applicant may resubmit an engineering analysis approved by the
department within the previous twelve months if:
      1.   The size and weight of the applicant's vehicle and load are
identical to the previously approved permit application;
      2.   The segments of the applicant's proposed route are within the outer
limits of the previously approved route; and
      3.   The condition of the highway structure or other county property has
not changed.
   E.   The department shall conduct a separate review and approval process for
each engineering analysis submitted under this section.
   F.   If the applicant's engineering analysis shows that a highway structure
will not support the overweight vehicle as requested, the department shall deny
the application for a special permit.
   G.   If the department determines a potential traffic safety risk exists, a
special permit applicant shall submit to the department a comprehensive traffic
control plan as provided under Section
10.36.070.
   H.   The department of transportation, sheriff's department, department of
public safety, or any other law enforcement entity lawfully authorized to
provide certified weights may weigh a special permitted vehicle and load
exceeding two hundred fifty thousand pounds, or require the applicant to have
the vehicle and load weighed as prescribed under A.R.S. § 28-1102.
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
10.36.050   Special permit limitation.
   The department shall issue oversize and overweight special permits for Pima
County highways. A permittee shall apply separately with an applicable
political subdivision or tribal nation for permission to operate on routes
outside of unincorporated Pima County.
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
10.36.060   Special permit extension—Confiscation.
   A.   Upon request by a permittee, the department shall authorize a one-time
extension of up to four days for a single-trip special permit if:
      1.   The permittee needs to exchange a permitted vehicle for another due
to mechanical failure, or
      2.   Transport by the permitted vehicle is delayed by inclement weather.
   B.   Except as provided under subsection C, a peace officer designated by
the director may confiscate an oversize or overweight special permit before its
expiration date if the permittee or driver is cited for a violation of this
chapter.
   C.   The director may suspend, revoke, and retrieve an envelope permit as
provided under Section
10.36.530.
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
10.36.070   Traffic control plan.
   A.   To promote safe transport of oversize and overweight vehicles, or
vehicle and load combinations, the department shall evaluate each special
permit application to determine, on a case-by-case basis, whether a potential
traffic safety risk exists that may require a comprehensive traffic control
plan as a condition of permit approval. The department's decision to require a
comprehensive traffic control plan shall be based on its consideration of:
      1.   Bridge capacities;
      2.   Load size and weight;
      3.   Pavement stress;
      4.   Road width, grade, and condition; and
      5.   Traffic dynamics of the proposed route.
   B.   If the department determines a potential traffic safety risk exists, a
special permit applicant shall submit to the department at the time of special
permit application, a comprehensive traffic control plan prepared as follows:
      1.   Identify all roadway features located along the proposed route that
may inhibit movement of the vehicle or vehicle and load combination;
      2.   Identify all obstructions that may be subject to potential
disturbance or damage;
      3.   Specify how all structures, delineators, foliage, and official
traffic control devices will be managed or avoided;
      4.   Specify all available pullout points located along the proposed
route;
      5.   Specify how all side traffic will be managed;
      6.   Specify the rate of speed at which the load will travel along the
proposed route;
      7.   Specify the approximate times when the load will be in transit; and
      8.   Provide a contingency plan to be followed in the event of a
breakdown.
   C.   As a condition of special permit issuance, the department may require
an applicant to coordinate use of one or more law enforcement escorts as needed
to ensure public safety while transporting a proposed load.
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
10.36.080   Special permit denial.
   The department shall deny an oversize or overweight special permit
application, or revoke and confiscate a previously approved special permit, if:
      1.   The proposed transport route or a structure on the route is:
         a.   Unable to bear the size or weight of the transport vehicle and
load according to the maximum permitted weight computations for overweight axle
group weight distribution as provided under Section
10.36.450,
         b.   Under repair, or
         c.   Temporarily closed due to a hazardous condition listed under
Section
10.36.430(B);
      2.   An applicant for a permit to transport a mobile home does not
provide written proof of ad valorem tax payment, evidence of certification of
compliance from the Arizona Department of Housing, Office of Manufactured
Housing for mobile homes manufactured prior to June 15, 1976, or clearance as
required under A.R.S. § 28-1104; or
      3.   The department determines that the special permit applicant made a
material misrepresentation or misstatement on the permit application or any
other document submitted to the department in support of the permit
application.
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
10.36.090   Liability.
   A person who operates an oversize or overweight special permitted vehicle
and a person who causes the vehicle to be operated shall be liable for any
damage caused to a county highway by the oversize or overweight vehicle or load
during transport as provided under A.R.S. § 28-1107.
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
10.36.100   Administrative appeal.
   A.   If a special permit application is denied, a previously issued special
permit is revoked and confiscated, or a permit applicant believes a condition
associated with an issued special permit is invalid, the permit applicant may
appeal by submitting an administrative appeal application form via email to
oversizeoverweightpermit@pima.gov. The administrative appeal application form
must be in a form prepared by the department and available on the department's
website at http://webcms.pima.gov/cms/One.aspx?portalId=169_&pageId=67525. In
order for the appeal to be considered, the permit applicant must:
      1.   Submit the administrative appeal application form within seven
calendar days of the department's denial or revocation and confiscation of the
special permit that is the subject of the appeal, or, in the event of a
challenge to a permit condition, within seven calendar days of issuance of the
special permit or application that is the subject of the appeal;
      2.   Specify either the permit that has been denied or revoked and
confiscated or the permit condition that the permit applicant challenges;
      3.   Explain the basis for the permit applicant's appeal.
   B.   The director or designee will review the administrative appeal
application form and issue a written decision to the permit applicant, based on
the written submission, within seven calendar days of the date the
administrative appeal application form was submitted.
   C.   A permit applicant aggrieved by a decision of the director or designee
under Section
10.36.100(B) may, within seven calendar days of receiving that decision, appeal
in writing to the county administrator. The county administrator will decide
the appeal based on the written submission and issue a written decision to the
permit applicant within seven calendar days. The county administrator's
decision is final.
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
10.36.110   Emergency operation provision.
   A.   In time of statewide or local emergency that affects public welfare or
safety the director may authorize transport of an oversize or overweight
vehicle or load without a special permit for purposes of relief or repair.
   B.   Authorization for emergency operation under this section may be
obtained by contacting the Pima County department of transportation.
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
10.36.120   Recommendation by engineer.
   The county engineer, upon finding on the basis of an engineering study and
engineering judgment that a weight limit is reasonably necessary on a roadway
or parts of a roadway for the protection and convenience of the traveling
public of the county, shall approve the weight limit and install and maintain
weight limit signs along the designated roadway or parts of a roadway. At the
county engineer's discretion, the county engineer may alternately make a
recommendation for the weight limit restriction to the board of supervisors,
and upon approval by the board, shall install and maintain the proper weight
limit signs along the designated roadway or parts of a roadway. (Ord. 2021-11 §
9 (part), 2021)
10.36.130   Effective upon posting.
   All roadway weight limits approved by the board of supervisors or county
engineer shall take effect when and to the extent that proper signs are posted
on the roadway or parts of a roadway. (Ord. 2021-11 § 9 (part), 2021)
Article 2. Special Permits and Fees
10.36.210   Special permit; fee schedule.
10.36.290   Envelope permits—Non-specific and non-reducible vehicle or load.
10.36.210   Special permit; fee schedule.
   A.   The department shall issue a multiple or single trip oversize,
overweight, or oversize and overweight special permit for a specified non-
reducible vehicle, combination of vehicles, or vehicle and load combination
that exceeds the threshold dimensions or weights provided under Section
10.36.020, Table 1:
Special Permit 
 
Overweight (greater than 80,000 lbs.)               30 days
Oversize (exceeds 8.5 ft. width or 13.5 ft. height) 1 day
                                                    30 days
Overweight and oversize                             30 days
Additional review or engineering                    NA
 
   B.   An applicant for an oversize, overweight, or oversize and overweight
special permit shall apply to the department and submit appropriate fees using
the application procedure provided under Section
10.36.030.
   C.   A permittee or driver of an oversize, overweight, or oversize and
overweight vehicle, combination of vehicles, or vehicle and load combination
shall not cross a structure listed under Section
10.36.460, Table 4, unless operating in full compliance with all indicated
restrictions and requirements.
   D.   Pertinent charges for the above permit shall be set forth by a fee
schedule available on the department's website approved by the board of
supervisors and amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
10.36.290   Envelope permits—Non-specific and non-reducible vehicle or load.
   A.   The department shall issue an annual oversize, overweight, or oversize
and overweight envelope permit, according to the following criteria for a non-
specific and non-reducible vehicle or load that meets the definition of
envelope permit under Section
10.36.010, and does not exceed two hundred fifty thousand pounds the maximum
permitted weight computations for overweight axle group weight distribution as
provided under Section
10.36.450:
Envelope Permit 
 
                            A non-specific and non-reducible vehicle or load
                            that meets the definition of envelope permit under
Vehicle or load description Section
                            10.36.010 and is within the maximum permitted
                            weights provided under Section
                            10.36.450 
Permit                      Annual
 
   B.   An applicant for an oversize, overweight, or oversize and overweight
envelope permit shall apply to the department and submit appropriate fees using
the application procedure provided under Section
10.36.030.
   C.   An applicant for an oversize, overweight, or oversize and overweight
envelope permit under subsection A for a vehicle that is a self-propelled
mobile crane, drilling rig, or similar specialty equipment not exceeding two
hundred fifty thousand pounds gross weight, fourteen feet in width, sixteen
feet in height, and one hundred twenty feet in length shall provide to the
department proof of gross weight:
      1.   For an initial application, a public weighmaster's certificate of
weight and measure issued at a certified public scale once the vehicle is
equipped and set for highway travel; or
      2.   For a renewal application, a certification by the applicant that no
dimension has changed and the vehicle does not exceed the originally certified
dimensions or weights.
   D.   A permittee or driver of an oversize, overweight, or oversize and
overweight vehicle or load shall not cross a structure listed under Section
10.36.460, Table 4, unless operating in full compliance with all indicated
restrictions and requirements.
   E.   Pertinent charges for the above permit shall be set forth by a fee
schedule available on the department's website approved by the board of
supervisors and amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
Article 3. Safety Requirements
10.36.310   General safety requirements.
10.36.320   Warning flag requirements.
10.36.330   Sign requirements.
10.36.340   Lighting device requirements.
10.36.350   Escort vehicles.
10.36.360   Traffic control provisions.
10.36.370   Projecting load or vehicle.
10.36.380   Permittee or driver obligation to notify utility companies of
overheight transport.
10.36.310   General safety requirements.
   In addition to the provisions of this article, a permittee and a driver of
an oversize or overweight vehicle permitted under this chapter, or a person or
entity exempt under Section
10.36.020 (D), shall comply with all federal motor carrier safety regulations
incorporated by the state under 17 A.A.C. Chapter 5, Article 2, as applicable
to a motor carrier operating in Arizona.
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
10.36.320   Warning flag requirements.
   A.   Specifications. Each warning flag attached to an overwidth or
overlength load shall be cloth or plastic at least eighteen inches square and
red or fluorescent orange in color.
   B.   Display. A permittee or driver of an overwidth or overlength special
permitted vehicle and load combination shall display warning flags applicable
to the permittee's vehicle and load configuration as indicated under
Illustration 1.
Illustration 1. Warning Flag Configurations 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4355.png]
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
10.36.330   Sign requirements.
   A.   A permittee shall ensure that an oversize or overweight vehicle or load
displays an "OVERSIZE LOAD" sign if the vehicle or load is nine feet or more in
width.
   B.   A permittee shall display an "OVERSIZE LOAD" sign on any oversize or
overweight special permitted vehicle or load not specified under subsection A
if necessary to ensure maximum visibility for public safety.
   C.   An "OVERSIZE LOAD" sign shall meet construction specifications provided
under Illustration 2 at a minimum.
   D.   A permittee shall display required "OVERSIZE LOAD" signs that are:
      1.   Mounted to the front or roof of the power unit,
      2.   Mounted to the rear of the load or loaded vehicle,
      3.   Parallel with the road surface from side-to-side,
      4.   Readable from left to right, and
      5.   Clearly visible from the vehicle's front and rear
   E.   If a permittee required to display an "OVERSIZE LOAD" sign is not
transporting an oversize or overweight load, the permittee shall ensure each
sign is not visible to traffic.
Illustration 2. "OVERSIZE LOAD" Sign 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4357.png]
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
10.36.340   Lighting device requirements.
   A.   A permittee or driver of an oversize or overweight vehicle or load
shall:
      1.   Comply with all applicable lighting equipment requirements under
A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 3, Article 16, and 49 CFR 393 as incorporated by
reference under A.A.C. R17-5-202; and
      2.   Operate with the lighting equipment illuminated as prescribed under
A.R.S. §§ 28-922 and 28-935.
   B.   A permittee or driver of a vehicle transporting a load that projects
more than four inches beyond the overall width of the vehicle shall attach
safety lighting during nighttime operation according to the requirements
provided under Illustration 4, and Section
10.36.370, that most closely correspond to the permittee's or driver's vehicle
and load configuration.
   C.   A permittee or driver of an oversize load that projects more than three
feet in front overhang, or more than four feet in rear overhang, shall attach
safety lighting during nighttime operation according to the requirements
provided under Illustration 4, and Section
10.36.370, that most closely correspond to the permittee's or driver's vehicle
and load configuration.
Illustration 4. Safety Lighting Configuration 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4359.png]
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
10.36.350   Escort vehicles.
   A.   Service Requirement.
      1.   A permittee transporting an oversize or overweight vehicle or load
shall use all escort vehicles required by the department as a condition of
special permit issuance under this chapter.
      2.   The department may determine whether one or more escort vehicles
must accompany an oversize or overweight special permitted vehicle by
considering the following in relation to the proposed transport and route:
         a.   Roadway dynamics, including surface condition, grade, width, and
height limitations;
         b.   Overall dimensions of the vehicle and load;
         c.   Need for frequent stops;
         d.   Concern for public safety; and
         e.   Time of transport.
      3.   According to the criteria applicable under subsection (A)(2), the
department shall require two or more oversize or overweight special permitted
vehicles traveling together to be accompanied by at least one escort vehicle
per load.
   B.   Vehicle, Operator, and Equipment Requirements.
      1.   A vehicle qualifies as an escort vehicle if it:
         a.   Is a passenger car or two-axle truck operating as a single unit,
         b.   Is currently registered, and
         c.   Meets insurance requirements as provided by law.
      2.   An escort vehicle operator, except for a law enforcement escort,
while in service under this chapter shall:
         a.   Meet all requirements under A.R.S. § 28-1110, and maintain
certification through a program that meets the escort vehicle operator training
and certification standards of the Commercial Vehicle Safety Alliance or an
equivalent program, whether in this state or another state, that meets the same
objectives;
         b.   Carry in the escort vehicle the same emergency equipment required
for a truck, truck tractor, or bus under A.R.S § 28-960 and 49 CFR 393.95,
which shall include:
            i.   Fire extinguishers;
            ii.   Warning devices for stopped vehicles; and
            iii.   Emergency staff-mounted warning flags;
         c.   Display an "OVERSIZE LOAD" sign:
            i.   Constructed for escort vehicles as provided under Section
10.36.330, Illustration 2;
            ii.   Mounted above the vehicle's roofline and visible to
approaching traffic from the front and rear;
            iii.   Accompanied by two flags, one mounted on each side of the
oversize load sign; and
            iv.   Concealed when not in use; and
         d.   Ensure continuous communication by two-way radio:
            i.   Capable of transmitting and receiving a minimum of one-half
mile; and
            ii.   Compatible with the two-way radios used by the driver of the
escorted vehicle, law enforcement escorts, and all other accompanying escort
vehicles.
   C.   Operations.
      1.   Lighting Requirement. While in service, an escort vehicle operator
shall maintain continuous illumination of head-lights and overhead warning
lights as prescribed under A.R.S. § 28-947.
      2.   Lead and Follow Distance. An escort vehicle operator shall maintain
a lead or follow distance from an escorted vehicle that generally does not
exceed one thousand five hundred feet on an open state highway or two hundred
fifty feet in an urban setting. When determining the appropriate lead or follow
distance, an escort vehicle operator shall:
         a.   Consider traffic density, road conditions, road type, speed, and
type of load;
         b.   Ensure constant radio communication with all escorts and the
escorted vehicle; and
         c.   Maintain visual contact with the escorted vehicle at all times.
      3.   Stop provisions at an intersection with a traffic control signal.
         a.   When an oversize or overweight special permitted vehicle is
required to stop, the lead-escort vehicle operator shall proceed through the
intersection and stop safely off the roadway. The lead-escort vehicle operator
shall resume an appropriate lead distance as soon as is safely possible.
         b.   When a following-escort vehicle is required to stop, the operator
of an oversize or overweight special permitted vehicle shall proceed without
stopping. The following-escort vehicle operator shall resume an appropriate
following distance behind the over- size or overweight special permitted
vehicle as soon as is safely possible after clearing an intersection.
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
10.36.360   Traffic control provisions.
   A.   The department may require additional traffic control by a uniformed
certified law enforcement officer to ensure highway safety. The department
shall consider the criteria under Section
10.36.350(A) when determining the need for additional traffic control.
   B.   If the department requires a law enforcement escort under Section
10.36.460, Table 4, or as necessary to promote public safety, the permittee or
driver of the oversize or overweight special permitted vehicle shall:
      1.   Contact law enforcement at least twelve hours before transport to
request the appropriate number of uniformed certified law enforcement escorts
required for the permitted activity; and
      2.   Ensure continuous two-way radio communication during transport with
all law enforcement and other escort vehicles required to accompany the
permitted vehicle under Sections
10.36.350 and
10.36.370.
   C.   The permittee or driver of an oversize or overweight special permitted
vehicle may use any uniformed certified law enforcement escorts if at least one
officer is certified for enforcement of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Regulations of the U.S. Department of Transportation's Federal Motor Carrier
Safety Administration.
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
10.36.370   Projecting load or vehicle.
   A.   The department shall require a special permit for transporting a load
or vehicle that projects:
      1.   Two feet or less, if the projecting portion of the load or vehicle
has a thickness of less than twelve inches; or
      2.   Three feet or less, if the projecting portion of the load or vehicle
has a thickness of twelve inches or more.
   B.   The department shall require a special permit for transporting a load
that projects from either side of the vehicle:
      1.   More than two feet, if the height of the projecting portion of the
load has a thickness of less than twelve inches; or
      2.   More than three feet, if the height of the projecting portion of the
load has a thickness of twelve inches or more.
   C.   A permittee of a projecting vehicle or load shall have escort vehicle
accompaniment as follows:
      1.   A front escort vehicle if the front load projection is longer than
twenty feet, or
      2.   A rear escort vehicle if rear projection is longer than twenty feet.
   D.   A permittee or driver of a projecting vehicle or load with more than a
four foot front or rear overhang shall:
      1.   Attach warning flags to the load as provided under Section
10.36.320 and Illustration 1, for daylight operation; or
      2.   Attach safety lighting to the load as provided under Section
10.36.340 and Illustration 4, for nighttime operation.
   E.   An integral component removed from a loaded primary object may be
transported on the same vehicle bearing the primary object provided the
component does not cause the hauling vehicle to exceed a size or weight
permitted for the primary object.
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
10.36.380   Permittee or driver obligation to notify utility companies of
overheight transport.
   A permittee or driver shall notify a responsible utility company of possible
disturbance or damage, as provided under A.R.S. § 40-360.43, if overhead
utility lines extend across a proposed route and the permitted vehicle or load
exceeds the height under Section
10.36.020, Table 1.
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
Article 4. Transport Provisions
10.36.410   General highway operations.
10.36.420   Speed restrictions.
10.36.430   Weather restriction—Hazardous conditions.
10.36.440   Special mobile home towing restriction.
10.36.450   Maximum permitted weights.
10.36.460   Highway-specific restrictions, requirements, conditions, and
allowances.
10.36.410   General highway operations.
   A.   A permittee or driver of an oversize or overweight special permitted
vehicle or vehicle and load combination shall:
      1.   Operate no earlier than one-half hour before sunrise and no later
than one-half hour after sunset, exact daily times as defined under Section
10.36.010, except as provided under this article, or unless the department
otherwise:
         a.   Restricts operation on a highway, or
         b.   Grants permit-specific alternate operation hours other than those
listed under this subsection as a necessary condition to maintain highway
safety;
      2.   Operate in the rightmost lane of a multi-lane highway if indicated
on the special permit except to overtake and pass another vehicle; and
      3.   Maintain a minimum distance of two thousand feet from any other
oversize or overweight special permitted vehicle traveling on the same highway
in the same direction except when passing.
   B.   Removal of signs, guardrails or other assets from the right-of-way is
not authorized under an oversize or overweight special permit and is illegal
under A.R.S. § 28-7053. A separate encroachment permit issued by the department
is required to enter the right-of-way for these purposes or for any reason
other than authorized public travel. The activities authorized while in the
right-of-way shall be outlined in the encroachment permit.
   C.   Replacement of any county highway feature moved under an encroachment
permit, as a result of the transport of an oversize or overweight vehicle along
a traveled route, shall be detailed on the encroachment permit and completed
under department inspection.
   D.   A permittee and driver of an oversize or overweight special permitted
vehicle, prior to commencing transport, shall access and review the most
current information on roadway conditions, closures, and restrictions using one
of the following methods:
      1.   Phone inquiry — County highways dial (520)724-6410, or
      2.   Online inquiry — County highways visit http://webcms.pima.gov/cms/
One.aspx?portalId_=169&pageId=136105.
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
10.36.420   Speed restrictions.
   A.   A driver of an oversize or overweight vehicle or load shall not exceed
the lower maximum speed determined by either of the following:
      1.   A speed limit printed on an issued permit, or
      2.   A highway posted vehicle-specific speed limit.
   B.   The department may order an alternative speed restriction to prevent:
      1.   Hazardous traffic conditions, or
      2.   Damages to a highway or highway feature.
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
10.36.430   Weather restriction—Hazardous conditions.
   A.   Responsibility. A driver of an oversize or overweight vehicle, or
vehicle and load combination, shall:
      1.   Use the criteria provided under subsection B to identify unsafe
roadway conditions and discontinue transport until safe to continue, and
      2.   Comply with all official agency weather-related travel advisories
prohibiting oversize or overweight transport.
   B.   Determining Conditions. A driver of an oversize or overweight vehicle,
or vehicle and load combination, shall not transport under the following
hazardous conditions:
 
Hazardous Conditions:                Possible Causes May Include:
Driver visibility range becomes less • Blowing dust, falling snow, fog, heavy
than 500 feet                        rain
Road surface condition reduces       • Snow, ice, flooding
normal traction
A load destabilizing condition       • High winds, falling objects
endangers road surface or traffic
 
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
10.36.440   Special mobile home towing restriction.
   A.   A vehicle towing a mobile home shall have a factory rating that
corresponds with the following criteria:
 
Load measurement criteria               Towing vehicle factory rating
10 feet or less in width and 50 feet or 1½ tons
less in length, including hitch
More than 10 feet in width or more than Two tons; four tires per drive axle and
50 feet in length, or both              minimum 99 inch wheel base
 
   B.   A mobile home transporter shall cover the open side of a mobile home
module with plastic sheeting no thinner than 1.5 mil plus a rigid grillwork
backing.
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
10.36.450   Maximum permitted weights.
   A.   The department shall use the formulas and computations provided under
Tables 3.01 through 3.09, and Illustration 3, to determine the maximum weights
allowed on any combination of axles within the distance between the front and
rear axle of a given axle group, up to a maximum of eighteen feet, when issuing
an oversize or overweight special permit for a non-reducible vehicle or load
under this chapter.
Table 3.01. Maximum Permitted Weight Computations: Axle Width — 8 Feet 
Overweight Axle Group Chart
   Distance between the center of the front axle and the center of the rear
axle of a given group.
          Inches
          0      1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9      10     11
Feet 3  A 28,000 28,000 28,000 28,000 28,000 28,000 45,675 45,763 45,850 45,938 46,025 46,113
        B 32,200 32,200 32,200 32,200 32,200 32,200 52,526 52,627 52,728 52,828 52,929 53,029
     4  A 46,200 46,288 46,375 46,463 46,550 46,638 46,725 46,813 46,900 46,988 47,075 47,163
        B 53,130 53,231 53,331 53,432 53,533 53,633 53,734 53,834 53,935 54,036 54,136 54,237
     5  A 47,250 47,338 47,425 47,513 47,600 47,688 47,775 47,863 47,950 48,038 48,125 48,213
        B 54,338 54,438 54,539 54,639 54,740 54,841 54,941 55,042 55,143 55,243 55,344 55,444
     6  A 48,300 48,388 48,475 48,563 48,650 48,738 48,825 48,913 49,000 49,088 49,175 49,263
        B 55,545 55,646 55,746 55,847 55,948 56,048 56,149 56,249 56,350 56,451 56,551 56,652
     7  A 49,350 49,438 49,525 49,613 49,700 49,788 49,875 49,963 50,050 50,138 50,225 50,313
        B 56,753 56,853 56,954 57,054 57,155 57,256 57,356 57,457 57,558 57,658 57,759 57,859
     8  A 50,400 50,488 50,575 50,663 50,750 50,838 50,925 51,013 51,100 51,188 51,275 51,363
        B 57,960 58,061 58,161 58,262 58,363 58,463 58,564 58,664 58,765 58,866 58,966 59,067
     9  A 51,450 51,538 51,625 51,713 51,800 51,888 51,975 52,063 52,150 52,238 52,325 52,413
        B 59,168 59,268 59,369 59,469 59,570 59,671 59,771 59,872 59,973 60,073 60,174 60,274
     10 A 52,500 52,588 52,675 52,763 52,850 52,938 53,025 53,113 53,200 53,288 53,375 53,463
        B 60,375 60,476 60,576 60,677 60,778 60,878 60,979 61,079 61,180 61,281 61,381 61,482
     11 A 53,550 53,638 53,725 53,813 53,900 53,988 54,075 54,163 54,250 54,338 54,425 54,513
        B 61,583 61,683 61,784 61,884 61,985 62,086 62,186 62,287 62,388 62,488 62,589 62,689
     12 A 54,600 54,688 54,775 54,863 54,950 55,038 55,125 55,213 55,300 55,388 55,475 55,563
        B 62,790 62,891 62,991 63,092 63,193 63,293 63,394 63,494 63,595 63,696 63,796 63,897
     13 A 55,650 55,738 55,825 55,913 56,000 56,088 56,175 56,263 56,350 56,438 56,525 56,613
        B 63,998 64,098 64,199 64,299 64,400 64,501 64,601 64,702 64,803 64,903 65,004 65,104
     14 A 56,700 56,788 56,875 56,963 57,050 57,138 57,225 57,313 57,400 57,488 57,575 57,663
        B 65,205 65,306 65,406 65,507 65,608 65,708 65,809 65,909 66,010 66,111 66,211 66,312
     15 A 57,750 57,838 57,925 58,013 58,100 58,188 58,275 58,363 58,450 58,538 58,625 58,713
        B 66,413 66,513 66,614 66,714 66,815 66,916 67,016 67,117 67,218 67,318 67,419 67,519
     16 A 58,800 58,888 58,975 59,063 59,150 59,238 59,325 59,413 59,500 59,588 59,675 59,763
        B 67,620 67,721 67,821 67,922 68,023 68,123 68,224 68,324 68,425 68,526 68,626 68,727
     17 A 59,850 59,938 60,025 60,113 60,200 60,288 60,375 60,463 60,550 60,638 60,725 60,813
        B 68,828 68,928 69,029 69,129 69,230 69,331 69,431 69,532 69,633 69,733 69,834 69,934
     18 A 60,900
        B 70,035
 
   Computation Formula: Weight = 1.5 X 700 (L + 40).
(L = Distance between the center of the front axle and the center of the rear
axle of a given group.)
   Legend:
   Line A: Four tires per axle or two 14-inch wide tires. Value is the formula
weight only.
   Line B: Eight tires per axle or four 14-inch wide tires. Value is the
formula weight plus 15%.
Table 3.02. Maximum Permitted Weight Computations: Axle Width — 8 Feet 3
Inches 
Overweight Axle Group Chart
   Distance between the center of the front axle and the center of the rear
axle of a given group.
          Inches
          0      1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9      10     11
Feet 3  A 28,525 28,525 28,525 28,525 28,525 28,525 46,531 46,621 46,710 46,799 46,888 46,977
        B 32,550 32,550 32,550 32,550 32,550 32,550 53,097 53,199 53,301 53,402 53,504 53,606
     4  A 47,066 47,155 47,245 47,334 47,423 47,512 47,601 47,690 47,779 47,869 47,958 48,047
        B 53,708 53,809 53,911 54,013 54,114 54,216 54,318 54,420 54,521 54,623 54,725 54,826
     5  A 48,136 48,225 48,314 48,403 48,493 48,582 48,671 48,760 48,849 48,938 49,027 49,116
        B 54,928 55,030 55,132 55,233 55,335 55,437 55,538 55,640 55,742 55,844 55,945 56,047
     6  A 49,206 49,295 49,384 49,473 49,562 49,651 49,740 49,830 49,919 50,008 50,097 50,186
        B 56,149 56,250 56,352 56,454 56,556 56,657 56,759 56,861 56,963 57,064 57,166 57,268
     7  A 50,275 50,364 50,454 50,543 50,632 50,721 50,810 50,899 50,988 51,078 51,167 51,256
        B 57,369 57,471 57,573 57,675 57,776 57,878 57,980 58,081 58,183 58,285 58,387 58,488
     8  A 51,345 51,434 51,523 51,612 51,702 51,791 51,880 51,969 52,058 52,147 52,236 52,326
        B 58,590 58,692 58,793 58,895 58,997 59,099 59,200 59,302 59,404 59,505 59,607 59,709
     9  A 52,415 52,504 52,593 52,682 52,771 52,860 52,950 53,039 53,128 53,217 53,306 53,395
        B 59,811 59,912 60,014 60,116 60,218 60,319 60,421 60,523 60,624 60,726 60,828 60,930
     10 A 53,484 53,574 53,663 53,752 53,841 53,930 54,019 54,108 54,198 54,287 54,376 54,465
        B 61,031 61,133 61,235 61,336 61,438 61,540 61,642 61,743 61,845 61,947 62,048 62,150
     11 A 54,554 54,643 54,732 54,821 54,911 55,000 55,089 55,178 55,267 55,356 55,445 55,535
        B 62,252 62,354 62,455 62,557 62,659 62,760 62,862 62,964 63,066 63,167 63,269 63,371
     12 A 55,624 55,713 55,802 55,891 55,980 56,069 56,159 56,248 56,337 56,426 56,515 56,604
        B 63,473 63,574 63,676 63,778 63,879 63,981 64,083 64,185 64,286 64,388 64,490 64,591
     13 A 56,693 56,783 56,872 56,961 57,050 57,139 57,228 57,317 57,407 57,496 57,585 57,674
        B 64,693 64,795 64,897 64,998 65,100 65,202 65,303 65,405 65,507 65,609 65,710 65,812
     14 A 57,763 57,852 57,941 58,031 58,120 58,209 58,298 58,387 58,476 58,565 58,655 58,744
        B 65,914 66,015 66,117 66,219 66,321 66,422 66,524 66,626 66,728 66,829 66,931 67,033
     15 A 58,833 58,922 59,011 59,100 59,189 59,279 59,368 59,457 59,546 59,635 59,724 59,813
        B 67,134 67,236 67,338 67,440 67,541 67,643 67,745 67,846 67,948 68,050 68,152 68,253
     16 A 59,903 59,992 60,081 60,170 60,259 60,348 60,437 60,526 60,616 60,705 60,794 60,883
        B 68,355 68,457 68,558 68,660 68,762 68,864 68,965 69,067 69,169 69,270 69,372 69,474
     17 A 60,972 61,061 61,150 61,240 61,329 61,418 61,507 61,596 61,685 61,774 61,864 61,953
        B 69,576 69,677 69,779 69,881 69,983 70,084 70,186 70,288 70,389 70,491 70,593 70,695
     18 A 62,042
        B 70,796
 
   Computation Formula: Weight = 1.5 X 700 (L + 40).
(L = Distance between the center of the front axle and the center of the rear
axle of a given group.)
   Legend:
   Line A: Four tires per axle or two 14-inch wide tires. Value is the formula
weight plus 1.875%.
   Line B: Eight tires per axle or four 14-inch wide tires. Value is the
formula weight plus 16.25%.
Table 3.03. Maximum Permitted Weight Computations: Axle Width — 8 Feet 6
Inches 
Overweight Axle Group Chart
   Distance between the center of the front axle and the center of the rear
axle of a given group.
          Inches
          0      1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9      10     11
Feet 3  A 29,050 29,050 29,050 29,050 29,050 29,050 47,388 47,479 47,569 47,660 47,751 47,842
        B 32,900 32,900 32,900 32,900 32,900 32,900 53,668 53,771 53,874 53,977 54,079 54,182
     4  A 47,933 48,023 48,114 48,205 48,296 48,386 48,477 48,568 48,659 48,750 48,840 48,931
        B 54,285 54,388 54,491 54,593 54,696 54,799 54,902 55,005 55,108 55,210 55,313 55,416
     5  A 49,022 49,113 49,203 49,294 49,385 49,476 49,567 49,657 49,748 49,839 49,930 50,020
        B 55,519 55,622 55,724 55,827 55,930 56,033 56,136 56,238 56,341 56,444 56,547 56,650
     6  A 50,111 50,202 50,293 50,384 50,474 50,565 50,656 50,747 50,838 50,928 51,019 51,110
        B 56,753 56,855 56,958 57,061 57,164 57,267 57,369 57,472 57,575 57,678 57,781 57,883
     7  A 51,201 51,291 51,382 51,473 51,564 51,655 51,745 51,836 51,927 52,018 52,108 52,199
        B 57,986 58,089 58,192 58,295 58,398 58,500 58,603 58,706 58,809 58,912 59,014 59,117
     8  A 52,290 52,381 52,472 52,562 52,653 52,744 52,835 52,925 53,016 53,107 53,198 53,289
        B 59,220 59,323 59,426 59,528 59,631 59,734 59,837 59,940 60,043 60,145 60,248 60,351
     9  A 53,379 53,470 53,561 53,652 53,743 53,833 53,924 54,015 54,106 54,196 54,287 54,378
        B 60,454 60,557 60,659 60,762 60,865 60,968 61,071 61,173 61,276 61,379 61,482 61,585
     10 A 54,469 54,560 54,650 54,741 54,832 54,923 55,013 55,104 55,195 55,286 55,377 55,467
        B 61,688 61,790 61,893 61,996 62,099 62,202 62,304 62,407 62,510 62,613 62,716 62,818
     11 A 55,558 55,649 55,740 55,830 55,921 56,012 56,103 56,194 56,284 56,375 56,466 56,557
        B 62,921 63,024 63,127 63,230 63,333 63,435 63,538 63,641 63,744 63,847 63,949 64,052
     12 A 56,648 56,738 56,829 56,920 57,011 57,101 57,192 57,283 57,374 57,465 57,555 57,646
        B 64,155 64,258 64,361 64,463 64,566 64,669 64,772 64,875 64,978 65,080 65,183 65,286
     13 A 57,737 57,828 57,918 58,009 58,100 58,191 58,282 58,372 58,463 58,554 58,645 58,735
        B 65,389 65,492 65,594 65,697 65,800 65,903 66,006 66,108 66,211 66,314 66,417 66,520
     14 A 58,826 58,917 59,008 59,099 59,189 59,280 59,371 59,462 59,553 59,643 59,734 59,825
        B 66,623 66,725 66,828 66,931 67,034 67,137 67,239 67,342 67,445 67,548 67,651 67,753
     15 A 59,916 60,006 60,097 60,188 60,279 60,370 60,460 60,551 60,642 60,733 60,823 60,914
        B 67,856 67,959 68,062 68,165 68,268 68,370 68,473 68,576 68,679 68,782 68,884 68,987
     16 A 61,005 61,096 61,187 61,277 61,368 61,459 61,550 61,640 61,731 61,822 61,913 62,004
        B 69,090 69,193 69,296 69,398 69,501 69,604 69,707 69,810 69,913 70,015 70,118 70,221
     17 A 62,094 62,185 62,276 62,367 62,458 62,548 62,639 62,730 62,821 62,911 63,002 63,093
        B 70,324 70,427 70,529 70,632 70,735 70,838 70,941 71,043 71,146 71,249 71,352 71,455
     18 A 63,184
        B 71,558
 
   Computation Formula: Weight = 1.5 X 700 (L + 40).
(L = Distance between the center of the front axle and the center of the rear
axle of a given group.)
   Legend:
   Line A: Four tires per axle or two 14-inch wide tires. Value is the formula
weight plus 3.75%.
   Line B: Eight tires per axle or four 14-inch wide tires. Value is the
formula weight plus 17.5%.
Table 3.04. Maximum Permitted Weight Computations: Axle Width — 8 Feet 9
Inches 
Overweight Axle Group Chart
   Distance between the center of the front axle and the center of the rear
axle of a given group.
          Inches
          0      1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9      10     11
Feet 3  A 29,575 29,575 29,575 29,575 29,575 29,575 48,244 48,337 48,429 48,521 48,614 48,706
        B 33,250 33,250 33,250 33,250 33,250 33,250 54,239 54,343 54,447 54,551 54,655 54,759
     4  A 48,799 48,891 48,984 49,076 49,168 49,261 49,353 49,446 49,538 49,631 49,723 49,815
        B 54,863 54,966 55,070 55,174 55,278 55,382 55,486 55,590 55,694 55,798 55,902 56,005
     5  A 49,908 50,000 50,093 50,185 50,278 50,370 50,462 50,555 50,647 50,740 50,832 50,924
        B 56,109 56,213 56,317 56,421 56,525 56,629 56,733 56,837 56,941 57,045 57,148 57,252
     6  A 51,017 51,109 51,202 51,294 51,387 51,479 51,571 51,664 51,756 51,849 51,941 52,034
        B 57,356 57,460 57,564 57,668 57,772 57,876 57,980 58,084 58,188 58,291 58,395 58,499
     7  A 52,126 52,218 52,311 52,403 52,496 52,588 52,680 52,773 52,865 52,958 53,050 53,143
        B 58,603 58,707 58,811 58,915 59,019 59,123 59,227 59,330 59,434 59,538 59,642 59,746
     8  A 53,235 53,327 53,420 53,512 53,605 53,697 53,790 53,882 53,974 54,067 54,159 54,252
        B 59,850 59,954 60,058 60,162 60,266 60,370 60,473 60,577 60,681 60,785 60,889 60,993
     9  A 54,344 54,436 54,529 54,621 54,714 54,806 54,899 54,991 55,083 55,176 55,268 55,361
        B 61,097 61,201 61,305 61,409 61,513 61,616 61,720 61,824 61,928 62,032 62,136 62,240
     10 A 55,453 55,546 55,638 55,730 55,823 55,915 56,008 56,100 56,193 56,285 56,377 56,470
        B 62,344 62,448 62,552 62,655 62,759 62,863 62,967 63,071 63,175 63,279 63,383 63,487
     11 A 56,562 56,655 56,747 56,839 56,932 57,024 57,117 57,209 57,302 57,394 57,486 57,579
        B 63,591 63,695 63,798 63,902 64,006 64,110 64,214 64,318 64,422 64,526 64,630 64,734
     12 A 57,671 57,764 57,856 57,949 58,041 58,133 58,226 58,318 58,411 58,503 58,595 58,688
        B 64,838 64,941 65,045 65,149 65,253 65,357 65,461 65,565 65,669 65,773 65,877 65,980
     13 A 58,780 58,873 58,965 59,058 59,150 59,242 59,335 59,427 59,520 59,612 59,705 59,797
        B 66,084 66,188 66,292 66,396 66,500 66,604 66,708 66,812 66,916 67,020 67,123 67,227
     14 A 59,889 59,982 60,074 60,167 60,259 60,351 60,444 60,536 60,629 60,721 60,814 60,906
        B 67,331 67,435 67,539 67,643 67,747 67,851 67,955 68,059 68,163 68,266 68,370 68,474
     15 A 60,998 61,091 61,183 61,276 61,368 61,461 61,553 61,645 61,738 61,830 61,923 62,015
        B 68,578 68,682 68,786 68,890 68,994 69,098 69,202 69,305 69,409 69,513 69,617 69,721
     16 A 62,108 62,200 62,292 62,385 62,477 62,570 62,662 62,754 62,847 62,939 63,032 63,124
        B 69,825 69,929 70,033 70,137 70,241 70,345 70,448 70,552 70,656 70,760 70,864 70,968
     17 A 63,217 63,309 63,401 63,494 63,586 63,679 63,771 63,864 63,956 64,048 64,141 64,233
        B 71,072 71,176 71,280 71,384 71,488 71,591 71,695 71,799 71,903 72,007 72,111 72,215
     18 A 64,326
        B 72,319
 
   Computation Formula: Weight = 1.5 X 700 (L + 40).
(L = Distance between the center of the front axle and the center of the rear
axle of a given group.)
   Legend:
   Line A: Four tires per axle or two 14-inch wide tires. Value is the formula
weight plus 5.625%.
   Line B: Eight tires per axle or four 14-inch wide tires. Value is the
formula weight plus 18.75%.
Table 3.05. Maximum Permitted Weight Computations: Axle Width — 9 Feet 
Overweight Axle Group Chart
   Distance between the center of the front axle and the center of the rear
axle of a given group.
          Inches
          0      1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9      10     11
Feet 3  A 30,100 30,100 30,100 30,100 30,100 30,100 49,101 49,195 49,289 49,383 49,477 49,571
        B 33,600 33,600 33,600 33,600 33,600 33,600 54,810 54,915 55,020 55,125 55,230 55,335
     4  A 49,665 49,759 49,853 49,947 50,041 50,135 50,229 50,323 50,418 50,512 50,606 50,700
        B 55,440 55,545 55,650 55,755 55,860 55,965 56,070 56,175 56,280 56,385 56,490 56,595
     5  A 50,794 50,888 50,982 51,076 51,170 51,264 51,358 51,452 51,546 51,640 51,734 51,828
        B 56,700 56,805 56,910 57,015 57,120 57,225 57,330 57,435 57,540 57,645 57,750 57,855
     6  A 51,923 52,017 52,111 52,205 52,299 52,393 52,487 52,581 52,675 52,769 52,863 52,957
        B 57,960 58,065 58,170 58,275 58,380 58,485 58,590 58,695 58,800 58,905 59,010 59,115
     7  A 53,051 53,145 53,239 53,333 53,428 53,522 53,616 53,710 53,804 53,898 53,992 54,086
        B 59,220 59,325 59,430 59,535 59,640 59,745 59,850 59,955 60,060 60,165 60,270 60,375
     8  A 54,180 54,274 54,368 54,462 54,556 54,650 54,744 54,838 54,933 55,027 55,121 55,215
        B 60,480 60,585 60,690 60,795 60,900 61,005 61,110 61,215 61,320 61,425 61,530 61,635
     9  A 55,309 55,403 55,497 55,591 55,685 55,779 55,873 55,967 56,061 56,155 56,249 56,343
        B 61,740 61,845 61,950 62,055 62,160 62,265 62,370 62,475 62,580 62,685 62,790 62,895
     10 A 56,438 56,532 56,626 56,720 56,814 56,908 57,002 57,096 57,190 57,284 57,378 57,472
        B 63,000 63,105 63,210 63,315 63,420 63,525 63,630 63,735 63,840 63,945 64,050 64,155
     11 A 57,566 57,660 57,754 57,848 57,943 58,037 58,131 58,225 58,319 58,413 58,507 58,601
        B 64,260 64,365 64,470 64,575 64,680 64,785 64,890 64,995 65,100 65,205 65,310 65,415
     12 A 58,695 58,789 58,883 58,977 59,071 59,165 59,259 59,353 59,448 59,542 59,636 59,730
        B 65,520 65,625 65,730 65,835 65,940 66,045 66,150 66,255 66,360 66,465 66,570 66,675
     13 A 59,824 59,918 60,012 60,106 60,200 60,294 60,388 60,482 60,576 60,670 60,764 60,858
        B 66,780 66,885 66,990 67,095 67,200 67,305 67,410 67,515 67,620 67,725 67,830 67,935
     14 A 60,953 61,047 61,141 61,235 61,329 61,423 61,517 61,611 61,705 61,799 61,893 61,987
        B 68,040 68,145 68,250 68,355 68,460 68,565 68,670 68,775 68,880 68,985 69,090 69,195
     15 A 62,081 62,175 62,269 62,363 62,458 62,552 62,646 62,740 62,834 62,928 63,022 63,116
        B 69,300 69,405 69,510 69,615 69,720 69,825 69,930 70,035 70,140 70,245 70,350 70,455
     16 A 63,210 63,304 63,398 63,492 63,586 63,680 63,774 63,868 63,963 64,057 64,151 64,245
        B 70,560 70,665 70,770 70,875 70,980 71,085 71,190 71,295 71,400 71,505 71,610 71,715
     17 A 64,339 64,433 64,527 64,621 64,715 64,809 64,903 64,997 65,091 65,185 65,279 65,373
        B 71,820 71,925 72,030 72,135 72,240 72,345 72,450 72,555 72,660 72,765 72,870 72,975
     18 A 65,468
        B 73,080
 
   Computation Formula: Weight = 1.5 X 700 (L + 40).
(L = Distance between the center of the front axle and the center of the rear
axle of a given group.)
   Legend:
   Line A: Four tires per axle or two 14-inch wide tires. Value is the formula
weight plus 7.5%.
   Line B: Eight tires per axle or four 14-inch wide tires. Value is the
formula weight plus 20%.
Table 3.06. Maximum Permitted Weight Computations: Axle Width — 9 Feet 3
Inches 
Overweight Axle Group Chart
   Distance between the center of the front axle and the center of the rear
axle of a given group.
          Inches
          0      1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9      10     11
Feet 3  A 30,625 30,625 30,625 30,625 30,625 30,625 49,957 50,053 50,148 50,244 50,340 50,436
        B 33,950 33,950 33,950 33,950 33,950 33,950 55,381 55,487 55,593 55,699 55,805 55,911
     4  A 50,531 50,627 50,723 50,818 50,914 51,010 51,105 51,201 51,297 51,393 51,488 51,584
        B 56,018 56,124 56,230 56,336 56,442 56,548 56,654 56,760 56,866 56,972 57,078 57,185
     5  A 51,680 51,775 51,871 51,967 52,063 52,158 52,254 52,350 52,445 52,541 52,637 52,732
        B 57,291 57,397 57,503 57,609 57,715 57,821 57,927 58,033 58,139 58,245 58,352 58,458
     6  A 52,828 52,924 53,020 53,115 53,211 53,307 53,402 53,498 53,594 53,689 53,785 53,881
        B 58,564 58,670 58,776 58,882 58,988 59,094 59,200 59,306 59,413 59,519 59,625 59,731
     7  A 53,977 54,072 54,168 54,264 54,359 54,455 54,551 54,646 54,742 54,838 54,934 55,029
        B 59,837 59,943 60,049 60,155 60,261 60,367 60,473 60,580 60,686 60,792 60,898 61,004
     8  A 55,125 55,221 55,316 55,412 55,508 55,604 55,699 55,795 55,891 55,986 56,082 56,178
        B 61,110 61,216 61,322 61,428 61,534 61,640 61,747 61,853 61,959 62,065 62,171 62,277
     9  A 56,273 56,369 56,465 56,561 56,656 56,752 56,848 56,943 57,039 57,135 57,230 57,326
        B 62,383 62,489 62,595 62,701 62,808 62,914 63,020 63,126 63,232 63,338 63,444 63,550
     10 A 57,422 57,518 57,613 57,709 57,805 57,900 57,996 58,092 58,188 58,283 58,379 58,475
        B 63,656 63,762 63,868 63,975 64,081 64,187 64,293 64,399 64,505 64,611 64,717 64,823
     11 A 58,570 58,666 58,762 58,857 58,953 59,049 59,145 59,240 59,336 59,432 59,527 59,623
        B 64,929 65,035 65,142 65,248 65,354 65,460 65,566 65,672 65,778 65,884 65,990 66,096
     12 A 59,719 59,814 59,910 60,006 60,102 60,197 60,293 60,389 60,484 60,580 60,676 60,771
        B 66,203 66,309 66,415 66,521 66,627 66,733 66,839 66,945 67,051 67,157 67,263 67,370
     13 A 60,867 60,963 61,059 61,154 61,250 61,346 61,441 61,537 61,633 61,729 61,824 61,920
        B 67,476 67,582 67,688 67,794 67,900 68,006 68,112 68,218 68,324 68,430 68,537 68,643
     14 A 62,016 62,111 62,207 62,303 62,398 62,494 62,590 62,686 62,781 62,877 62,973 63,068
        B 68,749 68,855 68,961 69,067 69,173 69,279 69,385 69,491 69,598 69,704 69,810 69,916
     15 A 63,164 63,260 63,355 63,451 63,547 63,643 63,738 63,834 63,930 64,025 64,121 64,217
        B 70,022 70,128 70,234 70,340 70,446 70,552 70,658 70,765 70,871 70,977 71,083 71,189
     16 A 64,313 64,408 64,504 64,600 64,695 64,791 64,887 64,982 65,078 65,174 65,270 65,365
        B 71,295 71,401 71,507 71,613 71,719 71,825 71,932 72,038 72,144 72,250 72,356 72,462
     17 A 65,461 65,557 65,652 65,748 65,844 65,939 66,035 66,131 66,227 66,322 66,418 66,514
        B 72,568 72,674 72,780 72,886 72,993 73,099 73,205 73,311 73,417 73,523 73,629 73,735
     18 A 66,609
        B 73,841
 
   Computation Formula: Weight = 1.5 X 700 (L + 40).
(L = Distance between the center of the front axle and the center of the rear
axle of a given group.)
   Legend:
   Line A: Four tires per axle or two 14-inch wide tires. Value is the formula
weight plus 9.375%.
   Line B: Eight tires per axle or four 14-inch wide tires. Value is the
formula weight plus 21.25%.
Table 3.07. Maximum Permitted Weight Computations: Axle Width - 9 Feet 6
Inches 
Overweight Axle Group Chart
   Distance between the center of the front axle and the center of the rear
axle of a given group.
          Inches
          0      1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9      10     11
Feet 3  A 31,150 31,150 31,150 31,150 31,150 31,150 50,813 50,911 51,008 51,105 51,203 51,300
        B 34,300 34,000 34,300 34,300 34,300 34,300 55,952 56,059 56,166 56,273 56,381 56,488
     4  A 51,398 51,495 51,592 51,690 51,787 51,884 51,982 52,079 52,176 52,274 52,371 52,468
        B 56,595 56,702 56,809 56,917 57,024 57,131 57,238 57,345 57,453 57,560 57,667 57,774
     5  A 52,566 52,663 52,760 52,858 52,955 53,052 53,150 53,247 53,344 53,442 53,539 53,636
        B 57,881 57,988 58,096 58,203 58,310 58,417 58,524 58,632 58,739 58,846 58,953 59,060
     6  A 53,734 53,831 53,928 54,026 54,123 54,220 54,318 54,415 54,513 54,610 54,707 54,805
        B 59,168 59,275 59,382 59,489 59,596 59,703 59,811 59,918 60,025 60,132 60,239 60,347
     7  A 54,902 54,999 55,097 55,194 55,291 55,389 55,486 55,583 55,681 55,778 55,875 55,973
        B 60,454 60,561 60,668 60,775 60,883 60,990 61,097 61,204 61,311 61,418 61,526 61,633
     8  A 56,070 56,167 56,265 56,362 56,459 56,557 56,654 56,751 56,849 56,946 57,043 57,141
        B 61,740 61,847 61,954 62,062 62,169 62,276 62,383 62,490 62,598 62,705 62,812 62,919
     9  A 57,238 57,335 57,433 57,530 57,628 57,725 57,822 57,920 58,017 58,114 58,212 58,309
        B 63,026 63,133 63,241 63,348 63,455 63,562 63,669 63,777 63,884 63,991 64,098 64,205
     10 A 58,406 58,504 58,601 58,698 58,796 58,893 58,990 59,088 59,185 59,282 59,380 59,477
        B 64,313 64,420 64,527 64,634 64,741 64,848 64,956 65,063 65,170 65,277 65,384 65,492
     11 A 59,574 59,672 59,769 59,866 59,964 60,061 60,158 60,256 60,353 60,450 60,548 60,645
        B 65,599 65,706 65,813 65,920 66,028 66,135 66,242 66,349 66,456 66,563 66,671 66,778
     12 A 60,743 60,840 60,937 61,035 61,132 61,229 61,327 61,424 61,521 61,619 61,716 61,813
        B 66,885 66,992 67,099 67,207 67,314 67,421 67,528 67,635 67,743 67,850 67,957 68,064
     13 A 61,911 62,008 62,105 62,203 62,300 62,397 62,495 62,592 62,689 62,787 62,884 62,981
        B 68,171 68,278 68,386 68,493 68,600 68,707 68,814 68,922 69,029 69,136 69,243 69,350
     14 A 63,079 63,176 63,273 63,371 63,468 63,565 63,663 63,760 63,858 63,955 64,052 64,150
        B 69,458 69,565 69,672 69,779 69,886 69,993 70,101 70,208 70,315 70,422 70,529 70,637
     15 A 64,247 64,344 64,442 64,539 64,636 64,734 64,831 64,928 65,026 65,123 65,220 65,318
        B 70,744 70,851 70,958 71,065 71,173 71,280 71,387 71,494 71,601 71,708 71,816 71,923
     16 A 65,415 65,512 65,610 65,707 65,804 65,902 65,999 66,096 66,194 66,291 66,388 66,486
        B 72,030 72,137 72,244 72,352 72,459 72,566 72,673 72,780 72,888 72,995 73,102 73,209
     17 A 66,583 66,680 66,778 66,875 66,973 67,070 67,167 67,265 67,362 67,459 67,557 67,654
        B 73,316 73,423 73,531 73,638 73,745 73,852 73,959 74,067 74,174 74,281 74,388 74,495
     18 A 67,751
        B 74,603
 
   Computation Formula: Weight = 1.5 X 700 (L + 40).
(L = Distance between the center of the front axle and the center of the rear
axle of a given group.)
   Legend:
   Line A: Four tires per axle or two 14-inch wide tires. Value is the formula
weight plus 11.25%.
   Line B: Eight tires per axle or four 14-inch wide tires. Value is the
formula weight plus 22.5%.
Table 3.08. Maximum Permitted Weight Computations: Axle Width — 9 Feet 9
Inches 
Overweight Axle Group Chart
   Distance between the center of the front axle and the center of the rear
axle of a given group.
          Inches
          0      1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9      10     11
Feet 3  A 31,675 31,675 31,675 31,675 31,675 31,675 51,670 51,769 51,868 51,967 52,066 52,165
        B 34,650 34,650 34,650 34,650 34,650 34,650 56,523 56,631 56,739 56,848 56,956 57,064
     4  A 52,264 52,363 52,462 52,561 52,660 52,759 52,858 52,957 53,056 53,155 53,254 53,353
        B 57,173 57,281 57,389 57,497 57,606 57,714 57,822 57,930 58,039 58,147 58,255 58,364
     5  A 53,452 53,551 53,650 53,749 53,848 53,946 54,045 54,144 54,243 54,342 54,441 54,540
        B 58,472 58,580 58,688 58,797 58,905 59,013 59,122 59,230 59,338 59,446 59,555 59,663
     6  A 54,639 54,738 54,837 54,936 55,035 55,134 55,233 55,332 55,431 55,530 55,629 55,728
        B 59,771 59,880 59,988 60,096 60,204 60,313 60,421 60,529 60,638 60,746 60,854 60,962
     7  A 55,827 55,926 56,025 56,124 56,223 56,322 56,421 56,520 56,619 56,718 56,817 56,916
        B 61,071 61,179 61,287 61,395 61,504 61,612 61,720 61,829 61,937 62,045 62,153 62,262
     8  A 57,015 57,114 57,213 57,312 57,411 57,510 57,609 57,708 57,807 57,906 58,005 58,104
        B 62,370 62,478 62,587 62,695 62,803 62,911 63,020 63,128 63,236 63,345 63,453 63,561
     9  A 58,203 58,302 58,401 58,500 58,599 58,698 58,797 58,896 58,995 59,094 59,193 59,292
        B 63,669 63,778 63,886 63,994 64,103 64,211 64,319 64,427 64,536 64,644 64,752 64,860
     10 A 59,391 59,490 59,589 59,688 59,787 59,886 59,985 60,084 60,183 60,281 60,380 60,479
        B 64,969 65,077 65,185 65,294 65,402 65,510 65,618 65,727 65,835 65,943 66,052 66,160
     11 A 60,578 60,677 60,776 60,875 60,974 61,073 61,172 61,271 61,370 61,469 61,568 61,667
        B 66,268 66,376 66,485 66,593 66,701 66,810 66,918 67,026 67,134 67,243 67,351 67,459
     12 A 61,766 61,865 61,964 62,063 62,162 62,261 62,360 62,459 62,558 62,657 62,756 62,855
        B 67,568 67,676 67,784 67,892 68,001 68,109 68,217 68,325 68,434 68,542 68,650 68,759
     13 A 62,954 63,053 63,152 63,251 63,350 63,449 63,548 63,647 63,746 63,845 63,944 64,043
        B 68,867 68,975 69,083 69,192 69,300 69,408 69,517 69,625 69,733 69,841 69,950 70,058
     14 A 64,142 64,241 64,340 64,439 64,538 64,637 64,736 64,835 64,934 65,033 65,132 65,231
        B 70,166 70,275 70,383 70,491 70,599 70,708 70,816 70,924 71,033 71,141 71,249 71,357
     15 A 65,330 65,429 65,528 65,627 65,726 65,825 65,924 66,023 66,122 66,221 66,320 66,419
        B 71,466 71,574 71,682 71,790 71,899 72,007 72,115 72,224 72,332 72,440 72,548 72,657
     16 A 66,518 66,616 66,715 66,814 66,913 67,012 67,111 67,210 67,309 67,408 67,507 67,606
        B 72,765 72,873 72,982 73,090 73,198 73,306 73,415 73,523 73,631 73,740 73,848 73,956
     17 A 67,705 67,804 67,903 68,002 68,101 68,200 68,299 68,398 68,497 68,596 68,695 68,794
        B 74,064 74,173 74,281 74,389 74,498 74,606 74,714 74,822 74,931 75,039 75,147 75,255
     18 A 68,893
        B 75,364
 
   Computation Formula: Weight = 1.5 X 700 (L + 40).
(L = Distance between the center of the front axle and the center of the rear
axle of a given group.)
   Legend:
   Line A: Four tires per axle or two 14-inch wide tires. Value is the formula
weight plus 13.125%.
   Line B: Eight tires per axle or four 14-inch wide tires. Value is the
formula weight plus 23.75%
Table 3.09. Maximum Permitted Weight Computations: Axle Width — 10 Feet 
Overweight Axle Group Chart
   Distance between the center of the front axle and the center of the rear
axle of a given group.
          Inches
          0      1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9      10     11
Feet 3  A 32,200 32,200 32,200 32,200 32,200 32,200 52,526 52,627 52,728 52,828 52,929 53,029
        B 35,000 35,000 35,000 35,000 35,000 35,000 57,094 57,203 57,313 57,422 57,531 57,641
     4  A 53,130 53,231 53,331 53,432 53,533 53,633 53,734 53,834 53,935 54,036 54,136 54,237
        B 57,750 57,859 57,969 58,078 58,188 58,297 58,406 58,516 58,625 58,734 58,844 58,953
     5  A 54,338 54,438 54,539 54,639 54,740 54,841 54,941 55,042 55,143 55,243 55,344 55,444
        B 59,063 59,172 59,281 59,391 59,500 59,609 59,719 59,828 59,938 60,047 60,156 60,266
     6  A 55,545 55,646 55,746 55,847 55,948 56,048 56,149 56,249 56,350 56,451 56,551 56,652
        B 60,375 60,484 60,594 60,703 60,813 60,922 61,031 61,141 61,250 61,359 61,469 61,578
     7  A 56,753 56,853 56,954 57,054 57,155 57,256 57,356 57,457 57,558 57,658 57,759 57,859
        B 61,688 61,797 61,906 62,016 62,125 62,234 62,344 62,453 62,563 62,672 62,781 62,891
     8  A 57,960 58,061 58,161 58,262 58,363 58,463 58,564 58,664 58,765 58,866 58,966 59,067
        B 63,000 63,109 63,219 63,328 63,438 63,547 63,656 63,766 63,875 63,984 64,094 64,203
     9  A 59,168 59,268 59,369 59,469 59,570 59,671 59,771 59,872 59,973 60,073 60,174 60,274
        B 64,313 64,422 64,531 64,641 64,750 64,859 64,969 65,078 65,188 65,297 65,406 65,516
     10 A 60,375 60,476 60,576 60,677 60,778 60,878 60,979 61,079 61,180 61,281 61,381 61,482
        B 65,625 65,734 65,844 65,953 66,063 66,172 66,281 66,391 66,500 66,609 66,719 66,828
     11 A 61,583 61,683 61,784 61,884 61,985 62,086 62,186 62,287 62,388 62,488 62,589 62,689
        B 66,938 67,047 67,156 67,266 67,375 67,484 67,594 67,703 67,813 67,922 68,031 68,141
     12 A 62,790 62,891 62,991 63,092 63,193 63,293 63,394 63,494 63,595 63,696 63,796 63,897
        B 68,250 68,359 68,469 68,578 68,688 68,797 68,906 69,016 69,125 69,234 69,344 69,453
     13 A 63,998 64,098 64,199 64,299 64,400 64,501 64,601 64,702 64,803 64,903 65,004 65,104
        B 69,563 69,672 69,781 69,891 70,000 70,109 70,219 70,328 70,438 70,547 70,656 70,766
     14 A 65,205 65,306 65,406 65,507 65,608 65,708 65,809 65,909 66,010 66,111 66,211 66,312
        B 70,875 70,984 71,094 71,203 71,313 71,422 71,531 71,641 71,750 71,859 71,969 72,078
     15 A 66,413 66,513 66,614 66,714 66,815 66,916 67,016 67,117 67,218 67,318 67,419 67,519
        B 72,188 72,297 72,406 72,516 72,625 72,734 72,844 72,953 73,063 73,172 73,281 73,391
     16 A 67,620 67,721 67,821 67,922 68,023 68,123 68,224 68,324 68,425 68,526 68,626 68,727
        B 73,500 73,609 73,719 73,828 73,938 74,047 74,156 74,266 74,375 74,484 74,594 74,703
     17 A 68,828 68,928 69,029 69,129 69,230 69,331 69,431 69,532 69,633 69,733 69,834 69,934
        B 74,813 74,922 75,031 75,141 75,250 75,359 75,469 75,578 75,688 75,797 75,906 76,016
     18 A 70,035
        B 76,125
 
   Computation Formula: Weight = 1.5 X 700 (L + 40).
(L = Distance between the center of the front axle and the center of the rear
axle of a given group.)
   Legend:
   Line A: Four tires per axle or two 14-inch wide tires. Value is the formula
weight plus 15%.
   Line B: Eight tires per axle or four 14-inch wide tires. Value is the
formula weight plus 25%.
Illustration 3. Overweight Axle Groups 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4361.png]
   The axle group weights shown on the previous tables are maximum weights
allowed on any combination of axles within the distance between the front and
rear axle of a given group to a maximum of eighteen feet. The values in Table
3.01 line "A" are an expansion of the formula W = 1.5 x 700 (L + 40), where L
is the distance between the centers of the front and rear axles of a group. The
values in line "B" and in the remaining tables are computed by applying the
percentages provided in the table footnotes and are intended to increase the
allowable weights based on wider axles and increased number of tires. Measured
axle widths shall be rounded down to the nearest three-inch increment when
determining the appropriate table to use.
(Axle 1) limited to 28,000 lbs. for single alone
(Axle 2 + 3); L = 4'; W = 46,200 lbs. for tandem alone
(Axle 1) + (Axle 2 + 3); L = 14'; W = 56,700 lbs. for the group
(Axle 4 + 5); L = 6'; W = 60,375 lbs. (25% increase for 10' wide - 8 tires)
(Axle 2 + 3 + 4); L = 16'; W = (2/3 x 58,800) + (1/3 x 73,500) = 63,700 lbs.
(Axle 3 + 4 + 5); L = 18'; W = (1/3 x 60,900) + (2/3 x 76,125) = 71,050 lbs.
(Axle 3 + 4); L = 12'; W = (1/2 x 54,600) + (1/2 x 68,250) = 61,425 lbs.
(Axle 6 + 7 +8); L = 10' 8"; W = 61,180 (15% increase for 10' wide - 4 tires)
   Note: The department shall review each possible axle group that can exist
within an eighteen-foot distance. Axle group configurations of different widths
or numbers of tires shall be prorated within the total group load in
determining any allowable increase over the basic formula weight.
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
10.36.460   Highway-specific restrictions, requirements, conditions, and
allowances.
   A.   The department may temporarily prohibit operation of an oversize or
overweight special permitted vehicle, or impose additional weight restrictions,
requirements, conditions, or allowances, if safe transport on a highway under
the department's jurisdiction is unavoidably affected by a temporary
construction or maintenance project, incident, or emergency situation as
indicated on the Department's web site at http://webcms.pima.gov/cms/
One.aspx?portalId=169&_pageId=136105.
   B.   The department shall post to its web site at http://webcms.pima.gov/
cms/One.aspx?portalId=_169&pageId=136105 all updates to any temporary or
permanent highway restrictions, requirements, conditions, or allowances
affecting a highway or structure listed under Table 4 as appropriate for safe
transport of an oversize or overweight vehicle or vehicle and load.
   C.   A permittee and driver shall check the department's web site at http://
webcms.pima.gov/cms/One.aspx?portalId=169&pageId=136105 daily for updates to
any temporary or permanent highway restrictions, requirements, conditions, or
allowances affecting safe transport of an oversize or overweight vehicle or
vehicle and load on a highway or structure listed under Table 4.
   D.   A permittee or driver of an oversize or overweight vehicle or load
shall not cross a structure listed under Table 4 unless operating in full
compliance with all indicated permanent highway restrictions, requirements,
conditions and allowances, including any additional instructions indicated on
the special permit issued by the department.
   E.   A permittee and driver shall additionally check daily for up-to-date
information on traffic conditions, road closures, and restrictions by:
      1.   Accessing the department's website for road closure updates at http:
//webcms.pima.gov/cms/One.aspx?portalId=169&pageId=136105; or
   F.   The information contained in Table 4 reflects structure restrictions,
requirements, conditions, and allowances applicable on the effective date of
this section. Real-time updates published as an addendum to Table 4 are posted
by the department to its website at http://webcms.pima.gov/cms/
One.aspx?portalId=169 &pageId=67525. This information is critical for ensuring
safe transport of an oversize or overweight vehicle or load and is subject to
change as provided under this Section.
Table 4. Highway Structure Restrictions, Requirements, Conditions, and
Allowances 
Street Name No. Name Restriction location Clear Roadway Width 1 Weight (lbs.) 2
                                                                                                      Clear
Street Name  No.   Name      Restriction location                                                     Roadway     Weight (lbs.) 2
                                                                                                      Width 1
                                                                                                                  Permitted vehicles with a gross weight less than 150,000 — no restrictions.
                   Pantano                                                                                        Permitted vehicles with a gross weight of 150,001 to 250,000 - drivers
Colossal     7575  Wash      2.2 miles N. of I-10                                                     44'-0"±    shall: Cross bridge in center of travel lanes at a constant speed of no more
Cave Road          Bridge    (Lat. 32 Deg. 02 Min 59.47 Sec N., Long. 110 Deg. 41 Min 51.26 Sec W.)               than 10 mph while on bridge. Permitted vehicles with a gross weight of over
                                                                                                                  250,000 require a special structural analysis and approval from Pima County
                                                                                                                  3
Telera       8258  Ajo Wash  South of Rocalla Ave. (Lat. 32 Deg. 22 Min. 24.68 Sec. N., Long. 112     26'-6"±    10,000 maximum gross
Street             Bridge    Deg. 51 Min. 57.71 Sec. W.)
Silverbell         Blanco    0.28 miles W. of Aguirre Rd. (Lat. 32 Deg. 27 Min. 58.81 Sec. N., Long.
Road         8259  Wash      111 Deg. 20 Min. 19.65 Sec. W.)                                          11'-4"±    6,000 maximum gross
                   Bridge
                   Santa
Trico Road   8262  Cruz      1.4 miles N. of Trico-Marana (Lat. 32 Deg. 28 Min. 16.68 Sec. N., Long.  24'-8"±    30,000 maximum gross
                   River     111 Deg. 18 Min. 15.23 Sec. W.)
                   Bridge
Dodge              Rillito   0.8 miles N. of Kleindale Dr. (Lat. 32 Deg. 16 Min. 16.00 Sec. N. Long.
Boulevard    8273  River     110 Deg. 54 Min. 51.44 Sec. W.)                                          28'-0"±    40,000 maximum gross
                   Bridge
Soldier            Small     Catalina Highway — Mt. Lemmon Rd. (Lat. 33 Deg. 18 Min. 12.56 Sec. N.,
Trail        8279  Wash      Long. 110 deg 44 Min. 41.17 Sec. W.)                                     22'-7±     46,000 maximum gross
                   Bridge
                   Pantano
Marsh        8293  Wash and  6.1 miles n. of Benson Highway (Lat. 32 Deg. 01 Min. 11.03 Sec. N.,      20'-0"±    40,000 maximum gross
Station Road       UPRR      Long. 110 Deg. 38 Min. 45.60 Sec. W.)
                   Bridge
Marsh        8294  Medium    4.7 miles N. of I-10 Exit 289 (Lat. 32 Deg. 01 Min. 23.27 Sec. N., Long. 25'-5"±    40,000 maximum gross
Station Road       Wash RCB  110 Deg. 37 Min. 19.47 Sec. W.)
                   La
Marsh        8299  Cienega   0.4 miles N. of Benson Highway (Lat. 31 Deg. 59 Min. 23.23 Sec. N.,      24'-6"±    40,000 maximum gross
Station Road       Wash      Long. 110 Deg. 33 Min. 55.99 Sec. W.)
                   Bridge
Greaterville       Medium    0.3 miles W. of Sonoita Highway (Lat. 31 Deg. 46 Min. 54.26 Sec. N.,
Road         8300  Wash      Long. 110 Deg. 41 Min. 46.19 Sec. W.)                                    20'-0"±    20,000 maximum gross
                   Bridge
Madera             Medium    0.4 miles S. of Whitehouse Canyon Rd. (Lat. 31 Deg. 47 Min. 16.46 Sec.
Canyon Road  8301  Wash      N., Long. 110 Deg. 53 Min. 03.95 Sec. W.)                                14'-2"±    78,000 maximum gross
                   Bridge
                   Mission   1.5 miles N. of Pima Mine Rd. (Lat. 32 Deg. 01 Min. 05.58 Sec. N, Long.
Mission Road 8318  Road      111 Deg. 04 Min. 28.67 Sec. W.)                                          41'-1"±    30,000 maximum gross
                   Overpass
Soledad            Drainage  300 feet N. of Orangewood (Lat. 32 Deg. 20 Min. 54.62 Sec. N, Long. 111
Avenue       8460  Channel   Deg. 03 Min. 11.69 Sec. W.)                                              40'-0"±    68,000 maximum gross
                   Bridge
Mile Wide          Brawley   1.5 miles W. of Sandario Rd. (Lat. 32 Deg. 14 Min. 53.26 Sec. N., Long.
Road         8474  Wash      111 Deg. 14 Min. 38.85 Sec. W.)                                          16'-4"±    10,000 maximum gross
                   Bridge
Mile Wide          Jones     3 miles W. of Sandario Rd. (Lat. 32 Deg. 14 Min. 53.14 Sec. N., Long.
Road         8475  Wash      111 Deg. 16 Min. 12.83 Sec. W.)                                          16'-4"±    10,000 maximum gross
                   Bridge
                                                                                                                  Permitted vehicles with a gross weight less than 150,000 — no restrictions.
                   SP        Kolb Road and UPRR (Lat. 32 Deg. 07 Min. 12.25 Sec. N., Long. 110 Deg.   28'-0"± NB Permitted vehicles with a gross weight of 150,001 to 250,000 — drivers
Kolb Road    8747  Railroad  50 Min. 27.72 Sec.)                                                      28'-0"± SB shall: Cross at a constant speed of no more than 10 mph while on bridge.
                   Bridge                                                                                         Permitted vehicles with a gross weight of over 250,000 require a special
                                                                                                                  structural analysis and approval from Pima County 3
                                                                                                                  Permitted vehicles with a gross weight less than 150,000 — no restrictions.
Valencia           UPRR      Valencia Road and UPRR (Lat. 32 Deg. 08 Min. 26.98 Sec. N., Long. 110    40'-0"± EB Permitted vehicles with a gross weight of 150,001 to 250,000 — drivers
Road         8756  Bridge    Deg. 52 Min. 40.03 Sec. W.)                                              40'-0"± WB shall: Cross at a constant speed of no more than 10 mph while on bridge.
                                                                                                                  Permitted vehicles with a gross weight of over 250,000 require a special
                                                                                                                  structural analysis and approval from Pima County 3
                                                                                                                  Permitted vehicles with a gross weight of 175,000 or less and no axle group
                                                                                                                  weights greater than 70% of the axle group weight limits provided in Tables
Silverbell   9230  Small     0.3 miles N. of Belmont (Lat. 32 Deg. 19 Min. 47.03 Sec. N., Long. 111   23'-5"±    3.01 to 3.09 — drivers shall: Cross on center of bridge at a constant speed
Road               Wash SPA  Deg. 04 Min. 49.01 Sec. W.)                                                          of no more than 10 mph with no other vehicles on the bridge. Permitted
                                                                                                                  vehicles with a gross weight of over 175,000 require a special structural
                                                                                                                  analysis and approval from Pima County 3
                                                                                                                  Permitted vehicles with a gross weight less than 150,000 — no restrictions.
Flowing            Rillito   South of Flowing Wells Rd./River Rd. (Lat. 32 Deg. 17 Min. 39.79 Sec.    64'-        Permitted vehicles with a gross weight of 150,001 to 250,000 — drivers
Wells Road   9339  River     N., Long. 110 Deg. 59 Min. 42.46 Sec. W.)                                0"&plusmn   shall: Cross at a constant speed of no more than 10 mph while on bridge.
                   Bridge                                                                                         Permitted vehicles with a gross weight of over 250,000 require a special
                                                                                                                  structural analysis and approval from Pima County 3
                   Santa
Trico Marana 9552  Cruz      4.05 miles W. of Rt. 84 (Lat. 32 Deg. 27 Min. 13.39 Sec. N., Long. 111   30'-        30,000 maximum gross
Road               River     Deg. 16 Min. 47.32 Sec. W.)                                              0"&plusmn
                   Bridge
                   Ventana   0.3 miles W. of Sabino Canyon Rd (Lat. 32 Deg. 16 Min. 21.22 Sec. N.,    28'-
River Road   9557  Wash      Long. 110 Deg. 50 Min. 35.57 Sec. W.)                                    0"&plusmn   40,000 maximum gross
                   Bridge
                   Palo                                                                                           Permitted vehicles with a gross weight of 250,000 or less — drivers shall:
Alvernon Way       Verde     SB Alvernon Way and Diversion Channel (Lat. 32 Deg. 11 Min. 38.59 Sec.   28'-        Cross on center of bridge at a constant speed of no more than 10 mph while
(SB)         9812  Diversion N., Long. 110 Deg. 54 Min. 38.03 Sec. W.)                                0"&plusmn   on bridge. Permitted vehicles with a gross weight of over 250,000 require a
                   Channel                                                                                        special structural analysis and approval from Pima County 3
                   Bridge
                                                                                                      40'-        Permitted vehicles with a gross weight of 150,000 or less — drivers shall:
                   UPRR SB                                                                            0"&plusmn   Cross on center of bridge at a constant speed of no more than 10 mph while
Alvernon Way 9813  Frontage  Alvernon Way & UPRR (Lat. 32 Deg. 10 Min. 42.68 Sec. N., Long. 110 Deg.  NB          on bridge with no other vehicles on same span as overweight vehicle.
                   Road      54 Min. 30.73 Sec. W.)                                                   52'-        Permitted vehicles with a gross weight of over 150,000 require a special
                   Bridge                                                                             0"&plusmn   structural analysis and approval from Pima County 3
                                                                                                      SB
Nogales      10488 Bridge    9.1 miles N. of Junction I-19 (Lat. 32 Deg. 01 Min. 37.45 Sec. N., Long. 32'-        Legal weight as provided under
Highway            over Wash 110 Deg. 56                                                              4"&plusmn   10.36.020, Table 1
Nogales      10489 Bridge    9.5 miles N. of Junction I-19 (Lat. 32 Deg. 02 Min. 00.21 Sec. N., Long. 32'-        Legal weight as provided under
Highway            over Wash 110 Deg. 56 Min. 54.16 Sec. W.)                                          4"&plusmn   10.36.020, Table 1
Nogales      10490 Wash      10.1 miles N. of Junction I-19 (Lat. 32 Deg. 02 Min. 29.71 Sec. N.,      32'-        Legal weight as provided under
Highway            Bridge    Long. 110 Deg. 56 Min. 57.08 Sec. W.)                                    4"&plusmn   10.36.020, Table 1
Nogales            Scoops    10.5 miles N. of Junction I-19 (Lat. 32 Deg. 02 Min. 51.60 Sec. N.,      32'-        Legal weight as provided under
Highway      10491 Wash      Long. 110 Deg. 57 Min. 04.57 Sec. W.)                                    4"&plusmn   10.36.020, Table 1
                   Bridge
Nogales            Budweiser 11.6 miles N. of Junction I-19 (Lat. 32 Deg. 03 Min. 46.81 Sec. N.,      32'-        Legal weight as provided under
Highway      10492 Wash      Long. 110 Deg. 57 Min. 23.48 Sec. W.)                                    4"&plusmn   10.36.020, Table 1
                   Bridge
                                                                                                                  Permitted vehicles with a gross weight less than 150,000 — no restrictions.
La Cholla          Rillito                                                                                        Permitted vehicles with a gross weight of 150,001 to 250,000 — drivers
Boulevard    11301 River     South of La Cholla Blvd./River Rd. (Lat. 32 Deg. 18 Min. 09.23 Sec. N.,  41'-        shall: Cross at a constant speed of no more than 10 mph while on bridge with
(NB)               Bridge NB Long. 111 Deg. 00 Min. 43.04 Sec. W.)                                    0"&plusmn   no other vehicles on same span as overweight vehicle. Permitted vehicles
                                                                                                                  with a gross weight of over 250,000 require a special structural analysis
                                                                                                                  and approval from Pima County 3
                                                                                                                  Permitted vehicles with a gross weight less than 150,000 — no restrictions.
La Cholla          Rillito                                                                                        Permitted vehicles with a gross weight of 150,001 to 250,000 — drivers
Boulevard    11302 River     South of La Cholla Blvd./River Rd. (Lat. 32 Deg. 18 Min. 09.66 Sec. N.,  41'-        shall: Cross at a constant speed of no more than 10 mph while on bridge with
(SB)               Bridge SB Long. 111 Deg. 00 Min. 43.91 Sec. W.)                                    0"&plusmn   no other vehicles on same span as overweight vehicle. Permitted vehicles
                                                                                                                  with a gross weight of over 250,000 require a special structural analysis
                                                                                                                  and approval from Pima County 3
                   Craycroft                                                                                      Permitted vehicles with a gross weight of 250,000 or less — drivers shall:
Park Access  11303 Wash Arch Just North of Rillito Wash (Lat. 32 Deg. 16 Min. 14.37 Sec. N. Long. 110 30'-        Cross on center of bridge at a constant speed of no more than 10 mph while
Road               Culvert   Deg. 52 Min. 32.71 Sec. W.)                                              0"&plusmn   on bridge. Permitted vehicles with a gross weight of over 250,000 require a
                                                                                                                  special structural analysis and approval from Pima County 3
Corta Vista        Craycroft                                                                                      Permitted vehicles with a gross weight of 250,000 or less — drivers shall:
Montanosa    11305 Wash Arch Corta Vista Montanosa Road (Lat. 32 Deg. 18 Min. 18.46 N. Long. 110 Deg. 24'-        Cross on center of bridge at a constant speed of no more than 10 mph while
River Road         Culvert   52 Min. 31.08 Sec. W.)                                                   9"&plusmn   on bridge. Permitted vehicles with a gross weight of over 250,000 require a
                                                                                                                  special structural analysis and approval from Pima County 3
                                                                                                      32'-
                   Carmack                                                                            0"&plusmn   Permitted vehicles with a gross weight of 250,000 or less — drivers shall:
Magee Road   11437 Wash Arch 300' East of Old Magee Trail (Lat. 32 Deg. 21 Min. 05.53 Sec. N. Long.   WB          Cross on center of bridge at a constant speed of no more than 10 mph while
                   Culvert   111 Deg. 00 Min. 26.78 Sec. W.)                                          29'-        on bridge. Permitted vehicles with a gross weight of over 250,000 require a
                                                                                                      0"&plusmn   special structural analysis and approval from Pima County 3
                                                                                                      EB
                                                                                                                  Permitted vehicles with a gross weight less than 150,000 — no restrictions.
                   Santa                                                                                          Permitted vehicles with a gross weight of 150,001 to 250,000 — drivers
Sunset Road  11516 Cruz      0.5 miles West of I-10 (Lat. 32 Deg. 18 Min. 20.84 Sec. N., Long. 111    46'-0"      shall: Cross at a constant speed of no more than 10 mph while on bridge with
                   River     Deg. 02 Min. 55.54 Sec. W.)                                                          no other vehicles on same span as overweight vehicle. Permitted vehicles
                   Bridge                                                                                         with a gross weight of over 250,000 require a special structural analysis
                                                                                                                  and approval from Pima County 3
                                                                                                                  Permitted vehicles with a gross weight of 250,000 or less — drivers shall:
Houghton           UPRR      1.6 miles N. of I-10 (Lat. 32 Deg. 04 Min. 52.93 Sec. N., Long. 110 Deg.             Cross on center of bridge at a constant speed of no more than 10 mph while
Road         11543 Bridge NB 46 Min. 20.55 Sec. W.)                                                   44'-0"      on bridge with no other vehicles on same span as overweight vehicle.
                                                                                                                  Permitted vehicles with a gross weight of over 250,000 require a special
                                                                                                                  structural analysis and approval from Pima County 3
                                                                                                                  Permitted vehicles with a gross weight of 250,000 or less — drivers shall:
Houghton           UPRR      1.6 miles N. of I-10 (Lat. 32 Deg. 04 Min. 53.88 Sec. N., Long. 110 Deg.             Cross on center of bridge at a constant speed of no more than 10 mph while
Road         11544 Bridge SB 46 Min. 22.25 Sec. W.)                                                   44'-0"      on bridge with no other vehicles on same span as overweight vehicle.
                                                                                                                  Permitted vehicles with a gross weight of over 250,000 require a special
                                                                                                                  structural analysis and approval from Pima County 3
 
   Note 1: Clear roadway width of bridge reported. Transporter to determine
width limitations along route unless noted otherwise.
   Note 2: Vehicles crossing structures with movement restrictions (speed or
location) shall be guided by pilot vehicles or law enforcement. Coordination of
pilot vehicles or law enforcement is the responsibility of the transporter.
   Note 3: If a special structural analysis is required for an overweight
vehicle to cross a structure, the analysis is the responsibility of the
transporter. The structural analysis shall be performed and signed and sealed
by a registered civil or structural engineer in the state of Arizona. The
analysis shall conform to the AASHTO Manual for Bridge Evaluation, 2nd Edition
with interim revisions to date and shall be submitted to Pima County for review
and approval prior to the issuance of a permit.
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
Article 5. Envelope Permit Special Provisions
10.36.510   Envelope permit required recordkeeping.
10.36.520   Envelope permit suspension.
10.36.530   Envelope permit reapplication.
10.36.510   Envelope permit required recordkeeping.
   A.   An envelope permit holder shall maintain in this state, for at least
three years, records and other data for all vehicles operated, and cargo
transported, under an envelope permit as required under A.R.S. § 29-1149. The
records and other data shall include:
      1.   Bills of lading,
      2.   Shipping manifests, and
      3.   Time cards or invoices.
   B.   A record retained by an envelope permit holder under subsection A shall
contain, at least, the following information:
      1.   Date of document preparation,
      2.   Name of shipper and name of receiver,
      3.   Address of load origination,
      4.   Address of load destination, and
      5.   Dates of transport.
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
10.36.520   Envelope permit suspension.
   The director may suspend an envelope permit as prescribed under A.R.S. § 28-
1147.
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
10.36.530   Envelope permit reapplication.
   A.   An envelope permit applicant denied issuance by the department, as
prescribed under A.R.S. § 28-1142, shall not reapply for an envelope permit for
two years from the date of denial.
   B.   An envelope permit applicant, who has previously had an envelope permit
revoked by the Department under A.R.S. § 28-1147, shall not reapply for an
envelope permit for two years from the date of revocation.
   C.   Upon reapplication, an applicant shall show by a preponderance of
evidence that the underlying cause for denial or revocation has been removed.
(Ord. 2017-47 § 2 (part), 2017)
Chapter 10.40
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING RESTRICTIONS
Sections: 
10.40.010   Purpose.
10.40.020   State provisions adopted.
10.40.030   Definitions.
10.40.040   Recommendation of engineer.
10.40.050   Prohibitions.
10.40.060   Presumption of liability.
10.40.070   Violations.
10.40.010   Purpose.
   The board of supervisors or county engineer, upon finding that parking on
certain streets and highways within unincorporated areas of the county is
dangerous and a menace to public safety and convenience, may prohibit,
regulate, restrict and otherwise provide for public safety and convenience by a
system of parking and traffic regulations.
(Ord. 2021-11 § 10 (part), 2021; Prior code § 35.32.010)
10.40.020   State provisions adopted.
   The state traffic laws regulating stopping, standing and parking apply upon
all streets, highways and alleys within the county, except in any incorporated
city or town.
(Prior code § 35.32.020)
10.40.030   Definitions.
   All words used in this chapter, in addition to those defined in Section
10.04.020, shall, where applicable, have the definition given in A.R.S. Section
28-602 and 28-102, as amended.
(Prior code § 35.32.030)
10.40.040   Recommendation of engineer.
   A.   The county engineer is authorized to make a study of the condition,
width and average traffic load of the principally used streets and
thoroughfares within the county, except in any incorporated city or town. The
county engineer shall forthwith report in writing his recommendations of
restrictions or regulations on parking of motor vehicles thereon, such as will
in his opinion facilitate the public convenience and safety. Such
recommendations in certain streets or parts of streets on which parking may be
completely forbidden, forbidden during certain hours or times, permitted on
only one side of the street, on which only parallel parking is permitted, or on
which any other reasonable prohibition or regulations are made. The county
engineer, upon finding on the basis of an engineering study and engineering
judgement that a parking restriction is reasonably necessary for the protection
and convenience of the traveling public of the county, shall approve the
parking restriction. At the county engineer's discretion, the county engineer
may alternately make a recommendation for the parking restriction to the board
and the board shall study such recommendations and may approve, reject or
modify them, and it shall note its action by ordinance or resolution.
   B.   The county engineer is also authorized to make a continuing study of
parking problems and other related matters. The county engineer, upon finding
on the basis of an engineering study and engineering judgement that new streets
and thoroughfares be restricted or regulated, or that the restrictions and
regulations applicable to previously designated streets or highways be
abolished, modified or otherwise changed, shall approve the parking
restriction. At the county engineer's discretion, the county engineer may
alternately make a recommendation for the parking restriction to the board. The
board shall approve, reject or modify all such recommendations in the manner
provided by subsection A of this section, and thereafter such streets or
highways shall be subject to the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 2021-11 § 10 (part), 2021; Prior code § 35.32.040)
10.40.050   Prohibitions.
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to park or leave a vehicle, attended or
otherwise, occupied or unoccupied, in or along designated and signposted
streets, highways, avenues, alleys or parts thereof.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to park or leave any vehicle having a
total gross vehicle weight rating in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) pounds,
including, but not limited to, trucks, truck tractors, road tractors, trailers,
semi-trailers, vehicle transporters, or any combination of such vehicles,
attended or otherwise, occupied or unoccupied, on dedicated Pima County road
right-of-way within or contiguous to land zoned or used primarily for single
family or multi-family residential uses.
   C.   Notwithstanding the prohibition in Section
10.40.050(B) above, a vehicle restricted by that subsection may temporarily
park on dedicated Pima County right-of-way to perform the following activities,
except that upon completion of such activity the vehicle must be promptly
removed.
      1.   Deliver, pickup, load or unload merchandise, materials, or
equipment, including furniture and other household goods; or
      2.   Provide construction, repair, or similar services to a property or
utility.
   D.   For purposes of this section, the term "dedicated Pima County road
right-of-way" shall mean right-of-way dedicated into the Pima County Highway
Maintenance System by a Road Establishment or Memorandum of Acceptance as
approved by the Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 2018-25 § 1 (part), 2018: Prior code § 35.32.060)
10.40.060   Presumption of liability.
   A.   In any prosecution charging a violation of any provision of this
chapter governing the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle, the person in
whose name such vehicle is registered is prima facie responsible for such
violation and subject to the penalty thereof.
   B.   The provisions of subsection A of this section apply to those persons
in whose names such vehicle is jointly registered. Such persons are jointly and
severally prima facie responsible for such a violation and subject to penalty
therefor.
(Prior code § 35.32.070)
10.40.070   Violations.
   A.   Any violation of
Chapter 10.40 shall be a civil traffic violation.
   B.   Any person found responsible for violating any provision of
Chapter 10.40 shall be fined not more than $250 for each violation.
(Ord. 2018-25 § 1 (part), 2018)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-25, § 1, adopted August 20, 2018, set out
provisions intended for use as § 10.40.060. For purposes of classification, and
at the direction of the county, these provisions have been included as §
10.40.070.
Chapter 10.41
PARKING FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH PHYSICAL DISABILITIES; DESIGNATION; ENFORCEMENT
Sections: 
10.41.010   Parking for individuals with physical disabilities; designation;
enforcement.
10.41.020   Penalty.
10.41.030   Parking prohibited in spaces reserved for individuals with physical
disabilities.
10.41.040   Parking prohibited in access aisles of spaces reserved for
individuals with physical disabilities.
10.41.050   Paratransit loading zones.
10.41.060   Wheelchair curb access ramps.
10.41.010   Parking for individuals with physical disabilities; designation;
enforcement.
   Parking spaces subject to these provisions shall be clearly and
conspicuously designated as being reserved for individuals with physical
disabilities. Such designation shall include a standard symbolic disabled
parking sign bearing the number of this section of this code and conforming to
specifications for design and placement as approved by the director of
transportation. The posting of such sign or signs shall authorize enforcement
of the provisions of this division and shall thereby constitute consent by the
owner of the property to enforcement of this division. The owner of the
property is responsible for posting the signs.
(Ord. 2002-110 § 1 (part), 2002)
10.41.020   Penalty.
   Unless otherwise specifically provided, the penalty for violating any
ordinance or provision of
Chapter 10.41, which regulates the time, place, or method of parking a vehicle
shall be a mandatory fine of one hundred eighty-five dollars and seventy-five
cents ($185.75), no part of which may be suspended or waived by the court. This
fine includes any assessments imposed by the state pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 12-
116.01 and 12-116.02.
(Ord. 2002-110 § 1 (part), 2002)
10.41.030   Parking prohibited in spaces reserved for individuals with physical
disabilities.
   A.   It is unlawful to park any motor vehicle, other than one bearing a
license plate with the international wheelchair symbol or displaying a placard
issued under state law for this purpose, in a parking space reserved for use by
individuals with physical disabilities whether on public property or private
property available for public use, when such space is designated as described
in section
10.41.010 above.
   B.   If the owner or operator of the vehicle involved in a violation of this
section, subsequently produces to the court proof of possession of a valid
placard issued under state law for these purposes, the fine shall be reduced to
seventy-five cents ($0.75), no part of which may be suspended or waived by the
court. This fine includes the assessments imposed by the state pursuant to
A.R.S. §§ 12-116.01 and 12-116.02.
(Ord. 2002-110 § 1 (part), 2002)
10.41.040   Parking prohibited in access aisles of spaces reserved for
individuals with physical disabilities.
   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle, including one with a disabled plate or
placard, to park in the access aisle of such space as designated by diagonal
white or yellow lines spaced at approximately two-foot intervals.
(Ord. 2002-110 § 1 (part), 2002)
10.41.050   Paratransit loading zones.
   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, it is unlawful to stop, stand,
or park a vehicle in any provisional paratransit loading zone. The provisions
of this section shall not apply to vehicles bearing a license plate with the
international wheelchair symbol or displaying a placard issued under state law
for this purpose, or to authorized commercial paratransit vehicles, when any
such vehicles are actively engaged in loading or unloading of passengers. In no
case shall the stop for the loading or unloading of passengers exceed twenty
(20) minutes.
(Ord. 2002-110 § 1 (part), 2002)
10.41.060   Wheelchair curb access ramps.
   It is unlawful to stop, stand, or park a vehicle in such a manner as to
block or deny access to a wheelchair curb access ramp. A violation of this
section is punishable by a fine of thirty-five dollars and seventy-five cents
($35.75) and such fine shall not be suspended. This fine includes any
assessments imposed by the state pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 12-116.01 and 12-116.02.
(Ord. 2002-110 § 1 (part), 2002)
Chapter 10.42
PARKING VEHICLES FOR SALE OR FOR DISPLAYING ADVERTISING OR GOODS FOR SALE
WITHIN RIGHT-OF-WAY AND PARKING VEHICLES FOR SALE ON PUBLIC LANDS
Sections: 
10.42.010   Definitions.
10.42.020   Parking within right-of-way.
10.42.030   Parking on public land.
10.42.040   Violation—Penalty.
10.42.050   Presumption of liability.
10.42.010   Definitions.
   The following definitions shall apply throughout this chapter:
   A.   "Parking" means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.
Parking does not include a temporary stop for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading.
   B.   "Right-of-way" means the entire width between boundary lines of every
way set apart for public travel when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
   C.   "Sale" means any transfer of title or possession or both, for
consideration. Sale includes any exchange, barter, conditional or otherwise, in
any manner or by any means whatsoever, including consignment transaction and
auctions of property.
   D.   "Vehicle" means every device by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn on a street or highway.
(Ord. 1994-131 § 1 (part), 1994)
10.42.020   Parking within right-of-way.
   It is unlawful to park a vehicle within any Pima County right-of-way for the
purpose of:
   A.   Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
   B.   Displaying advertising; or
   C.   Displaying goods for sale.
(Ord. 1994-131 § 1 (part), 1994)
10.42.030   Parking on public land.
   It is unlawful to park a vehicle for the purpose of sale upon Pima County
public land which has been designated by ordinance or resolution of the board
and signposted.
(Ord. 1994-131 § 1 (part), 1994)
10.42.040   Violation—Penalty.
   Violation of Section
10.42.020 or
10.42.030 is a civil infraction, punishable by civil fine only. A fine of not
less than fifty dollars nor more than two hundred fifty dollars shall be
imposed.
(Ord. 1994-131 § 1 (part), 1994)
10.42.050   Presumption of liability.
   A.   The display of any signs or other markings indicating that a vehicle is
for sale shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle has been parked for the
purpose of sale.
   B.   Whenever a vehicle is parked in violation of this chapter, the person
or persons in whose names such vehicle is registered and the person who parked
the vehicle where the violation occurred are jointly and severally prima facie
responsible for such violation and subject to penalty therefor.
(Ord. 1994-131 § 1 (part), 1994)
Chapter 10.43
USE OF BICYCLE HELMETS BY MINORS
Sections: 
10.43.010   Requirement for helmet use.
10.43.020   Bicycle renters and sellers.
10.43.030   Civil penalties.
10.43.040   Waiver of fine.
10.43.010   Requirement for helmet use.
   No person under eighteen years of age shall ride a bicycle or be a passenger
on a bicycle, ride in a restraining seat attached to a bicycle, or ride in a
trailer towed by a bicycle unless that person is wearing a properly fitted and
fastened bicycle helmet which meets the current standards of the American
National Standards Institute for protective headgear.
(Ord. 1995-12 § 1 (part), 1995)
10.43.020   Bicycle renters and sellers.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to rent or lease any bicycle to or
for the use of a person under the age of eighteen years unless:
      1.   The person is in possession of a protective helmet meeting the
standards set out above in Section
10.43.010 at the time of such rental or lease; or
      2.   The rental or lease includes a protective bicycle helmet meeting the
standards set out above in Section
10.43.010 and the person agrees to wear the helmet at all times while operating
or riding as a passenger on the bicycle.
   B.   A person regularly engaged in the business of selling bicycles shall
provide any purchaser of a bicycle with a written explanation, either on the
receipt of sale or on a separate form indicating receipt of a written
explanation of the provisions of Sections
10.43.010 and
10.43.020.
(Ord. 1995-12 § 1 (part), 1995)
10.43.030   Civil penalties.
   Any person in violation of this chapter shall be found guilty of a civil
infraction and be required to pay a minimum fine of fifty dollars which cannot
be suspended except pursuant to Section
10.43.040.
(Ord. 1995-12 § 1 (part), 1995)
10.43.040   Waiver of fine.
   The penalty provided in this section for a violation of Section
10.43.010 may be waived if an offender presents suitable proof that an approved
helmet has been purchased or otherwise obtained since the time of the violation
and that the minor uses or intends to use said helmet whenever required to do
so by this chapter.
(Ord. 1995-12 § 1 (part), 1995)
Chapter 10.44
CONSTRUCTION IN COUNTY RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Sections: 
10.44.010   Authority of engineer.
10.44.020   Permit.
10.44.030   Liability and work rules.
10.44.040   Fees.
10.44.050   Violation—Penalty.
10.44.010   Authority of engineer.
   The county engineer of Pima County is appointed the duly authorized
representative of the board of supervisors, with full power and authority to
authorize on behalf of this board and to supervise the use of the public
highways and public drainageways of this county, for certain purposes other
than authorized public travel or stormwater conveyance.
(Ord. 1988-181 § 1 (part), 1988: prior code § 35.48.010)
10.44.020   Permit.
   A.   Any person, contractor, firm, utility company or corporation desiring
to dig any hole, drain, trench or ditch in any public street, alley,
drainageway or thoroughfare, or remove or change any curb pavement or other
constructed improvement now or hereafter existing in Pima County, or construct
any paving, irrigation or landscaping or any other improvement, or construct
any improvement for flood-control purposes in any public drainageway or
drainage easement, shall first obtain written permission from the county
engineer of Pima County, specifying that all such work shall be done in the
manner specified in this chapter. After finding that the proposed construction
does not interfere with the safety of the traveling public or the authorized
public use of the right-of-way, and upon finding that the construction does not
otherwise interfere with the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens
of Pima County, said permission shall be given by the issuance of a permit by
the county engineer to any person, contractor, firm, utility company or
corporation desiring to do any of the aforementioned work. The county engineer
or an authorized representative shall inspect the work for the compliance with
this chapter, and conduct a final inspection prior to county acceptance of the
work.
   B.   For the purposes of this chapter, any person, contractor, firm, utility
company or corporation desiring to do said work, even if they hire a contractor
to perform the actual work, shall be known as the "applicant."
   C.   Applicant may, at the time of filing his application for a permit, be
required to post a satisfactory performance bond for one hundred percent of the
cost of the work to be performed within Pima County rights-of-way. A cash bond
or its equivalent equal in value to one hundred percent of the work to be
performed in the public right-of-way may be substituted for a performance bond.
This bond or its substitute will be held until the applicant's work has been
completed and accepted. Applicant may be exempted from posting bond with the
approval of the county engineer.
   D.   In order to mitigate impacts to Pima County rights-of-way and to
protect the safety of the travelling public, access connections to Pima County
rights-of-way shall conform to this chapter and to those provisions of the
Subdivision and Development Street Standards governing connections to Pima
County rights-of-way and those additional provisions of the Subdivision and
Development Street Standards that the county engineer reasonably determines
must be complied with to mitigate the direct impact of adjacent development to
the Pima County right-of-way. The county engineer may issue a permit for a
connection to a Pima County right-of-way only after finding that the proposed
connection complies with this subsection.
(Ord. 2016-18, § 2, 2016; Ord. 1988-181 § 1 (part), 1988: prior code §
35.48.020)
10.44.030   Liability and work rules.
   A.   The applicant assumes the responsibility and all liability for any
injury or damage to any person or property caused by or arising out of the
exercise of the permit. The applicant shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless
Pima County, its officers, departments, employees and agents from and against
any and all suits, actions, legal or administrative proceedings, claims,
demands or damages of any kind or nature arising out of the exercise of the
permit which are attributed to any act or omission of the applicant, its
agents, employees or anyone acting under its direction, control or on its
behalf. In the event suit shall be brought and Pima County is named as a
defendant, all costs for counsel, either house counsel or retained counsel, and
any other court costs associated with defending itself shall be paid by the
applicant.
   B.   All work shall be at no cost and expense to the county and shall be
done at such time and in such a manner as to be least destructive of the
existing public improvements and for the shortest possible time, as directed by
the county engineer or his authorized representative. Applicant must notify the
permit section of the field engineering division, Pima County department of
transportation and flood control district at least forty-eight hours prior to
starting work. Once the work has begun it shall continue in a timely manner
until completion. There shall be no significant gaps in the time between
execution of the various phases of the work. In the case of an emergency
requiring immediate work within Pima County right-of-way, the applicant shall
make a diligent effort to telephone the permit section prior to commencement of
work. Such emergency work shall be halted upon issuance of a stop work order by
the county engineer. Emergency work shall not continue beyond twenty-four hours
during the normal workweek or the next full work day following a weekend or
holiday without the issuance of a written permit.
   C.   If the work performed under the permit or in emergency fails to pass
final inspection, the applicant shall remove or replace the same within such
time as specified by written notice from the county engineer, or his authorized
representative; or if any material used by the applicant in replacing or
reconstructing any part of the work, or workmanship performed under this permit
proves defective, the applicant shall replace the same as specified by the
county engineer or his authorized representative.
   D.   If the work requires cutting of existing pavement, temporary pavement
repair must be completed prior to leaving the work site. Temporary pavement
repair shall be maintained in a manner acceptable to the county engineer, or
his authorized representative, by the applicant until permanent pavement repair
is made. On newly constructed roadways, five years old or less, no open
pavement cuts shall occur without the permission of the county engineer except
in emergency situations. In this context, emergency situations are defined as
any condition which poses an immediate or imminent hazard to people or
property. Permission from the county engineer shall only be granted when the
applicant has assured the county engineer that all other methods of
accomplishing the work have been considered, and the county engineer in his
sole discretion has found other methods to be impractical. Verification of
pavement age may be obtained from the county engineer. When open pavement cuts
are made pursuant to an emergency or by permission of the county engineer, the
methods for repairing the roadway subgrade and pavement structure shall be
reviewed and approved by the county engineer. Applicant shall deposit with the
county engineer amount equivalent to fifty dollars per square foot of open
pavement cut, which the county engineer may use within ninety days of
completion of the initial work for the sole purpose of repairing, replacing, or
reconstructing open pavement cuts and the adjacent affected areas if the
applicant has not done so to the satisfaction of the county engineer. Unused
portions of the deposit shall be returned to the applicant. In lieu of a
deposit, Pima County retains the option to invoice public service corporations
for all costs her repairs have been made if such repairs are not done to the
satisfaction of the county engineer.
   E.   Permanent pavement repairs shall be performed within fifteen working
days of the completion of the initial work or sooner if required, in writing,
by the county engineer or his authorized representative. The county engineer or
his representative may grant an extension upon determining suitable cause.
   F.   If the applicant fails to maintain the temporary pavement repair, or if
the permanent pavement repair is not performed within fifteen working days of
the completion of the initial work and a extension has not been granted
pursuant to subsection E. Pima County may select a contractor to perform all
necessary work and the applicant shall be financially responsible for the costs
associated with this work.
   G.   Permanent pavement repair shall be completed by a competent contractor
qualified to make repairs in accordance with Pima County department of
transportation requirements and standards.
   H.   The applicant shall be responsible for restoration of all permanent
traffic-control devices, including, but not limited to, all pavement markings,
signs, and signals. The restoration of traffic-control devices may be
accomplished by the applicant or by Pima County if so requested by the
applicant. In either case, the applicant shall be responsible for all of the
costs of the restoration. All traffic-control devices shall be approved by the
county engineer or his authorized representative before they are installed.
   I.   The applicant shall not allow any condition to exist in connection with
the exercise of the permit which would be a hazard or source of danger to the
traveling public. If the work presents or becomes a hazard to the traveling
public, Pima County may take immediate corrective action and bill the applicant
for the full cost incurred for such corrective action.
   J.   The applicant shall provide, install and maintain traffic-control
devices as prescribed by the Traffic Control Manual for Highway Construction
and Maintenance, Arizona department of transportation, August, 1981, and
including all subsequent revisions thereof, and shall take such other measures
of precaution as the county engineer or his authorized representative shall
direct. The applicant shall submit, with his permit application, a traffic-
control plan for approval.
   K.   The applicant shall be responsible for verifying the location of all
underground utilities in accordance with the Blue Stake laws prior to the
commencement of any excavation and shall protect said utilities from damage.
   L.   All work shall be accomplished in accordance with applicable
requirements of the Pima County Articles for Issuance of Permits, Floodplain
Management Ordinance, Grading Ordinance, Channel Design Standards Manual, and
any other applicable engineering details, standards or specifications of Pima
County on file in the office of the county engineer with the exception of plans
prepared by public service corporations that are subject to federal and state
regulations concerning safety and design, all work shall be performed in
accordance with plans prepared by a professional engineer. The applicant shall
keep at the construction site, at all times, and available for inspection,
copies of the permit and of the approved traffic-control plan. In addition,
applicant will strictly comply with the Arizona Commission of Agriculture and
Horticulture Native Plant Laws. All areas used by the applicant in which
natural vegetation is disturbed by said work, or by his employees, will require
vegetation in accordance with the Grading Ordinance.
   M.   If at any time the right-of-way of any portion thereof, occupied and
used by the applicant in accordance with the permit is needed or required by
the county, the applicant, upon receipt of notice and plans stamped Final Plans
for Public Utilities Only, at no cost or expense to the county, shall remove,
relocate, or abandon in place all property belonging to the applicant or placed
in the right-of-way by the applicant within ninety days except when
notification of a schedule conflict has been given by applicant within thirty
days of receipt of notice and plans stamped Final Plans for Public Utilities
Only and county accepts an alternate schedule. When providing such
notification, applicant shall provide county with complete as-built locations
of the facilities in question and a proposed alternate schedule for relocating
its facilities. If applicant has removed, relocated, or abandoned in place its
property pursuant to such Final Plans for Public Utilities Only, county shall
bear the cost for any subsequent removal, relocation, or abandonment in place
of applicant's property made necessary to accommodate changes made by the
county in the design that produced the original Final Plans for Public
Utilities Only. If the facilities are to be abandoned, the applicant must
advise Pima County in writing of the extent of the abandonment.
   N.   Where work is performed in a drainageway, drainage easement or
designated floodplain area, the applicant shall not at any time obstruct or
diminish in any manner the ability of the drainageway, drainage easement or
designated floodplain area to convey or pass stormwater. Prior to any work
within a drainageway or designated floodplain area, the applicant shall obtain
a permit in compliance with the Pima County Floodplain Management Ordinance,
except in the case of an emergency, in which case the applicant shall make a
diligent effort to telephone the permit section prior to commencement of work.
Such emergency work shall be halted upon issuance of a stop work order by the
county engineer. Emergency work shall not continue beyond twenty-four hours
during the normal workweek or the next full work day following a weekend or
holiday without the issuance of a written permit. Any and all existing bank
protection, or any concrete structure or structures damaged or removed, shall,
at no cost or expense to Pima County, be replaced immediately to the
satisfaction of the county engineer or his duly authorized representative.
   O.   In the event the applicant performs work not authorized by the permit
or under the provisions for commencing emergency repairs, the applicant shall
be responsible for its removal within fifteen working days of being notified,
or Pima County may have this unauthorized work removed by a competent
contractor and the applicant shall be financially responsible for all the costs
involved.
   P.   In the event the applicant does not repair the road and right-of-way to
the conditions set forth by the county engineer after a thirty-day notice of
any deficiencies, the applicant by the acceptance of a permit agrees to be
responsible for all costs of completing such repair, and in the event suit is
necessary, agrees to be responsible for all costs of collection including but
not limited to court costs and attorney's fees.
   Q.   Applicant is placed on notice that the county may not own the
particular property or property rights for which the permit is issued.
Applicant assumes all liability resulting from any defect to the title of the
land and no warranty of title to the underlying land is expressed or implied.
(Ord. 1988-181 § 1 (part), 1988: prior code § 35.48.030)
10.44.040   Fees.
   Pertinent charges for the above required permit and for meeting the
conditions of the permit, as well as fines applied to the applicant due to
violations of the permit requirements, shall be set forth by a fee schedule
approved by the board of supervisors and amended from time to time. A copy of
the fee schedule is on file in the permits section, Field Engineering Division
of the Pima County department of transportation and Flood Control District.
(Ord. 1988-181 § 1 (part), 1988: prior code § 35.48.040)
10.44.050   Violation—Penalty.
   Any person, contractor, utility company or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided by pertinent state
statutes such as but not limited to Sections 28-7053 and 28-7054 of the Arizona
Revised Statutes.
(Ord. 1998-76 § 1, 1998; Ord. 1988-181 § 1 (part), 1988: prior code §
35.48.050)
Chapter 10.45
SPECIAL EVENTS IN COUNTY RIGHTS OF WAY
Sections: 
10.45.010   Purpose.
10.45.020   Special event defined.
10.45.030   Person defined.
10.45.040   Permit required.
10.45.050   Permit application.
10.45.060   Standards for issuance.
10.45.070   Conditions for issuance of permit.
10.45.080   Insurance requirements.
10.45.090   Permit fees.
10.45.100   Safety protection.
10.45.110   Claims.
10.45.120   Review of application; decision.
10.45.130   Compliance.
10.45.140   Notice of issuance; denials.
10.45.150   Appeal of permit denial.
10.45.160   Penalty for violations.
10.45.170   Revocations.
10.45.010   Purpose.
   This chapter may be cited and referred to as the Pima County Special Events
Ordinance. The purpose of this chapter is to establish the County's approval
and permitting process for special public events that utilize some element of
the public right of way in unincorporated Pima County. Any person, company,
organization or public event may be permitted to use the county public right of
way for a special event or activity in accordance with the provisions of this
ordinance. Any permit granted under this chapter may include conditions imposed
to reduce or minimize the dangers and hazards to vehicular, bicycle, or
pedestrian traffic and public health, safety, tranquility, morals or welfare,
including, but not limited to, restrictions on timing, location, duration,
number of participants, levels of sound, and activities permitted. This
ordinance will be applied uniformly without discrimination as to age, gender,
ethnicity, religion or political affiliation.
(Ord. 2007-114 § 1 (part), 2007)
10.45.020   Special event defined.
   As used in this chapter the words "special event" shall mean any organized
competitive or non-competitive activity consisting of pedestrian, bicycle or
other non-motorized or motorized group that have a mass start or special
activity including charitable events, block parties, grand openings, etc.,
which could interfere with the normal use of any public street or right-of-way
within Pima County. "Special event" does not include motion picture filming for
which a separate license is required under other sections of the County Code.
However, if filming activities encroach or interfere with the normal use of any
public street or roadway, traffic engineering will need to review traffic
control applications as they pertain to the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices (MUTCD) and County Traffic Engineering Standards.
(Ord. 2007-114 § 1 (part), 2007)
10.45.030   Person defined.
   As used in this chapter the word "person" means any individual, firm,
partnership, copartnership, corporation, charitable organization, city, county
other than Pima County, municipality, district or other political subdivision
other than the Pima County Free Library District, Pima County Flood Control
District, or Pima County Stadium District, or any combination of the above.
(Ord. 2007-114 § 1 (part), 2007)
10.45.040   Permit required.
   A person shall not conduct, manage, or sponsor any organized special event
within a public street or right-of-way under the jurisdiction of Pima County
unless a permit has first been properly acquired for such special event.
Furthermore, where a permit has been issued for an organized special event
pursuant to this ordinance, a person shall not conduct, manage or participate
in the permitted special event in violation of or in any manner contrary to the
provisions of the permit. Any violation of any requirement or condition of the
permit shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the permit by Pima County.
(Ord. 2007-114 § 1 (part), 2007)
10.45.050   Permit application.
   Any person desiring to conduct or manage a special event shall, not less
than ninety (90) calendar days before the date on which the special event is to
occur, file with the Traffic Engineering Division of the Pima County Department
of Transportation, an application for a special event permit on a form
furnished by that department setting forth the following information:
      1.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and of any
other persons, organizations, firms or corporations on whose behalf the
application is made and the purpose of the special event.
      2.   The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the
special event chairperson or organizer and will be responsible for the special
event.
      3.   The name, address and telephone number of the person or organization
to which the permit is to be issued.
      4.   The date or dates when the special event is to be conducted and the
time when the special event is to commence and finish
      5.   The route to be traveled with designated starting and termination
points and a traffic control plan describing in detail the placement and types
of traffic control devices and law enforcement or safety personnel. The traffic
control plan shall include the name, address, and contact information for the
Barricade Company and law enforcement agency or safety personnel provider
contracted by the applicant to provide traffic control and security during the
special event.
      6.   If requesting a road closure, indicate the beginning and end points
and times of the requested closure.
      7.   Any assembly and disassembly areas or other staging areas to be used
for the special event.
      8.   Whether parking is requested or prohibited, and the area designated
as such.
      9.   The estimated number of persons who will participate.
      10.   The estimated number and description of vehicles, if any, which
will participate in the special event.
      11.   Whether or not charity, gratuity, or offerings will be solicited or
accepted, or sales of food, beverages or other merchandise will occur before,
during, or after the special event.
      12.   Commitment to clean up any debris generated by the special event.
      13.   If the special event includes any activities in which any of the
participants will be participating in a time event or racing competitively for
any recognition or award.
      14.   Ages or age groups of the participants.
      15.   If the event passes through any state right-of-way or other roadway
under the jurisdiction of another municipality, the applicant is responsible to
obtain any and all necessary permits from each jurisdiction.
   The Pima County Engineer may waive the time limitation for filing an
application if it is found that unusual circumstances or good cause exists and
no unreasonable burden will be created by the waiver upon the county or its
citizens.
(Ord. 2007-114 § 1 (part), 2007)
10.45.060   Standards for issuance.
   A special event permit will be issued when, based on information contained
in the application and obtained from other sources, a finding is made that all
of the following circumstances exist:
      1.   The special event permit application has been circulated to the
following departments or agencies for their recommendations:
         a.   The Pima County Sheriff's Department.
         b.   The Pima County Risk Manager
         c.   The fire department(s) having jurisdiction.
         d.   The adjacent public lands manager, if applicable. This includes
Pima County Natural Resources, Parks and Recreation and National Park Service
      2.   The applicant has obtained and provided written proof of the
insurance, as required by Section
10.45.080.
      3.   The applicant has paid the special event permit fee in accordance
with Section
10.45.090 of this ordinance.
      4.   If any state right-of-way is part of the area to be used for a
special event, the applicant is responsible to obtain any and all necessary
permits from the Arizona State Department of Transportation and the Arizona
State Department of Public Safety
      5.   If the route passes through, or is on a road located on the boundary
of an incorporated municipality, or municipalities, the applicant is
responsible to obtain the pertinent permit required for the special event by
each municipality.
      6.   Issuance of this special events permit does not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility of acquiring any other permits required by law.
      7.   That the applicant has contracted with the Pima County Sheriff's
Department or others approved by the Pima County Sheriff's Department to
provide any additional law enforcement deemed necessary by the Pima County
Sheriff's Department.
      8.   The applicant has contracted for the proper barricades and warning
devices as required in the traffic control plan submitted to and approved by
the Traffic Engineering Division of the Pima County Department of
Transportation.
      9.   The applicant has not knowingly, or with intent to deceive, made any
false, misleading or fraudulent statements of material fact in the application
for a special event permit or in any other document required pursuant to this
chapter.
      10.   The applicant has met the standards in this chapter and paid in
advance any and all fees required, and agree to such conditions as are imposed
in the special event permit.
      11.   The time, duration and size of the special event will not require
the diversion of so great a number of police officers as to prevent the normal
law enforcement protection.
      12.   The concentration of persons and/or equipment will not unduly
interfere with proper fire and police protection, or ambulance service to
special event area and areas contiguous to such special event.
      13.   The special event will not unduly interfere with the orderly
operation and accessibility, to persons with and without disabilities, of
public roadways, hospitals, parks, schools, or other public and quasi-public
institutions in the county.
      14.   The applicant has provided reasonable means for informing all
interested persons and all persons participating in the special event of the
terms and conditions of such special event permit and applicable laws thereto.
      15.   The special event will not conflict with or interfere with another
special event for which a permit has been previously granted.
      16.   The special event permit does not relieve the person obtaining the
permit from conducting the event in a reasonably safe manner for the
participants and the general public.
      17.   If a road closure is deemed necessary by the County Engineer or
designated representative, the County Engineer is hereby authorized to
establish a road closure of up to 30 days. A Resolution will be submitted to
the Board of Supervisors for their consideration and approval for a road
closure greater than 30 days. All road closures approved by the County Engineer
or Board of Supervisors shall take effect when and to the extent that proper
signs are posted.
(Ord. 2020-42, § 1, 2020; Ord. 2007-114 § 1 (part), 2007)
10.45.070   Conditions for issuance of permit.
   Any special event permit granted under this chapter shall contain conditions
reasonably calculated to reduce or minimize the dangers and hazards to
vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian traffic and public health, safety,
tranquility, morals or welfare, including, but not limited to, changes in time,
duration, numbers of participants, or level of sound.
(Ord. 2007-114 § 1 (part), 2007)
10.45.080   Insurance requirements.
   Every permit shall require the applicant to obtain and maintain Commercial
General Liability insurance with limits not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence
and $2,000,000 in the aggregate covering claims arising from bodily injury,
including death or property damage alleged to have been caused or contributed
to due to the special event. The insurance policy shall include participant
legal liability and spectator legal liability coverage, and shall be endorsed
to include Pima County and its officers, employees, and agents as additional
insured. Pima County's Risk Manager may require increased coverage limits and
other types of insurance based upon the nature of the special event.
   The applicant shall provide a certificate of insurance with evidence of the
required insurance coverage not later than five working days prior to the
special event. Failure to maintain the required insurance shall be a material
breach of the permit. The permit shall include an agreement by the applicant
waiving any claim against the County and agreeing to indemnify and hold the
County harmless from any claims due to cancellation of the special event due to
failure to maintain required insurance.
(Ord. 2007-114 § 1 (part), 2007)
10.45.090   Permit fees.
   The applicant shall pay a permit processing fee in an amount adopted by the
Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 2007-114 § 1 (part), 2007)
10.45.100   Safety protection.
      1.   Every applicant shall include a traffic control plan to be reviewed
and approved by the Traffic Engineering Division of the Pima County Department
of Transportation.
      2.   Every applicant shall, at their own expense, provide barricades,
warning devices and off duty law enforcement where such protection is found
necessary for the public safety in accordance with a traffic control plan
approved by the Traffic Engineering Division of the Pima County Department of
Transportation, and the Pima County Sheriff's Department.
      3.   The applicant shall be responsible for any and all off duty law
enforcement officers deemed necessary by the Pima County Sheriff's Office and
the Traffic Engineering Division of the Pima County Department of
Transportation, as a consequence of such special event. Use of off duty law
enforcement officers shall be specified as a supplement to an approved traffic
control plan. Off duty law enforcement officers shall be required at signalized
intersections. Placement of off duty enforcement officers on County roads and
streets shall require proper placement of advance warning signs. The number and
type of officers shall be determined and specified by the Pima County Sheriff's
Department to provide for the public safety and protection of public property
in and around the area of the special event.
(Ord. 2007-114 § 1 (part), 2007)
10.45.110   Claims.
   Every special event permit shall contain an agreement whereby the applicant
shall agree to indemnify, defend and hold harmless Pima County, its boards,
commissions, officers, employees and agents from all suits, actions, damages or
claims to which they may be subjected of any kind or nature whatsoever
resulting from, caused by, arising out of or as a consequence of the special
event and the activities permitted in connection therewith.
(Ord. 2007-114 § 1 (part), 2007)
10.45.120   Review of application; decision.
   After receipt of the application, Traffic Engineering Division of the Pima
County Department of Transportation, will review the application and shall
consider the recommendation and application and shall make such decision
thereon as is warranted under the provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-114 § 1 (part), 2007)
10.45.130   Compliance.
   Prior to issuance of a special event permit under this chapter, all
applicable ordinances, rules and regulation shall be complied with and all
required permits and licenses shall be secured in connection with such special
event, or the proposed activities associated therewith including, but not
limited to, charitable solicitations, collections or acceptance of gratuities,
the sale of food, beverages or other merchandise, or the use of candles,
torches, fires or other combustibles, including pyrotechnics.
(Ord. 2007-114 § 1 (part), 2007)
10.45.140   Notice of issuance; denials.
   Written notice of the issuance or denial of a special event permit shall be
provided to the applicant by the Pima County Engineer or designated
representative within thirty calendar days of receipt of an application or as
soon as practicable if received less than thirty days in advance of the
proposed date of the special event.
(Ord. 2007-114 § 1 (part), 2007)
10.45.150   Appeal of permit denial.
   If the special event permit is denied by the Pima County Engineer or
designated representative, the applicant may, within five working days, appeal
in writing the denial to the Pima County Board of Supervisors through the Pima
County Engineer or designated representative. The Board of Supervisors shall
hear the appeal at the next available regularly scheduled Board meeting. The
decision of the Board of Supervisors regarding the appeal shall be final.
(Ord. 2007-114 § 1 (part), 2007)
10.45.160   Penalty for violations.
   Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a
petty offense and subject to a fine of three hundred dollars per person per
violation ARS 13-802(D).
(Ord. 2007-114 § 1 (part), 2007)
10.45.170   Revocations.
   Any special event permit for a special event issued under this chapter may
be summarily revoked at any time by the Pima County Engineer or designated
representative, following consultation with the Pima County Board of
Supervisors or the Pima County Sheriff's Department when, by reason of
disaster, public calamity, public safety, or other emergency, the County
Engineer or designated representative determines that the safety of persons and
property demands such revocation.
(Ord. 2007-114 § 1 (part), 2007)
Chapter 10.46
PRIMITIVE ROADS
Sections: 
10.46.010   Purpose.
10.46.020   Recommendation by engineer.
10.46.030   Approval by the board of supervisors or county engineer.
10.46.040   Posting required.
10.46.050   Index.
10.46.010   Purpose.
   Pima County has limited resources to provide for regular maintenance on all
streets or roads opened prior to June 13, 1975, which were not constructed in
accordance with county standards and therefore can provide only limited
maintenance for such roads. The health, safety and welfare of Pima county
residents and others using such roads would best be served by designating the
roads as primitive roads and notifying the road users of the limited
maintenance and primitive road designation.
(Ord. 1999-21 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.46.020   Recommendation by engineer.
   The county engineer, upon determining that a road meets the criteria for
designation as a primitive road, and that such designation is proper, shall
designate the roadway as a primitive road. At the county engineer's discretion,
the county engineer alternately may make a recommendation for the primitive
road designation to the board of supervisors.
(Ord. 2021-11 § 11 (part), 2021; Ord. 1999-21 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.46.030   Approval by the board of supervisors or county engineer.
   The board of supervisors or county engineer may approve the designation of a
roadway as a primitive road only if all of the following apply:
   1.   The road is not a state or county highway,
   2.   The road was opened before June 13, 1990, and
   3.   The road was not constructed in accordance with county standards.
(Ord. 2021-11 § 11 (part), 2021; Ord. 1999-21 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.46.040   Posting required.
   All approved primitive roads in Pima County shall be posted with signs that
state "PRIMITIVE ROAD, CAUTION, USE AT YOUR OWN RISK, THIS SURFACE IS NOT
REGULARLY MAINTAINED" in locations adequate to warn the public.
(Ord. 1999-21 § 2 (part), 1999)
10.46.050   Index.
   The director of the department of transportation and flood control district
shall keep an accurate listing of primitive roads designated by the board of
supervisors.
(Ord. 1999-21 § 2 (part), 1999)
Chapter 10.48
UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
Sections: 
   
Article I. - General Provisions
   
Article II. - Established
Article I. General Provisions
10.48.010   Definitions.
10.48.020   Hearing on proposals.
10.48.030   District designation.
10.48.040   Emergency service.
10.48.050   Excepted facilities.
10.48.060   Notice to property owners and utilities.
10.48.070   Utility responsibility.
10.48.080   Property owner responsibility.
10.48.090   County responsibility.
10.48.100   Deadline extension.
10.48.010   Definitions.
   Whenever in this article the words or phrases defined in this section are
used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following
definitions:
   A.   Commission means the Arizona Corporation Commission.
   B.   Person means and includes individuals, firms, corporations,
partnerships, associations and their agents and employees.
   C.   Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures means poles,
towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces,
transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits,
appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above ground within a
district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or
associated service.
   D.   Underground utility district or district means that area in the county
within which poles, overhead wires and dated overhead structures are prohibited
as such area is described in a ordinance adopted pursuant to the provisions of
Section
10.48.030.
   E.   Utility includes all persons or entities supplying electric,
communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials
or devices.
(Prior code § 37.04.010)
10.48.020   Hearing on proposals.
   A.   The board of supervisors may, from time to time, call public hearings
to ascertain whether, in areas of the county affected by overhead utilities and
structure undergrounding is in the general public interest for one or more of
the following reasons:
      1.   Such undergrounding will avoid or eliminate an unusually heavy
concentration of overhead distribution facilities;
      2.   The street, road, alley or right-of-way is in an area extensively
used by the general public and carries a heavy volume of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic;
      3.   The street, road, alley or right-of-way adjoins or passes through a
civic area or public recreation area or an area of unusual scenic interest to
the general public.
   B.   The clerk of the board of supervisors shall notify all affected
property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities
concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least seven days
prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and
may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested
shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the board shall be
final and conclusive.
(Prior code § 37.04.020)
10.48.030   District designation.
   If after such public hearing, the board of supervisors finds that
undergrounding of an area is in the general public interest for one or more of
the reasons listed in Section
10.48.020, the board shall, by ordinance, declare such designated area an
underground utility district and order removal of poles, overhead wirers and
associated structures, and the installation of underground utilities. Such
ordinance shall include a description of the area comprising such district and
shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall
be accomplished, and the time within which the utility is authorized to
disconnect overhead service and the time within which affected property owners
must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be
allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for
the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal
and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned
thereby.
(Prior code § 37.04.030)
10.48.040   Emergency service.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, overhead facilities may be
installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, without
authority of the board of supervisors or its designee, in order to provide
emergency service. The board or its designee may grant special permission, on
such terms as the board or its designee deems appropriate, in cases of unusual
circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect,
construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and
associated overhead structures.
(Prior code § 37.04.040)
10.48.050   Excepted facilities.
   This article and any ordinance adopted pursuant to Section
10.48.030 shall not apply, unless otherwise provided in such ordinance, to the
following types of facilities:
   A.   Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision
and to the satisfaction of the county engineer or his designee;
   B.   Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;
   C.   Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any
portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited or
connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires
originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead
structures are not prohibited;
   D.   Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for
transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of twenty-five
thousand volts, unless otherwise provided for in the ordinance establishing the
individual district;
   E.   Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means
of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building
to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without
crossing any public street;
   F.   Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a
utility for furnishing communication services;
   G.   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities such as surface-mounted
transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed
ducts.
(Prior code § 37.04.050)
10.48.060   Notice to property owners and utilities.
   A.   Within ten days after the effective date of an ordinance adopted
pursuant to Section
10.48.030, the clerk of the board of supervisors shall notify all affected
utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by
the ordinance of the adoption thereof. The clerk shall further notify such
affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying
such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar
associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility
changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the
supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to applicable rules,
regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the
commission.
   B.   Notification by the clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the
ordinance adopted pursuant to Section
10.48.030, together with a copy of this article, to affected property owners as
such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected
utilities.
(Prior code § 37.04.060)
10.48.070   Utility responsibility.
   A.   If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service
within a district created by any ordinances adopted pursuant to Section
10.48.030, the supplying utility shall furnish pursuant to applicable rules,
regulations and tariffs on file with the commission, that portion of the
conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it
under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the
Commission.
   B.   The company described in subsection A of this section is authorized,
pursuant to Section
10.48.030, to discontinue its overhead service in the district.
   C.   All existing overhead communication and electric distribution
facilities in the district shall be removed by the supplying utility.
(Prior code § 37.04.070)
10.48.080   Property owner responsibility.
   A.   Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a
building or structure within a district shall perform construction and provide
that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities
referred to in Section
10.48.070 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure
being served, all in accordance with applicable rules, regulations and tariffs
on the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission.
   B.   Each property owner in the district served from electric overhead
distribution facilities shall provide, in accordance with the company's rule
for underground service, all electrical facility changes on his premises
necessary to receive service from the underground facilities of the company as
soon as such are available.
   C.   All properties in the district are subject to the provisions of this
article, except Section
10.48.050(A).
   D.   In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or
renting the property does not comply with the provisions of subsection A of
this section within the time provided for in the ordinance enacted pursuant to
Section
10.48.030, the county engineer shall post written notice on the property being
served and thirty days thereafter shall have the authority to order the
disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated
facilities supplying utility service to the property.
(Prior code § 37.04.080)
10.48.090   County responsibility.
   The county shall remove at its own expense, unless otherwise provided for in
the ordinance establishing the district, all county-owned equipment from all
poles required to be removed under this article in ample time to enable the
owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the
ordinance enacted pursuant to Section
10.48.030.
(Prior code § 37.04.090)
10.48.100   Deadline extension.
   In the event that any act required by this article or by an ordinance
adopted pursuant to Section
10.48.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage
of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor
disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control
of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be
extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation.
(Prior code § 37.04.100)
Article II. Established
10.48.110   Coronado Foothills Estates.
10.48.120   Fort Lowell Park.
10.48.130   Green Valley Golf Course.
10.48.140   Interstate 19—Continental Road.
10.48.150   Manzanita Park.
10.48.160   Marana Park.
10.48.170   Santa Catalina Estates.
10.48.180   Tucson Estates.
10.48.110   Coronado Foothills Estates.
   A.   The Coronado Foothills Estates underground district, by which name it
shall be known in all proceedings, is established pursuant to the provisions in
Article I of this chapter and is subject to all provisions in
Article I.
   B.   The boundaries of the district are as follows:
      Section 3, Township 17 south, Range 14 east, G. & S.R.B. & M., Pima
County, Arizona, except the south 320.0 feet of Swan Road and that portion of
Skyline Drive falling within Section 3 and the east 5.0 feet of the south 5.0
feet of the west 75.0 feet of Lot 243 Coronado Foothills Estates, as recorded
in Book 16 at Page 63 in the county recorder's office.
(Prior code § 37.08.010)
10.48.120   Fort Lowell Park.
   A.   The Fort Lowell Park underground district, by which name it shall be
known in all proceedings, is established pursuant to the provisions in
Article I of this chapter and is subject to all provisions in
Article I.
   B.   The boundaries of the district area as follows:
      The southwest ¼ of the northwest ¼ of Section 36, Township 13 south,
Range 14 east, G. & S.R.B. & M., Pima County, Arizona, except any part lying
within the corporate city limits of Tucson; and except the north 10.0 feet and
the west 75.0 feet of the southwest ¼ of the northwest ¼ described in this
subsection.
(Prior code § 37.08.020)
10.48.130   Green Valley Golf Course.
   A.   The Green Valley Golf Course underground district, by which name it
shall be known in all proceedings, is established pursuant to the provisions in
Article I of this chapter and is subject to all provisions in
Article I.
   B.   The boundaries of the district are as follows:
      All of Green Valley Desert Meadows No. 1 (Lots 1 through 198) as recorded
in Book 22 at Page 65 of Maps and Plats; and all of Green Valley Fairways No. 1
(Lots 1 through 235) as recorded in Book 17 at Page 76 of Maps and Plats; and
all of Green Valley Fairways No. 2 (Lots 236 through 474) as recorded in Book
17 at Page 97 of Maps and Plats; and all of Green Valley Fairways No. 3 (Lots
475 through 763) as recorded in Book 18 at Page 51 of Maps and Plats; all of
the above being subdivisions of record in the county recorder's office, Tucson,
Arizona; and including that portion of the alley and drainage easement of
Tucson Green Valley, Unit No. 1, as recorded in Book 16 at Page 76 of Maps and
Plats in the county recorder's office, Tucson, Arizona, and lying between Green
Valley Fairways No. 3 (Book 18, Page 51), except the westerly 100.0 feet of the
alley, and including the westerly 500.0 feet of that certain easement to Tucson
Electric Power Company and Southwest Gas Corporation, as recorded in Docket
Book 2269 at Pages 484 through 487 in the county recorder's office, Tucson,
Arizona, and located in a portion of Lot 2, Block 10 of Tucson Green Valley,
Unit No. 1.
(Prior code § 37.08.030)
10.48.140   Interstate 19—Continental Road.
   A.   The I-19 (Interstate 19)—Continental Road underground district, by
which name it shall be known in all proceedings, is established pursuant to the
provisions in
Article I of this chapter and is subject to all provisions in
Article I.
   B.   The boundaries of the district are as follows:
      That portion of Interstate Highway No. 19 (1-19) at its intersection with
Continental Road (at S.B. Sta. 2083 + 45.97 and Crossroad St. 8 + 00) and more
particularly described as follows: 75 feet each side of the centerline of
Continental Road from Sta. 3 + 50 to Sta. 12 + 00 as shown on Arizona Highway
Department Construction Plans 1-19-1(57) and on I-19, extending 100 feet west
(left) of the extending 235 feet east (right) of the S.B. centerline of I-19-1
(57), from Sta. 2083 + 00 to 2096 + 90; and also, including all of areas fi;3,
fi;10, and fi;11, and that portion of area fi;4 lying north of Continental
Road, as shown in that particular instrument of final order of condemnation,
and recorded in Book 3741 at Pages 253 through 263, in the office of the county
recorder, Pima County, Arizona.
(Prior code § 37.08.040)
10.48.150   Manzanita Park.
   A.   The Manzanita Park underground district, by which name it shall be
known in all proceedings, is established pursuant to the provisions in
Article I of this chapter and is subject to all provisions in
Article I.
   B.   The boundaries of the district are as follows:
   The southeast ¼ of the northwest ¼ of Section 4, Township 15 south, Range 13
east, G. & S.R.B. & M., Pima County, Arizona; and the north 45.0 feet of the
east 1277.00 feet of the northeast ¼ of the southwest ¼ of Section 4, Township
15 south, Range 13 east, G. & S.R.B. & M., Pima County, Arizona.
(Prior code § 37.08.050)
10.48.160   Marana Park.
   A.   The Marana Park underground district, by which name it shall be known
in all proceedings, is established pursuant to the provisions in
Article I of this chapter and is subject to all provisions in
Article I.
   B.   The boundaries of the district are as follows:
      All of the southwest ¼ of the northeast ¼ of Section 27, Township 11
south, Range 11 east, G. & S.R.B. & M., Pima County, Arizona.
(Prior code § 37.08.060)
10.48.170   Santa Catalina Estates.
   A.   The Santa Catalina Estates underground district, by which name it shall
be known in all proceedings, is established pursuant to the provisions in
Article I of this chapter and is subject to all provisions in
Article I.
   B.   The boundaries of the district are as follows:
   Those portions of North 1st Avenue and Orange Grove Road lying within the
south half of Section 6, Township 13 south, Range 14 east, G. & S.R.B. & M.,
Pima County, Arizona.
(Prior code § 37.08.070)
10.48.180   Tucson Estates.
   A.   The Tucson Estates underground district, by which name it shall be
known in all proceedings, is established pursuant to the provisions in
Article I of this chapter and is subject to all provisions in
Article I.
   B.   The boundaries of the district are as follows:
      That part of Kinney Road as established in Road Proceedings No. 1248 and
recorded in the county recorder's office in Book 9 at Page 87 of road maps,
running northwesterly from the intersection of Sarasota Boulevard as
established in Road Proceedings No. 1244 and recorded in the county recorder's
office in Book 9 at Page 83 of road maps, 3,200 feet; also a 15.00 foot utility
easement over Lots 193 through 219 of Tucson Estates as recorded in Book 15 at
Page 94 of maps and plats and a 20.00 foot utility easement over Lots 19
through 31 and easterly 400.00 feet of Block 2 of Tucson Estates as recorded in
Book 15 at Page 6 of maps and plats; all of record in the office of the county
recorder, Pima County, Arizona.
(Prior code § 37.08.080)
Chapter 10.50
REGULATIONS FOR THE USE OF THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
Sections: 
10.50.010   Purpose.
10.50.020   County authority over public right-of-way.
10.50.030   Licensing.
10.50.040   Alteration of public right-of-way.
10.50.050   Nonexclusive use.
10.50.060   Utility construction in public right-of-way.
10.50.070   Undergrounding.
10.50.080   Scenic routes.
10.50.090   Notice to adjacent property.
10.50.100   Design and location of facilities.
10.50.110   Construction safety.
10.50.120   Drainage.
10.50.130   Issuance of permit not county approval of violation.
10.50.140   County inspections.
10.50.150   Abandonment of facilities.
10.50.160   Liability—Indemnification.
10.50.170   Compliance with laws.
10.50.180   Fees.
10.50.190   Wireless structures and facilities.
10.50.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish the terms and conditions that
apply to any person, entity, corporation, company, organization or governmental
agency or subdivision locating any of its facilities within the public right-
of-way in unincorporated Pima County. This chapter will be applied uniformly
without discrimination as to age, sex, ethnicity, religion, or political
affiliation, and may be amended or revised by the Pima County board of
supervisors as needed.
(Ord. 2008-72 § 1 (part), 2008)
10.50.020   County authority over public right-of-way.
   The authority of the county over the control, regulation and use of the
public right-of-way located within the unincorporated areas of Pima County are
and shall remain superior to the rights of any other person, governmental
entity, user, franchisee, licensee, company or corporation (hereinafter
collectively "user") with facilities located in the public right-of-way.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code or related license, franchise
or intergovernmental agreement, the county may move, adjust or relocate any
facilities in the public right-of-way if said activity is determined by county
to be necessary for the public health and safety or as otherwise allowed by
law.
(Ord. 2008-72 § 1 (part), 2008)
10.50.030   Licensing.
   Any user which has placed or wishes to place facilities within the public
right-of-way must have a valid license, franchise or intergovernmental
agreement. Every user is obligated to comply fully with all terms and
conditions contained in the license, franchise, or agreement. Any license or
franchise approved by the board of supervisors may be updated, revised, or
modified by the board as it deems necessary for the public safety or welfare,
and any breach or violation of any obligation, term, or condition contained in
the board approved license or franchise may result in a temporary suspension or
revocation of the license or franchise by the board of supervisors.
Intergovernmental agreements between the county and any municipality or
improvement district for the use of county rights-of-way may be amended or
renewed by the parties as necessary.
(Ord. 2008-72 § 1 (part), 2008)
10.50.040   Alteration of public right-of-way.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent county from altering,
improving, adjusting, repairing, or maintaining county facilities or the public
right-of-way, or requiring any user to adjust, remove, replace, or relocate
user's facilities to accommodate or facilitate county's use of county
facilities or the public right-of-way. "Facility" means any physical item,
object, device, or improvement possessed, made, installed, constructed, or
maintained within the public right-of-way by the owner or user thereof, or by
others on behalf of the owner or user, including all service connections owned
by user or others that lie within existing and future portions of the public
right-of-way.
(Ord. 2008-72 § 1 (part), 2008)
10.50.050   Nonexclusive use.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to grant any user an exclusive
right to use the public right-of-way. Any user's facilities shall be erected,
adjusted, installed, replaced, removed, relocated and maintained in a manner
that will not interfere with the reasonable use of the public right-of-way,
drainage ways, alleys, or easements by the public, by county, or by any other
user, or the rights and convenience of adjacent property owners. The location
of any of user's facilities in the public right-of-way shall not create or
establish in the user a vested interest in the right-of-way, and user's
facilities shall be removed or relocated by the user in the event county
determines that user's facilities unreasonably hinder, restrict, or obstruct
the public's use of the public right-of-way or the operation or location of
county facilities.
(Ord. 2008-72 § 1 (part), 2008)
10.50.060   Utility construction in public right-of-way.
   A.   Utility Relocations by Other Users. Any user that requires the
relocation of another user's facilities within the public right-of-way shall be
responsible for the cost of such relocation and shall establish an agreement
with the other user to address the relocation project and related cost payment.
   B.   Notice—Clearance Letter. As part of the county's project development
process, county will provide advanced notice to users of all planned county
projects along with the county's designated start dates for individual
projects. Upon such notice, the county will require each user with facilities
located in a planned project zone to provide a clearance letter to county
certifying that the current location of user's facilities in the planned
project zone is fully and correctly depicted on the county's plans stamped
"final plans for public utilities only" and assuring that user's facilities
will not impact, conflict, or interfere with the project. If a user's
facilities will impact, conflict, or interfere with the county's project, user
shall acknowledge in the clearance letter that work will be performed by user
to avoid any impact, conflict, or interference with the county's project and
identify a completion date for the work that is acceptable to county.
Acceptance by county of user's work completion date shall not relieve user of
the liability for any delay costs attributable to user's facilities. In the
event user's work completion date is later in time than the county's designated
project start date, user shall be absolutely liable for all delay costs
attributed to the delay of county's project start date. User shall provide the
county with the required clearance letter within ten working days of the mail
out date of the county's notice.
   C.   Construction, Relocation Costs. Any user shall be solely responsible
for the design, adjustment, modification, construction, relocation, or removal,
either temporarily or permanently, of its facilities located in the public
right-of-way, and shall be responsible for any action that impacts, conflicts,
or interferes with county's use of the right-of-way or the county's
improvement, relocation, or adjustment of its own facilities, including any
costs incurred by county as a result of the user's facilities or actions
therein. The design, adjustment, modification, removal, relocation, or
replacement of user's facilities shall be completed at no cost to the county
unless the user has established prior rights with the county for the affected
facilities or, in the case of county improvement districts, if the relocation
is necessitated by an exclusive county sewer utility project.
   D.   Delay Costs. If county realizes an impact, conflict, or interference to
the project as a result of user's facilities, the user shall be responsible for
all damages attributed to the impact, conflict, or interference with the
project including the cost of any delays arising from such impact, conflict, or
interference. In the event county incurs any such costs, the user shall be
billed for such costs and shall pay the invoiced amount to county within sixty
calendar days of the date of the invoice. No permits will be issued to the user
for any work within the public right-of-way until all outstanding invoiced
costs are paid in full to the county.
   E.   Invasive Vegetation Mitigation. A substantial amount of research
conducted in recent years has identified invasive species proliferation as one
of Pima County's major environmental problems. Land adjacent to public roadways
is a common area for the establishment of invasive species such as Buffelgrass.
Work within the right-of-way has been shown to exacerbate the spread of
invasive plants. All users are strongly encouraged to incorporate invasive
species mitigation measures whenever disturbing public rights-of-way and should
contact the Buffelgrass Coordination Center for information on invasive species
eradication and control measures prior to initiating any work within county
rights-of-way.
   F.   Vegetation Mitigation. Any user of the right-of-way that disturbs,
damages or removes vegetation must mitigate such disturbance, damage, or
removal in accordance with county standards for planting and restoration within
public right-of-way.
(Ord. 2017-46 § 1, 2017; Ord. 2008-72 § 1 (part), 2008)
10.50.070   Undergrounding.
   If a user has above ground facilities in a specific area within the public
right-of-way that county determines must be undergrounded for the public
safety, county may require the facilities to be undergrounded and the cost of
such undergrounding shall be the sole responsibility of the user. If county
determines that it would be advantageous for user's facilities to be placed
underground, county may initiate a collaborative effort with the user to
explore undergrounding options and related costs, and may, upon mutual
agreement, enter into a separate agreement with the user to accomplish the
undergrounding project.
(Ord. 2008-72 § 1 (part), 2008)
10.50.080   Scenic routes.
   The installation of any facilities within any public right-of-way designated
as a scenic route must be constructed, or exempted, in accordance with the Pima
County Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2008-72 § 1 (part), 2008)
10.50.090   Notice to adjacent property.
   Each user shall provide prior written notice to the owners or others having
lawful control of adjoining property of any activities by the user that might
interfere with access to or use of said adjoining property. The user shall
maintain access to adjoining properties during all construction activities or
other operations unless the requirement of access is waived in writing by the
owners or others having lawful control of the adjoining properties. If an
emergency requires activity without written notice, a user shall use its best
efforts to provide timely actual notice to the owners or others having lawful
control of the adjoining property.
(Ord. 2008-72 § 1 (part), 2008)
10.50.100   Design and location of facilities.
   A.   Work Plans. Any work performed by a user or user's contractors within
the public right-of-way shall be performed in accordance with all terms and
conditions of the applicable right-of-way permit issued by the county.
   B.   Conformance with County Regulations. The location or relocation of a
user's facilities in the public right-of-way shall conform to county policies,
standards, and regulations applicable to the use of the public right-of-way.
   C.   Request for Locating Underground Facilities. When the county's
activities necessitate determining the exact location of noncounty utilities in
the public right-of-way, a user shall, upon receiving written request from the
county, horizontally locate user's facilities within the area designated by
county. The user shall respond as promptly as practicable, but in no event
later than four working days, by carefully applying surface markings such as
stakes, paint, or some other customary surface marking methods sufficient to
locate the horizontal position of the user's underground facilities accurate to
within twenty-four inches. The user shall provide county with certified
horizontal survey data of ground markings and above ground facilities tied to
an accepted county control and datum accurate to within six inches or less
within thirty working days of user's receipt of the written notice from county.
In the event a user is unable to provide the ground marking and certified
survey data within the allotted time frame, county may perform the utility
location work and bill user for such work. In the event county incurs utility
location costs, user shall pay the invoiced amount to county within sixty
calendar days of receipt of the invoice from county. No permits will be issued
to the user for any work within the public right-of-way until the invoiced
costs are paid in full to county.
   D.   Request of Exposing Underground Facilities. Any user shall, upon
receiving written request by county, expose user's facilities at specified spot
locations as dictated by county. User shall provide the county with certified
vertical and horizontal survey data of user's exposed facilities, tied to an
accepted county control and datum accurate to within six inches or less within
thirty working days of user's receipt of the written request from county. In
the event the user is unable to provide certified horizontal and vertical
survey data within the allotted time frame, county may perform the necessary
utility location work and bill user for the cost of the work. In the event the
county incurs such cost, the user shall pay the invoiced amount to county
within sixty calendar days of the date of receipt of the invoice from county.
No permits will be issued to user for any work within the public right-of-way
until the invoiced costs are paid in full to county.
   E.   County Modifications. Upon receipt of certified horizontal and vertical
survey data from a user and a request by user to modify county's project to
avoid conflicts with a user's facilities, county may modify its project as
requested. User shall be required to pay for any construction or redesign cost
increases caused by such modifications.
   F.   Users with underground facilities within right-of-way must be a member
of a one-call notification center pursuant to A.R.S. § 40-360.32, subsection B.
(Ord. 2017-46 § 2, 2017; Ord. 2008-72 § 1 (part), 2008)
10.50.110   Construction safety.
   Any activities that a user or a user's contractor performs within the public
right-of-way must occur in the safest manner possible and with the least amount
of impediment to the public's continued use of the public right-of-way. A user
must guard and protect any hazardous condition it causes during the course of
the user's activities in the public right-of-way by erecting safety barriers
that clearly designate the hazardous area with warning lights during periods of
dusk and darkness. A user must properly sign and mark any work that a user
performs in or adjacent to a public right-of-way open for travel with warning
and directional devices in accordance with all applicable state and local
traffic regulations, and in accordance with the Arizona Department of
Transportation's Traffic Control Manual for Highway Construction and
Maintenance. Prior to the start of any activity that modifies vehicular,
bicycle, or pedestrian traffic patterns, a user or user's contractor must
submit to the county a traffic control plan for approval.
(Ord. 2017-46 § 3, 2017: Ord. 2008-72 § 1 (part), 2008)
10.50.120   Drainage.
   During any user's construction or excavation activities in the public right-
of-way, the user shall provide proper drainage features sufficient to ensure
that the public right-of-way will be free of standing surface water and be
adequately drained to prevent flood or erosion damage to facilities within the
public right-of-way and the surrounding property. A user may be required at the
request of the county to submit drainage engineering data and design plans to
the county for review and approval prior to the issuance of any permit by
county.
(Ord. 2008-72 § 1 (part), 2008)
10.50.130   Issuance of permit not county approval of violation.
   County's review, approval, or acceptance of a user's plans or
specifications, or the county's issuance of a permit for the any user's
installation, construction, or location of its facilities in the public right-
of-way shall not be construed to be an authorization for or approval of a
violation of any federal, state or local law or regulation. No permit or
approval given by county shall relieve a user of its obligations under this
chapter regarding the design, adjustment, modification, construction,
relocation, or removal of user's facilities.
(Ord. 2008-72 § 1 (part), 2008)
10.50.140   County inspections.
   The county has the right to inspect any work conducted by any user or any
user's contractor in the public right-of-way to verify conformance with county
regulations. County may require a user to pay a reasonable and uniform fee to
cover the cost of county inspections, including potholing costs, performed by
county or its contractor under this provision. A user may be required by county
to correct its facilities when a user's facilities do not conform to county
requirements.
(Ord. 2008-72 § 1 (part), 2008)
10.50.150   Abandonment of facilities.
   A user may not abandon any facilities within the public right-of-way without
acquiring prior written approval from the county for the abandonment. Any
abandonment of a user's facilities must be performed in accordance with all
safety standards applicable to the type of facilities involved. The county may,
at its discretion, inspect any abandonment work performed by a user to verify
the user's conformance with county regulations.
(Ord. 2008-72 § 1 (part), 2008)
10.50.160   Liability—Indemnification.
   A user shall be solely liable for its facilities installed in the public
right-of-way and for any activities a user or user's contractor performs within
the public right-of-way. Prior to the start of any work by any user or user's
contractor within the public right-of-way, the user shall be required to
indemnify, defend and hold harmless the county, its governing board or body,
and its officers, departments, employees and agents from and against any and
all suits, actions, legal or administrative proceedings, claims, demands,
liens, losses, fines or penalties, damages, liability, interest, and
attorneys', consultants', and accountants' fees, costs, and expenses of any
kind and nature resulting from or arising out of any act or omission of the
user, whether intentional, negligent, grossly negligent, or amounting to a
breach of contract.
(Ord. 2008-72 § 1 (part), 2008)
10.50.170   Compliance with laws.
   Each user shall comply with all federal, state, and local regulations
relating to the use of the public right-of-way.
(Ord. 2008-72 § 1 (part), 2008)
10.50.180   Fees.
   Each user shall be responsible for all applicable county fees approved and
adopted by the Pima County board of supervisors applicable to utilities in the
public right-of-way.
(Ord. 2008-72 § 1 (part), 2008)
10.50.190   Wireless structures and facilities.
   A.   An entity that provides any services that are provided to the public
and that use licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or
mobile, using wireless facilities is a "wireless services provider" for
purposes of this section. For purposes of this section, "small wireless
facilities" has the same definition as in A.R.S. § 11-1801(17).
   B.   A proposed or modified utility pole that a wireless services provider
installs in a county right-of-way may not exceed the greater of ten feet in
height above the tallest utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting
only wireless facilities, that is in place and that is located within five
hundred feet of the proposed utility pole in the same right-of-way or fifty
feet above the ground level.
   C.   A wireless services provider must comply with undergrounding
requirements that require prior approval for the installation of new structures
in a right-of-way if such requirements do not prohibit the replacement of
existing structures and facilities.
   D.   A wireless services provider must screen or conceal its facilities, as
applicable, including all pole-mounted, pad, and ground-mounted equipment with
required aesthetic features, such as canisters, screen walls, and landscaping,
as Pima County may approve at each site location. Concealing and screening must
blend with or enhance the surrounding area with the use of artistic and
architectural detail and will take into account scale, form texture, materials
and color and must conceal the equipment. The wireless services provider must
note concealing and screening features on the site survey and construction
drawings that it submits for each site location. Any new ground mounted
equipment or screening must be located outside of the roadway clear zone in a
manner that does not block sight visibility at adjacent intersections.
   E.   Collocation of a small wireless facility on a utility pole or wireless
support structure in the right-of-way that Pima County does not own and that
does not include ground-mounted equipment, will not require a permit.
   F.   For any installation of a small wireless facility that modifies
vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian traffic patterns, prior to the start of any
activity, the wireless services provider must submit a traffic control plan to
Pima County for approval.
   G.   The wireless services provider must coordinate installation of wireless
facilities on a county owned traffic signal or street light pole with the Pima
County traffic signals shop. All equipment must be attached to the outside of
the pole. Access to the interior of the pole and conduit system including pull
boxes is reserved exclusively for Pima County use. A county traffic signal
inspector must be present during the installation of the equipment.
   H.   Installation, modification, or replacement by a wireless services
provider of a utility pole located in the right-of-way must be in accordance
with
Chapter 10.44.
   I.   A wireless services provider assumes all risk, costs and expenses
related to the wireless services provider's facilities and loss of service that
may occur due to damage, destruction or collapse of any county utility pole or
due to any incompatibility of wireless services provider's use with county use,
or another authorized user's use, of county utility poles.
   J.   Where the installation of a small wireless facility requires the
replacement of a county utility pole with a specialty pole, the wireless
provider must replace the county utility pole with a structure meeting all
applicable county standards and specifications and return replaced structures
to Pima County at a designated location. Specialty poles must fit on a pole
foundation that meets or exceeds the foundation requirements for the pole it is
replacing. The specialty pole must also fit the standard bolt pattern of the
pole it is replacing. The replacement of any traffic signal or street light
poles requires prior approval from the Pima County traffic signal shop and a
county signal inspector must be present during the pole installation to ensure
all work is completed to county specifications. Any pole replacement will be at
the sole expense of the wireless service provider, to include payment for
sheriff's department point control during any necessary signal shut-downs.
   K.   In addition to other applicable county standards, any utility pole that
requires replacement must include overbuild per county overbuild design
capacity standards: No structural member, foundation component, fastener,
weldment or discreet section may be stressed to more than ninety-five percent
of the design capacity.
   L.   Pima County will allow collocation of a small wireless facility on a
county-owned utility pole if all of the following apply:
      1.   The utility pole is structurally sound and able to support the
proposed wireless facility as evidenced by a sealed statement of a registered
structural engineer.
      2.   The facility owner's name and contact information is clearly
displayed on associated ground-mounted equipment. When ground-mounted equipment
is not required, facility owner name and contact information must be placed
directly on the pole-mounted wireless facility.
      3.   Wireless ground-mounted equipment is a minimum of ten feet from
county-owned ground-mounted equipment.
      4.   Pole-mounted wireless facility attachments must be a minimum of five
feet from county pole-mounted attachments such as signal heads, lighting,
signage, and communications equipment. Wireless facilities must be located in
such that they do not interfere with the operation, visibility, or intent of
the signal and street lighting equipment.
   M.   Operations, Interference.
      1.   A wireless services provider must not use a county utility pole or
the right-of-way in any way which interferes with the use of any portion of the
county property by the county. In the event county determines that a wireless
provider's use of a county utility pole or right-of-way interferes with the
county's use of the county property, county will notify the wireless provider
of such interference and the wireless provider will have fifteen days to remedy
the interference. If a wireless provider does not remedy the interference,
county will have the right to take steps to mitigate the interference at the
wireless service provider's expense.
      2.   A wireless services provider must not install, operate, or allow the
use of equipment, methodology or technology that interferes or is likely to
interfere with the optimum effective use or operation of county's existing or
future law enforcement, public safety, transportation, information technology,
engineering, emergency or other communication equipment, methodology, or
technology. If such interference occurs, the wireless services provider must
immediately discontinue using the equipment, methodology or technology that
causes the interference until the interference has been eliminated to the
satisfaction of and at no cost to the county.
      3.   In the event of an emergency or accident that causes the county to
replace or remove a county utility pole with collocated small wireless
facilities, the wireless services provider must remove the equipment within two
hours of notice by the county. The service provider will need to keep an
emergency contact on file with the Pima County traffic signal shop for twenty-
four-hour per day, three hundred sixty-five-day per year response in case of
emergencies. If the wireless services provider fails to so remove the
equipment, the county will remove the equipment at the wireless services
provider's expense if necessary for public safety.
      4.   Wireless services providers must have the ability to make traffic
signal replacement pole installations in the event of emergency or routine
replacement of such county utility poles utilized by wireless services provider
or county. In the case of an emergency, the county will install a standard
traffic signal or street light pole unless the wireless service provider can
make a new specialty pole immediately available. Reinstallation of the
specialty pole will be at the expense of the wireless service provider and must
be coordinated with the Pima County traffic signal shop. County must approve
all replacement poles before installation. The replacement pole must meet the
identical structural specifications of the sealed statement in accordance with
requirements of Section
10.50.190(L)(1).
      5.   Wireless services providers must provide access to a kill switch for
each wireless site that county employees, agents, or representatives may use to
turn off all power to the wireless facilities when determined necessary by the
county for safe maintenance and operation of right-of-way. Each kill switch
must be clearly identified on project plans and accessible at ground level.
Wireless services providers must provide entry and access requirements to the
county and must provide a key to the Pima County traffic signal shop supervisor
if the kill switch is located within a locked enclosure. Except in case of an
emergency or accident, the county will notify the wireless services provider a
minimum of twenty-four hours in advance of a required shut down. The wireless
service provider is responsible for keeping up to date contact information on
file with the Pima County traffic signal shop for notification purposes.
      6.   Pole-mounted wireless facilities on county utility poles not in
compliance with Federal radio frequency exposure limit rules, 47 C.F.R. Section
1.1310, or subsequent Federal rules as amended from time to time, must be shut
down (except for work necessary to bring it into compliance) until such time
that evidence of compliance has been submitted to and accepted by the county.
(Ord. 2017-46 § 4, 2017)
Chapter 10.52
NEWSPAPER COLLECTION BINS IN RIGHT-OF-WAY
Sections: 
10.52.010   Purpose.
10.52.020   Applicability.
10.52.030   Definitions.
10.52.040   Submittal of application.
10.52.050   Permit.
10.52.060   Insurance.
10.52.070   Removal or relocation—Revocation of permit.
10.52.080   Processing fee and annual fee.
10.52.090   Confirmation of charitable status or use.
10.52.100   Location of collection bins.
10.52.110   Appeal to or variance by board of supervisors.
10.52.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards to determine when prior
written authorization should be given by the county engineer to allow the use
of Pima County right-of-way for the collection of newspaper for recycling
purposes.
(Ord. 1989-86 (part), 1989)
10.52.020   Applicability.
   This chapter shall apply to any and all newspaper collection bins located or
placed, now and in the future, within Pima County right-of-way.
(Ord. 1989-86 (part), 1989)
10.52.030   Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, terms are defined as follows:
   A.   "County engineer" means the director of the Pima County department of
transportation and flood control district, and shall include any person
designated by the county engineer to perform the duties and functions
prescribed by this chapter.
   B.   "Newspaper collection bin" means a collection container with a capacity
of between three and five cubic yards, placed for the purpose of having the
general public deposit newspapers for recycling. Any structure or container
which is, in the opinion of the County Engineer, not appropriate for the
collection of newspapers on public rights of way shall not be considered a
newspaper collection bin.
   C.   "Right of way" means the entire width between boundary lines of every
way set apart for public travel when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
(Ord. 1989-86 (part), 1989)
10.52.040   Submittal of application.
   Any person wishing to place a newspaper collection bin within Pima County
right-of-way shall first submit to the county engineer an application on a form
provided by the county engineer. The applicant must be the owner of the
newspaper collection bin. In addition to such other information deemed
necessary by the county engineer, the application form shall contain a sworn
statement by the owner or the owner's agent, indicting that the owner has read
this chapter and agrees to be bound by and abide by its requirements. The
application shall be accompanied by the one-time processing fee and the first
year's annual fee, as set forth in this chapter. Owners of newspaper collection
bins located within Pima County right-of-way at the time of the adoption of the
ordinance codified in this chapter shall submit applications for each newspaper
collection bin within sixty days after the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this chapter, and shall comply with the remaining requirements of
this chapter within two weeks after receiving a permit pursuit to this chapter.
No application shall be considered submitted unless and until it is accompanied
by the processing fee and the first year's annual fee.
(Ord. 1989-86 (part), 1989)
10.52.050   Permit.
   Upon submittal of the application, the county engineer shall determine
whether the proposed newspaper collection bin complies with the requirements of
this chapter. If the county engineer finds that the proposed newspaper
collection bin complies with the requirements of this chapter, the county
engineer shall issue a permit allowing the newspaper collection bin. If the
county engineer finds that the proposed newspaper collection bin does not
comply with the requirements of this chapter, the county engineer shall give
written notice of the denial of the permit, stating the masons for denial, and
shall refund any annual fee paid by the applicant. The decision to issue or
deny the permit shall be made by the county engineer within thirty days after
submittal of the application.
(Ord. 1989-86 (part), 1989)
10.52.060   Insurance.
   Before a permit is issued pursuit to Section
10.52.050, a owner shall obtain a one million dollar single limit comprehensive
general liability insurance policy with specific provisions covering bodily
injuries and property damage. The owner shall name Pima County as additional
insured on all comprehensive general liability policies and shall provide Pima
County with copies of certificates of insurance and the endorsement of
additional insured each year as the policy is renewed. All policies shall
provide that insurer shall provide Pima County with a written notice of
cancellation a minimum of thirty days before cancellation.
(Ord. 1989-86 (part), 1989)
10.52.070   Removal or relocation—Revocation of permit.
   A.   Upon a finding by the county engineer that changed circumstances have
resulted in the need to remove or relocate any newspaper collection bin for
which a permit has been issued pursuit to this chapter, a written notice to
remove or relocate shall be sent by registered mail or by had delivery to the
owner of the newspaper collection bin, stating a deadline for the removal or
relocation. If the owner of the newspaper collection bin fails to remove or
relocate the bin on or before the deadline, the county engineer may remove or
relocate the bin and charge the owner for the costs of such removal or
relocation. If determined in the best interests of Pima County, the county
engineer may retain custody of the bin until all removal or relocation costs
have been paid by the owner.
   B.   If in the opinion of the county engineer the location of a newspaper
collection bin located within a Pima County right-of-way constitutes an
immediate and substantial hazard to life or property, the county engineer may
immediately remove or relocate the bin without prior notice to the owner. In
such instances, the county engineer shall give notice to the owner of the bin
by registered mail or hand delivery within five working days after the bin has
been relocated or removed.
   C.   In the event of a removal pursuant to this section, the permit shall be
revoked and the prorated amount of the annual fee collected for the newspaper
collection bin shall be refunded to the owner. Unless waived by the owner, no
permit revocation or refund shall occur until the owner has had an opportunity
to be heard on appeal to the Pima County board of supervisors pursuant to
Section
10.52.110.
   D.   For purposes of this section, the term changed circumstances shall
include road or public facilities construction, change of traffic pattern,
change of road classification or status, or any circumstance which in the
opinion of the county engineer causes a newspaper collection bin to become
unsafe to the traveling public.
   E.   The owner shall bear the cost of removal or relocation of any newspaper
collection bin done pursuant to this section, unless the removal was done
without notice to the owner and was not caused by actions of the owner.
Compensation for removal of a newspaper collection bin done pursuant to this
section shall be limited to the refund of the annual fee, prorated to the date
of removal. In cases where the newspaper collection bin is relocated, there
shall be no compensation allowed, and the annual fee shall be applied to the
new location.
(Ord. 1989-86 (part), 1989)
10.52.080   Processing fee and annual fee.
   For each newspaper collection bin located within Pima County right-of-way,
the owner shall pay a one-time processing fee of ten dollars, plus the
following annual fee:
   A.   Where the owner of the newspaper collection bin is exempt from federal
income tax pursuant to 26 U.S.C. Section 501(c)(3) and is not denied such
exemption pursuant to 26 U.S.C. Section 502 or 503, there shall be no annual
fee.
   B.   Where at least fifty percent of the gross proceeds of newspaper
collection bins owned by one owner are used by the owner for charitable
purposes, the annual fee shall be one hundred dollars.
   C.   Where at least twenty-five percent of the gross proceeds of newspaper
collection bins owned by one owner are used by the owner for charitable
purposes, the annual fee shall be two hundred dollars.
   D.   Where less than twenty-five percent of the gross proceeds of newspaper
collection bins owned by one owner are used by the owner for charitable
purposes, the annual fee shall be five hundred dollars.
(Ord. 1989-86 (part), 1989)
10.52.090   Confirmation of charitable status or use.
   Each owner of a newspaper collection bin shall provide an annual statement
to the county engineer, representing the tax exempt status of the owner or the
percentage of gross proceeds of the collection bins used by the owner for
charitable purposes. Upon request by the county engineer, the owner shall
supply financial reports and income tax returns to support the annual
statement.
(Ord. 1989-86 (part), 1989)
10.52.100   Location of collection bins.
   A.   Newspaper collection bins shall be located only along streets that fall
within the definition of collector street or major street as set forth in Pima
County Code Section
18.69.020A3 and 8.
   B.   No newspaper collection bin shall be located along an alley, local
access street, local service street, local street, or minor street, as defined
in Pima County Code Section
18.69.020A.
   C.   No newspaper collection bin shall be located on a scenic route, as
currently or hereafter designated pursuant to the Pima County Zoning Code.
   D.   No newspaper collection bin shall be located closer than three hundred
feet from any intersection containing a traffic-control signal placed in
accordance with
Chapter 10.12 of the Pima County Code. This distance shall be measured from the
right-of-way line of the intersecting street.
   E.   No collection bin shall be located closer than three hundred feet from
any stop intersection or yield intersection established in accordance with
Chapter 10.16 and
Chapter 10.20 of the Pima County Code. This distance shall be measured from the
right-of-way line of the intersecting street.
   F.   No collection bin shall be located closer than thirty feet from the
edge of pavement of any road.
   G.   No collection bin shall be located within the sight triangle of any
intersection, as determined by the Pima County engineer.
   H.   No collection bin shall be located closer than one hundred feet from
the nearest exterior wall of any single-family residence.
   I.   No newspaper collection bin shall be located where, in the opinion of
the county engineer, it will disrupt the flow of traffic or will adversely
affect the health, safety or welfare of the traveling public.
   J.   A newspaper collection bin may be located in one or more of the above
restricted areas where, in the opinion of the county engineer, it:
      1.   Will provide a service to local residents who wish to recycle
newspaper:
      2.   Will not disrupt the flow of traffic: and
      3.   Will not adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of the
traveling public.
(Ord. 1989-86 (part), 1989)
10.52.110   Appeal to or variance by board of supervisors.
   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the county engineer made pursuant to
this chapter may appeal the decision to the Pima County board of supervisors
within thirty days after the written notice of the county engineer's decision.
The board of supervisors shall hear and determine requests for variances from
the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 1989-86 (part), 1989)
Chapter 10.56
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION AND MITIGATION
Sections: 
10.56.010   Purpose.
10.56.020   Applicability.
10.56.030   General considerations.
10.56.040   Project initiation.
10.56.050   Reserved.
10.56.060   Location report.
10.56.065   Design concept report.
10.56.070   Environmental assessment and mitigation report.
10.56.080   Construction documents.
10.56.090   Public participation.
10.56.100   Project mailing list.
10.56.110   Establishment of community advisory committees.
10.56.120   Public meetings.
10.56.130   Public opinion questionnaire.
10.56.140   Project status reports.
10.56.150   Report and executive summary for Board of Supervisors hearing.
10.56.160   Board of Supervisors hearing notification.
10.56.170   Community advisory committee.
10.56.180   Community advisory committee—Membership.
10.56.190   Community advisory committee—Formation.
10.56.200   Community advisory committee—Functions and duties.
10.56.210   Community advisory committee—Permitted scope of review.
10.56.220   Community advisory committee—Matters not to be reviewed for change.
10.56.230   Community advisory committee—Meeting schedule.
10.56.240   Mitigation measures.
10.56.250   Reserved.
10.56.260   Roadway design criteria.
10.56.270   Advance right-of-way acquisition.
10.56.280   Operation and maintenance.
10.56.290   Exemptions and variances.
10.56.300   Annual report.
10.56.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that, with respect to proposed
major roadway improvement projects:
   A.   Adequate consideration is given to possible social, economic,
environmental and transportation effects;
   B.   Appropriate consideration is given to reasonable alternatives;
   C.   Interested parties are afforded an opportunity to express their views
early enough in the study process to influence the course of studies as well as
the action taken; and
   D.   Decisions on projects are made in the overall public interest.
(Ord. 1992-69 § 1, 1992)
10.56.020   Applicability.
   A.   Major projects. This chapter shall apply to proposed major roadway
projects, including environmentally sensitive roadway projects, constructed by
Pima County. This chapter shall be a policy statement and guide for proposed
major roadway improvement projects and environmentally sensitive roadway
projects constructed jointly by Pima County and other agencies or
jurisdictions. For purposes of this chapter, the term "major roadway" means a
roadway depicted on the Pima County Major Streets and Scenic Routes Plan and
which is classified and functions as an arterial roadway. The term
"environmentally sensitive roadway" refers to a transportation project within
or crossing environmentally sensitive lands as determined by certain Sonoran
Desert Conservation Plan conservation land system categories and/or designation
as a Scenic and/or Historic Route, and/or location within or crossing a High or
Moderate Archaeological Sensitivity Zone or a Priority Cultural Resource, as
described in the Pima County Roadway Design Manual .
   B.   Minor projects. All minor projects shall include a minimum level of
public notification and information. The Department of Transportation shall be
responsible for determining the appropriate level of public outreach,
participation and notification on a project by project basis. The following
projects may be considered minor projects:
      1.   Overlay or maintenance of an existing roadway;
      2.   Addition of paved shoulder, bike lanes, or multi-use lanes to an
existing roadway;
      3.   Pavement widening of an existing roadway which does not increase the
number of through traffic lanes;
      4.   Traffic control or warning device installation projects;
      5.   Changes or improvements to the right-of-way area outside the
shoulder of an existing roadway;
      6.   Drainage improvements; and
      7.   Safety improvements.
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1992-69 § 2, 1992)
10.56.030   General considerations.
   To promote compatibility between proposed major roadway projects and
surrounding properties, the following shall be considered for each proposed
project:
   A.   Environmental Effects. Effects of the proposed project on the
environment, including but not limited to noise, air quality and wildlife.
   B.   Neighborhood Impacts. Protection of existing neighborhoods and
minimizing negative impacts from a proposed project.
   C.   Business Impacts. Protection of existing businesses and minimizing
negative impacts from a proposed project.
   D.   Alternative Transportation Modes. Features for alternative modes of
transportation as a part of the proposed project.
   E.   Cost. Cost and budget limitations incorporated throughout the design
and construction of a project.
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1992-69 § 3, 1992)
10.56.040   Project initiation.
   A project may be initiated after the desirability and necessity for the
project is established by action of the Board of Supervisors or by inclusion of
the improvement in the regional transportation plan adopted by the Pima
Association of Governments. After corridor planning has occurred, the project
design process shall begin with an environmental screening and inventory. If
previous corridor planning has determined an analysis of alignment alternatives
is required, this analysis shall be performed and documented in a location
report. The location report shall be approved by the Board of Supervisors. An
analysis of design alternatives and design criteria shall then be documented in
a design concept report. In conjunction with the preparation of the design
concept report, the appropriate measures to mitigate the impacts identified
during the environmental screening shall be identified. These mitigation
measures, as well as the environmental screening and inventory, shall be
documented in an environmental assessment and mitigation report. Upon approval
of the design concept report by the Director, and the environmental assessment
and mitigation report by the Board of Supervisors, preparation of project plans
beyond the design concept stage and specifications shall begin.
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1992-69 § 4.1, 1992)
10.56.050   Reserved.
10.56.060   Location report.
   A.   If previous corridor planning has determined that a location report is
required, the criteria of Section
10.56.060 shall apply. If a location report is not required, project design
shall proceed with a design concept report as outlined in Section
10.56.065 and environmental assessment and mitigation report as outlined in
Section
10.56.070.
   B.   A location report is a recommended final right-of-way alignment based
on a comparative study of all reasonable alternative right-of-way alignments.
The location report shall include a general overview of anticipated
environmental impacts for each alignment. The location report shall contain the
information specified in the Pima County Roadway Design Manual .
   C.   A location report is appropriate where (1) the proposed project is a
new roadway on a new alignment, (2) the proposed roadway has virtually no
existing right-of-way, or (3) there are significant alignment choices to be
made between the identified project termination points. A location report is
not appropriate where (1) the established or existing right-of-way is not of
adequate width in accordance with the Major Streets and Scenic Routes Plan, (2)
the alignment variations are contiguous with the existing road right-of-way and
location, (3) additional right-of-way is needed only to accommodate minor
alignment alterations or intersection widening.
   D.   After the location report is completed, the Board of Supervisors shall
hold a public hearing to determine the final right-of-way alignment. At the
conclusion of the hearing, the Board of Supervisors may approve any of the
alternative alignments studied in the location report, may order the
preparation of a new location report, or may order that the project be
terminated or delayed.
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1992-69 § 4.3, 1992)
10.56.065   Design concept report.
   The design concept report shall identify the processes undertaken in
developing a design concept for a roadway project, including the issues
identified, design criteria employed, optional approaches considered, public
input, and the recommended concept for design. The design concept report shall
contain the information specified in the Pima County Roadway Design Manual .
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006)
10.56.070   Environmental assessment and mitigation report.
   A.   An environmental assessment and mitigation report shall be prepared in
conjunction with the design concept report.
   B.   The environmental assessment and mitigation report shall identify
adverse impacts of the proposed project and shall provide recommendations for
mitigation measures which may be undertaken to minimize the adverse impacts.
The environmental assessment and mitigation report shall contain the
information specified in the Pima County Roadway Design Manual .
   C.   After the environmental assessment and mitigation report is completed,
the Board of Supervisors shall hold a public hearing to determine the
mitigation components to be incorporated into the project. At the conclusion of
the hearing, the Board of Supervisors may approve any of the mitigation
measures considered in the environmental assessment and mitigation report, may
order the preparation of a new environmental assessment and mitigation report,
or may order that the project be terminated or delayed. Approval of mitigation
components after the Board of Supervisors hearing on the environmental
assessment and mitigation report shall constitute authorization to prepare
construction documents and to acquire right-of-way for the project.
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1992-69 § 4.4, 1992)
10.56.080   Construction documents.
   Construction documents shall be prepared in conformance with the action
taken by the Board of Supervisors on the environmental assessment and
mitigation report and the Transportation Director on the design concept report.
Any deviations from the Board's or Director's actions shall be identified in a
project summary report, which shall be sent to the Board with the request for
permission to advertise for bids for the project.
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1992-69 § 4.5, 1992)
10.56.090   Public participation.
   It is the policy of Pima County to promote public involvement and comment
throughout the roadway development process, including during preparation of any
location report, design concept report, or environmental assessment and
mitigation report for major roadway projects constructed by Pima County. For
minor projects, the Department of Transportation will evaluate the need for
public involvement and notification on a project by project basis. Minimum
levels of public notification shall be required for all projects.
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1992-69 § 5, 1992)
10.56.100   Project mailing list.
   The Pima County Department of Transportation shall maintain a project
mailing list for each project subject to this chapter. The mailing list shall
be used for all notifications required to be made under this chapter. The
project mailing list shall consist of all owners of properties located within
at least a one-half mile wide corridor along the alignment of the proposed
project, based on the latest available records of the Pima County Assessor's
Office. In addition, the list shall contain the names of all business property
owners and tenants and the president or secretary of each homeowner and
business association officially registered with Pima County adjacent to the
project corridor. Throughout the project implementation process, this mailing
list shall be expanded to include any additional resident and business who
requests to be included in the mailings.
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1992-69 § 5.1, 1992)
10.56.110   Establishment of community advisory committees.
   For each project subject to this chapter, a community advisory committee
shall be established by the Department of Transportation to provide input and
feedback to the Department of Transportation concerning any proposed location
report, design concept report, or environmental assessment and mitigation
report relating to the project. The community advisory committee shall function
as set forth in Section
10.56.170.
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1992-69 § 5.2, 1992)
10.56.120   Public meetings.
   A.   A public meeting shall be held at least once during each of the
following steps in project development:
      1.   During the process of preparing a location report, if applicable;
      2.   During the process of preparing a design concept report, and;
      3.   During the process of preparing an environmental assessment and
mitigation report.
   A general public invitation to each public meeting shall be posted on the
Pima County Department of Transportation website and shall be given in a
display ad published in at least one daily newspaper of general circulation in
Pima County not less than fifteen and not more than thirty calendar days before
the meeting. The website posting and display ad shall include a project
location map and a description of the prominent features of the proposed
project. Invitations to each public meeting shall be sent by mail to each
person on the mailing list (see Section
10.56.100).
   B.   Public meetings shall be held in reasonable proximity to the proposed
project site. Illustrations to assist the public to visualize the proposed
project shall be available for public viewing at each public meeting, and Pima
County staff and consultants shall be available to answer questions about the
proposed project. The public shall have access to the illustrations, staff, and
consultants for each public meeting. Following the public meeting, project
illustrations may be posted on the Pima County Department of Transportation
website in addition to being available upon request.
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1992-69 § 5.3, 1992)
10.56.130   Public opinion questionnaire.
   After each public meeting, a public opinion questionnaire shall be sent by
mail to each person on the mailing list (see Section
10.56.100), soliciting public opinion concerning key design, environmental
impact and mitigation issues. The questionnaire results shall be reported,
along with the number of questionnaires sent and the percentage of responses
obtained, to the Board of Supervisors at or before the hearing on the location
report or environmental assessment and mitigation report.
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1992-69 § 5.4, 1992)
10.56.140   Project status reports.
   After appointment of a community advisory committee for a project, the
Department of Transportation shall prepare and submit project status reports to
the community advisory committee whenever there is a substantial change in the
project status.
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1992-69 § 5.5, 1992)
10.56.150   Report and executive summary for Board of Supervisors hearing.
   A location report or environmental assessment and mitigation report shall be
delivered to the Board of Supervisors at least thirty days before the public
hearing, along with an executive summary of the report prepared by or for the
Pima County Department of Transportation. The executive summary shall explain
whether and to what extent the opinions, requests and suggestions of the
community advisory committee were incorporated in the location report or the
environmental assessment and mitigation report.
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1992-69 § 5.6, 1992)
10.56.160   Board of Supervisors hearing notification.
   Notice of Board of Supervisors public hearings shall be published in at
least one daily newspaper of general circulation in Pima County not less than
thirty and not more than forty-five calendar days before any Board of
Supervisors public hearing required by this chapter. Notice of the public
hearing shall also be sent to each person on the mailing list (see Section
10.56.100). The location report or environmental assessment and mitigation
report to be considered at the hearing shall be available for public review at
the time the hearing notice is published.
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1992-69 § 5.7, 1992)
10.56.170   Community advisory committee.
   The function of each project's community advisory committee is to provide
input and feedback to the Pima County Department of Transportation during the
preparation of any location report, design concept report, or environmental
assessment and mitigation report for the project, so that ample consideration
is given to the concerns of those who are most directly affected by a project.
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1992-69 § 6, 1992)
10.56.180   Community advisory committee—Membership.
   Each community advisory committee shall consist of between five and fifteen
members. Two to eight members shall own property or reside immediately adjacent
to the proposed improvement. One to six members may own property or reside
within an approximate one-half mile corridor but not immediately adjacent to
the proposed improvement. Up to four members may own property or reside outside
of the one-half mile corridor. Preference will be given to property owners,
business owners, and representatives of homeowners' and merchants'
associations.
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1992-69 § 6.1, 1992)
10.56.190   Community advisory committee—Formation.
   To solicit volunteers for membership on a project's community advisory
committee, notices shall be mailed to all whose names appear on the project
mailing list (see Section
10.56.100), and an advertisement shall be posted on the Pima County Department
of Transportation website and shall be published at least once in a newspaper
of general circulation in Pima County not less than fifteen days before
appointment of members. The notice shall contain a brief description of the
proposed improvements and information on obtaining an application for
membership on the community advisory committee. The notice shall specify the
maximum number and composition of the community advisory committee, along with
a deadline for receiving applications. The Director of the Department of
Transportation shall appoint each community advisory committee.
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1992-69 § 6.2, 1992)
10.56.200   Community advisory committee—Functions and duties.
   A.   Community advisory committee members shall attend meetings as called by
either the Department of Transportation or the chair, generally at regular
intervals during project development through the end of construction.
   B.   The Department of Transportation shall provide community advisory
committee members with training materials, reports, construction documents, and
copies of this chapter, and shall explain operating procedures, duties and
responsibilities of membership.
   C.   The community advisory committee shall elect a chairperson, who shall
conduct meetings and supervise the preparation of the community advisory
committee's written comments.
   D.   The community advisory committee shall review the location report, the
design concept report, the environmental assessment and mitigation report, and
the construction documents, based on the meeting schedule set forth in Section
10.56.230. The community advisory committee shall prepare written comments
containing the committee's recommendations concerning the location report, the
design concept report, the environmental assessment and mitigation report,
project summary report and any other matter listed in Section
10.56.210. The community advisory committee's written comments may suggest a
priority for elements of the proposed improvements, including the committee's
priorities for allocation of mitigation resources available to the project.
   E.   The community advisory committee's written comments shall be presented
to the Department of Transportation at least forty-five days before the Board
of Supervisors public hearing on the location report or environmental
assessment and mitigation report. A copy of the community advisory committee's
written comments shall be presented to each member of the Board of Supervisors
with the location report or environmental assessment and mitigation report (see
Section
10.56.150).
   F.   After construction, the community advisory committee shall provide a
written post-construction evaluation of the project. The evaluation shall
analyze whether the construction has achieved the mitigation goals identified
in the environmental assessment and mitigation report.
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1992-69 § 6.3, 1992)
10.56.210   Community advisory committee—Permitted scope of review.
   The community advisory committee may review any aspect of the following
items, including mitigation methods, except as limited by Section
10.56.220:
   A.   The location report, which identifies the roadway location within a
roadway corridor;
   B.   The design concept report, which documents the analysis of design
alternatives;
   C.   The environmental assessment and mitigation report, including but not
limited to:
      1.   Environmental factors, such as:
         a.   View shed treatments;
         b.   Landscaping theme;
         c.   Wildlife crossings;
         d.   Ecological resources; and
         e.   Cultural and historic resources,
      2.   Neighborhood factors, such as:
         a.   Noise abatement methods;
         b.   Streetscape themes, including public art;
         c.   Architectural treatments;
         d.   Street lighting;
         e.   Access control and mitigation; and
         f.   Other neighborhood impacts,
      3.   Business factors, such as:
         a.   Access control and mitigation;
         b.   Signage;
         c.   Visibility; and
         d.   Construction impacts,
      4.   Alternative modes considerations, such as:
         a.   Pedestrian facilities, including sidewalks, trails and paths;
         b.   Equestrian crossings; and
         c.   Alternative travel modes (for example, public bus and bicycle
facilities),
      5.   Cost considerations.
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1992-69 § 6.4, 1992)
10.56.220   Community advisory committee—Matters not to be reviewed for change.
   The community advisory committee may request information regarding the
following, but shall not alter these requirements or their applicability:
   A.   Pima County ordinances;
   B.   Pima County Department of Transportation engineering design standards
and procedures;
   C.   Federal Highway Administration, Arizona Department of Transportation
Standards, American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials, and
the Institute of Traffic Engineers design criteria, and other generally
accepted engineering and safety principles and standards;
   D.   Pima County regional long range transportation plan roadway
designations;
   E.   Pima County Department of Transportation adopted typical roadway cross
sections;
   F.   Pima County Department of Transportation design and posted speed limit
standards and procedures;
   G.   Pima Association of Governments traffic projection modeling;
   H.   Pima County capital improvements program funding allocation;
   I.   Federal and state historic, cultural, and archaeological site
protection requirements;
   J.   Federal and state endangered species protection requirements;
   K.   Federal and state wildlife habitat protection requirements;
   L.   The Americans With Disabilities Act.
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1992-69 § 6.5, 1992)
10.56.230   Community advisory committee—Meeting schedule.
   The following meeting schedule is recommended for each community advisory
committee. Progress drafts of the report or documents under consideration shall
be available prior to each respective meeting:
 
Items Under Consideration Suggested Number of Community Advisory Committee
                          Meetings            Meeting Schedule
                                              A meeting when the draft
Location report (if                           report is initiated, one
applicable)               3                   when it is completed, and
                                              one when the final report is
                                              approved.
                                              A meeting when the draft
Design concept report     2                   report is initiated, and one
                                              when the final report is
                                              completed.
                                              A meeting when the draft
Environmental assessment                      report is initiated, one
and mitigation report     3                   when it is completed, and
                                              one when the final report is
                                              approved.
                                              As the construction
                                              documents are being
                                              prepared, the project team
                                              shall provide the community
                                              advisory committee with
                                              reports identifying
Construction documents    Optional            deviations from the approved
                                              environmental assessment and
                                              mitigation report. The
                                              committee may meet as it
                                              deems necessary to review
                                              the construction documents
                                              based upon this report.
Post-construction         1                   Upon completion of the
                                              project
 
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1992-69 § 6.6, 1992)
10.56.240   Mitigation measures.
   General and specific impact mitigation measures as approved by the Board of
Supervisors as a result of the public hearing on the environmental assessment
and mitigation report shall be utilized to mitigate adverse impacts of each
major roadway project. Mitigation includes measures to (1) avoid the impact
altogether by not taking a certain action or selected elements of a proposed
action, (2) minimize impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action
and its implementation, (3) rectify the impact by repairing, rehabilitating or
restoring the affected environment, (4) reduce or eliminate the impact over
time by preservation and maintenance activities during the life of the action,
or (5) compensate for the impact by replacing or providing substitute resources
or environments. The following mitigation measures shall be implemented for
each major roadway project covered by this chapter:
   A.   Environmental.
      1.   Preservation of Environmentally or Ecologically Sensitive Areas.
Where possible, the location of major roadway projects shall avoid areas of
significant environmental and ecological sensitivity. Where major roadway
projects are adjacent to areas of unique environmental or ecological
sensitivity, acquisition in fee simple, acquisition of development rights, or
conservation easements may be proposed by the appropriate environmental
assessment and mitigation report (see Item 5 below for additional
requirements).
      2.   Landscaping. All medians and right-of-way areas on major roadway
projects shall be landscaped with drought-resistant, low pollinating,
preferably native plants. Plant species shall be listed as permissible pursuant
to the landscaping requirements of the Pima County zoning code. The landscaping
theme of each major roadway project shall be compatible with the native
landscape through which the roadway passes. Installation of landscaping shall
begin not later than six months after the formal completion date of the roadway
project.
      3.   Dust Abatement. Curbs or paved roadway shoulders shall be provided
adjacent to through traffic lanes to minimize air borne dust generated by
vehicular traffic.
      4.   Scenic Route Designations. A visual impact analysis shall be
included in any environmental assessment and mitigation report prepared for
improvements on major roadway projects designated as scenic routes.
      5.   Environmentally Sensitive Roadways. Roadways are defined as
Environmentally Sensitive Roadways (ESR) if they are located within or cross
(a) unique ecologically or culturally sensitive lands as determined by the
Sonoran Desert Conservation Plan, (b) High or Moderate Archaeological
Sensitivity Zones or Priority Cultural Resources, or (c) if the roadways are
identified as Historic or Scenic Routes. Projects that are defined as ESR shall
be designed and constructed to minimize disturbance to the area resources.
Additional environmental resource assessment and mitigation procedures are
required as defined in the Pima County Roadway Design Manual .
   B.   Neighborhood.
      1.   Area Adjoining Roadway. The primary purpose of the area between the
roadway improvements and the right-of-way line shall be to mitigate adverse
effects of highway development on adjacent land uses and provide an
aesthetically pleasing environment. Therefore, the following uses are
permitted: installation of noise walls, screens or berms; landscaping; public
art; facilities for public bus, pedestrian, equestrian and/or bicycle use;
underground utilities; drainage system components, safety appurtenances and
environmental mitigation measures. Overhead utilities are permitted only when
the cost of placing the utilities underground causes the project budget to be
exceeded or when the voltage exceeds fourteen thousand volts. Where native
vegetation exists, a design goal shall be to conserve and incorporate this
vegetation within the project landscaping plan.
      2.   Neighborhood Traffic Intrusion. Major roadway projects shall be
designed to minimize neighborhood traffic intrusion. Where local street
connections offer a bypass or shortcut between major roadway projects which in
the opinion of the Board of Supervisors has a substantial adverse impact on
neighborhood traffic, such streets shall be closed to through traffic or
otherwise modified to minimize traffic intrusion.
      3.   Noise Abatement. Noise abatement shall be incorporated into the
project design to protect inhabited residential or other sensitive land uses
from roadway traffic noise. Noise abatement measures shall be considered for
these land uses when existing or design year projections of exterior traffic
noise measurements exceed an hourly A-weighted sound level of sixty-seven dBA
or when there is an increase in noise measurements of fifteen dBA or greater.
The preferred method of noise abatement shall be the construction of noise
barrier walls. Other methods such as rubberized asphalt, berms, and/or
landscaping may be utilized if the cost to Pima County does not exceed the cost
of noise barrier walls.
   C.   Businesses.
      1.   Business Assistance Program. Pima County shall develop a Business
Assistance Program to assist businesses throughout the design and construction
phases of roadway projects. The goals of this program are to help businesses
maintain profitability throughout roadway projects, improve communication
between businesses and Pima County Department of Transportation, and to
minimize and mitigate the impacts associated with roadway projects.
      2.   Information Program. Pima County shall implement an information
program to provide project information to business owners and tenants
throughout the design and construction phases of roadway projects.
      3.   Access Control. Major roadways shall be designed and constructed to
maintain and control safe and convenient access to businesses and parking.
During construction, at least one access driveway shall be maintained at all
times.
      4.   Signage and Visibility. Major roadways shall be designed to maintain
business visibility and signage, including careful placement of street trees,
vegetation, utility and other structures that could impact visibility. During
construction, additional business signage shall be provided to improve
visibility.
   D.   Alternative Modes.
      1.   Bicycle and Pedestrian Considerations. The outside lane width for
any urban (curbed) and rural (noncurbed) major roadway project shall be per the
standards specified in the Pima County Roadway Design Manual to accommodate
bicycles and other uses. Physically separated bicycle paths shall be examined
as a design alternative where right-of-way widths are two hundred feet or
greater and side street and driveway connections are limited. Sidewalks shall
be provided where warranted by pedestrian travel, and special consideration
shall be given to pedestrian or bicycle crossings with major routes. Pedestrian
overpasses/underpasses shall be considered for school crosswalks or school
zones for existing public or private schools adjacent to any major route.
      2.   Transit Vehicles. The project design shall consider mass transit
vehicle pullouts if bus or other mass transit services are available or planned
along the proposed improvement.
      3.   Park and Ride Facilities. To facilitate carpooling, ridesharing and
mass public transportation ridership, additional right-of-way shall be
considered in the vicinity of major intersections of major roadway projects for
the development of future park and ride facilities. Park and ride facilities
shall be convenient and screened with landscaping.
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1992-69 § 7.1, 1992)
10.56.250   Reserved.
10.56.260   Roadway design criteria.
   The roadway design criteria for any major roadway project covered by this
chapter shall be specified in the current Pima County Roadway Design Manual .
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1992-69 § 7.2, 1992)
10.56.270   Advance right-of-way acquisition.
   To minimize displacement, disruption and right-of-way acquisition costs, and
to maximize the effectiveness of mitigation measures, advance right-of-way
acquisition may be proposed in the environmental assessment and mitigation
report, per the current procedures used by Real Property Services. Where
funding is available, priority for consideration of advance acquisition shall
be given to single-family residences with sole, direct access to major roadway
projects for hardship and protective reasons, and to real property for which
the inevitability of acquisition affects its marketability.
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1992-69 § 8, 1992)
10.56.280   Operation and maintenance.
   Except as otherwise agreed to in a maintenance agreement duly authorized by
the Board of Supervisors, all major roadway project improvements including
noise walls, public art, landscape medians, and other similar features shall be
maintained as part of Pima County's normal maintenance process.
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1992-69 § 9, 1992)
10.56.290   Exemptions and variances.
   A.   At any time before or during consideration of a proposed improvement,
the Board of Supervisors may exempt the project or any portion of it from any
or all procedural or substantive requirements of this chapter. The Board of
Supervisors may grant a variance from the specific application of any
substantive requirement of this chapter where the application of the provision
will impose an unnecessary hardship on a property owner or on the general
public.
   B.   An exemption or variance may be granted by the Board of Supervisors as
part of the approval of the final road alignment (see Section
10.56.060) or the mitigation components to be incorporated into the project
(see Section
10.56.070). In that case, the public hearing notice required for consideration
of the location report or the environmental assessment and mitigation report
shall identify each recommended alterative which constitutes an exemption or
waiver from the requirements of this chapter. No further notice shall be
required.
   C.   If not granted as part of the approval of the final road alignment or
the mitigation components to be incorporated into the project, an exemption or
variance may be granted after a public hearing by the Board of Supervisors, at
least one notice of which shall be published no less than fifteen days before
the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in Pima County.
(Ord. 1992-69 § 10, 1992)
10.56.300   Annual report.
   Each year the Director of the Department of Transportation shall prepare a
report to the Board of Supervisors regarding the application, use and
effectiveness of this chapter. The annual report shall contain a list of the
projects to which this chapter was applied in the past year, the status of each
project, estimated costs of each project, and any suggested modifications to
the procedures and processes of project implementation which would improve the
effectiveness of this chapter.
(Ord. 2006-31 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1992-69 § 11, 1992)
Title 11 PIMA COUNTY PROCUREMENT CODE
Chapters: 
   
Chapter 11.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
Chapter 11.08 - PROCUREMENT ORGANIZATION
   
Chapter 11.12 - SOURCE SELECTION: MATERIALS AND SERVICES
   
Chapter 11.14 - PROCUREMENT FOR ARCHITECTURAL AND ENGINEERING SERVICES
   
Chapter 11.16 - PROCUREMENT FOR CONSTRUCTION
   
Chapter 11.20 - PROTESTS
   
Chapter 11.24 - COOPERATIVE PROCUREMENT AUTHORIZED
   
Chapter 11.25 - MULTI-YEAR CONTRACTS
   
Chapter 11.28 - SUSPENSION AND DEBARMENT OF CONTRACTORS
   
Chapter 11.32 - RULES FOR DEBARMENT AND SUSPENSION OF CONTRACTORS
   
Chapter 11.36 - NONRETALIATION
   
Chapter 11.38 - PIMA COUNTY LIVING WAGE
   
Chapter 11.40   WORKPLACE HEAT SAFETY
Chapter 11.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections: 
11.04.010   Purpose.
11.04.020   Applicability.
11.04.030   Definitions.
11.04.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of the Pima Procurement Code is to:
   A.   Simplify, clarify, and modernize the rules governing procurement by the
county.
   B.   Permit the continued development of county procurement policies and
practices.
   C.   Provide for a uniform system of control to enhance accountability and
increase public confidence in the process followed in county procurement.
   D.   Ensure full and equitable economic opportunities to persons or
businesses that compete for business with Pima County government, including
small business enterprises.
   E.   Provide increased economy in county procurement activities and maximize
to the fullest extent practicable the purchasing value of public monies of the
county.
   F.   Foster effective broad-based competition within the free enterprise
system.
   G.   Provide safeguards for the maintenance of a procurement system of
quality and integrity.
(Ord. 2018-37 § 1, 2018; Ord. 2012-10 § 1, 2012; Ord. 2011-14 § 1 (part), 2011;
Ord. 1997-45 § 1, 1997)
11.04.020   Applicability.
   A.   This title applies only to procurement initiated after adoption unless
the parties agree to its application to procurement initiated before such
dates.
   B.   Unless otherwise specified, this title applies to expenditures of
public monies by the county, notwithstanding the source of such monies. Nothing
in this title shall prevent the county from complying with the terms and
conditions of any grant, gift, bequest, or intergovernmental agreement.
   C.   This title does not apply to the procurement of experts to provide
testimony or other professional services relating to pending or anticipated
litigation or administrative proceedings, including any court ordered services.
   D.   This title shall not apply to the procurement of services related to
land titles, appraisals, real property acquisitions, relocation, or property
management authorized under Arizona Revised Statutes Titles 11, 28, or 48.
(Ord. 2017-27 § 1 (part), 2017; Ord. 2001-131 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 1997-45 §
1, 1997)
11.04.030   Definitions.
   In this title, unless the context otherwise requires:
   A.   "Administering department" means the department requesting the material
or service.
   B.   "Business" means a corporation, partnership, individual, sole
proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture, professional association,
or any other legal entity, operated for profit or nonprofit that is properly
licensed or otherwise authorized to do business.
   C.   "Certification" means completion by a business enterprise of an
application procedure as provided or approved by the county Small Business
Enterprise (SBE) Ordinance.
   D.   "Construction" means all work subject to the requirements of Arizona
Revised Statutes Title 34 including building, improving, altering, repairing,
maintaining or demolishing any public building, highway, bridge or other real
property structure.
   E.   "Contract" means all types of county agreements, regardless of what
they may be called, for the procurement of materials, services or construction.
   F.   "Contractor" means any person who participates in a solicitation or is
awarded a contract in connection with a procurement. This term also includes
any person who conducts business as an agent or representative of the
contractor.
   G.   "Day" means Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. excluding
holidays, as provided by law, unless stated as "calendar days" herein.
   H.   "Department" means any office, division, or department or other entity
of Pima County.
   I.   "Designee" means a duly authorized representative.
   J.   "Filed" means physical or electronic delivery to the location by the
due date and time designated in the solicitation. A time and date stamp affixed
to a document by the county or recorded by online submission system shall be
determinative of the time of delivery for purposes of filing.
   K.   "Interested party" means an actual or prospective bidder or offeror
whose economic interest may be affected substantially and directly by the
issuance of a solicitation, the award of a contract, or by the failure to award
a contract. Whether an actual or prospective bidder or offeror has an economic
interest will depend upon the circumstances of each case.
   L.   "Internet" means the international computer network of both federal and
nonfederal interoperable packet switched data networks, including the graphical
subnetwork called the World Wide Web.
   M.   "Invitation for bids" means all documents, whether attached or
incorporated by reference, used for soliciting bids. Synonymous with the term
"Request for Bids".
   N.   "Materials" means all property, including, but not limited to,
equipment, supplies, insurance and leases of property, but does not include
land, an interest in land, or leases of land or buildings.
   O.   "Multi-step sealed bidding" means a two-phase process consisting of a
technical first phase composed of one or more steps in which bidders submit
unpriced technical offers to be evaluated by the county and a second phase in
which those bidders whose technical offers are determined to be acceptable
during the first phase have their price bids considered.
   P.   "Procurement" means buying, purchasing, renting, leasing or otherwise
acquiring any materials, services or construction. Procurement also includes
all functions that pertain to the acquiring of any material, service or
construction, including description of requirements, selection and solicitation
of sources, preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract
administration.
   Q.   "Procurement officer" means any person to whom the procurement director
has delegated procurement authority in writing.
   R.   "Professional services" means services involving specialized knowledge,
skill and expertise provided by persons with advanced training and experience
in a field that requires an extended course of specialized instruction and
study.
   S.   "Request for proposals" means all documents whether attached or
incorporated by reference, used for soliciting proposals through the
competitive sealed proposals process.
   T.   "Request for quotations" means the documentation or method used in the
process of competing for purchases that are lower than the dollar amount
requiring submission of sealed bids or proposals.
   U.   "Responsible bidder or offeror" means a person who has the capability
to perform the contract requirements and the reliability and integrity that
will assure good faith performance.
   V.   "Responsive bid or offer" means a bid or proposal that conforms with
all material respects to the solicitation.
   W.   "Services" means the furnishing of labor, time or effort by a
contractor or subcontractor which does not involve the delivery of a specific
end product other than required reports, plans, or documents and performance.
The term includes professional services and construction.
   X.   "Solicitation" means an invitation for bids, a request for technical
offers, a request for proposals, a request for quotations, or any other
invitation or request by which the county invites a person to participate in a
procurement.
   Y.   "Specification" means any description of the physical or functional
characteristics, or of the nature of a material, service or construction item.
Specification may include a description of any requirement for inspecting,
testing, or preparing a material, service, or construction item for delivery.
It includes statements or scopes of work often used in solicitations for
professional services.
   Z.   "Subcontractor" means a company or person who contracts to perform work
or render service to a contractor or as a sub-subcontractor as a part of a
contract with the county.
(Ord. 2017-27 § 1 (part), 2017; Ord. 2011-14 § 1 (part), 2011; Ord. 2009-88 § 1
(part), 2009: Ord. 2005-44 § 1, 2005; Ord. 2001-131 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord.
1997-45 § 1, 1997)
Chapter 11.08
PROCUREMENT ORGANIZATION
Sections: 
11.08.010   Authority of the procurement director.
11.08.010   Authority of the procurement director.
   A.   The procurement director shall be appointed by the county administrator
to serve as the central procurement agent of the county.
   B.   Unless otherwise provided in this title, the authority, duties and
responsibilities of the procurement director are as follows:
      1.   Serve as the exclusive supervisor and manager of the county's
procurement system.
      2.   Conduct procurement for all county departments except those
conducted by departments to whom the procurement director has delegated
procurement authority.
      3.   Prepare or monitor the use of specifications for materials and
services required by the county.
      4.   Issue solicitations, including electronic solicitations, for
materials, services and construction in compliance with this title.
      5.   Award and execute contracts in an amount up to two hundred fifty
thousand dollars per year for a maximum term of five years from the effective
date of the contract, with the exception of settlement agreements related to
lawful claims arising from litigation involving the county and certain software
contracts as further defined in policy. Procurement requirements must not be
artificially divided to circumvent source selection procedures required by this
title. Contracts signed by the procurement director will be reported to the
board.
      6.   Cancel solicitations, including electronic solicitations, for
materials, services or construction prior to the time set for receipt of bids,
quotes, offers or proposals where it is in the best interests of the county and
provide such notice of cancellation as the procurement director may require by
procedure.
      7.   Develop and maintain countywide procurement standards, procedure
manuals and standard contract terms and conditions as necessary to carry out
the terms of this title.
      8.   Delegate procurement authority to departments meeting the
certification requirements established pursuant to this title.
      9.   Provide guidance and leadership on procurement matters to the board,
the county administrator, departments, and procurement officers.
      10.   Authorize emergency, limited competition and sole source
procurement as specified in this title.
      11.   Monitor sourcing decisions, procurement of materials and services,
contracts awarded, and contract compliance, and report these matters to the
board as directed.
      12.   Appoint procurement advisory committees to assist with
specifications and procurement decisions. Anyone who participates in any aspect
of a specific procurement as an advisory committee member shall not receive any
benefits directly or indirectly from a contract resulting from such
procurement.
      13.   In accordance with the county SBE ordinance, develop and administer
a program which encourages participation of small businesses and requires the
certification of such businesses and the publication of annual reports
reflecting the dollar participation of such businesses in the procurement of
goods, services, and construction.
      14.   Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary in this section, the
procurement director or authorized designee may execute contracts for materials
and services in any amount, provided that if the contract amount exceeds the
award authority of the procurement director, the board will make the award.
   C.   Delegation of Authority.
      1.   The procurement director may delegate or rescind procurement
authority to a department except that the authority delegated to the
procurement director under Subsection B.5 of this section may not be delegated
to a department.
      2.   Departments having procurement authority shall comply with this
chapter and all implementing procedures, forms and terms established by the
procurement director.
      3.   The procurement director shall consider the following factors in
making the decision to delegate or rescind procurement authority:
         a.   The procurement expertise, specialized knowledge and past
experience of the department;
         b.   The impact of the delegation of the procurement on efficiency and
effectiveness;
         c.   Department adherence to the procurement code, standards,
procedures and manuals.
      4.   The procurement director shall monitor contracts developed and
administered by the departments with delegated procurement authority, and shall
be available to provide technical assistance.
      5.   Notwithstanding the delegation of procurement authority the
procurement director shall retain all other authority, responsibilities and
duties relating to procurement.
(Ord. 2017-27 § 1, 2017; Ord. 2011-14 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2009-88 § 1 (part), 2009:
Ord. 2006-90 § 2, 2006; Ord. 2005-44 § 2, 2005; Ord. 2002-94 § 2, 2002; Ord.
2001-131 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 1997-45 § 1, 1997)
Chapter 11.12
SOURCE SELECTION: MATERIALS AND SERVICES
Sections: 
11.12.010   Competitive sealed bidding.
11.12.020   Competitive sealed proposals.
11.12.030   Professional services.
11.12.040   Small purchases.
11.12.050   Sole source procurement.
11.12.060   Emergency and other limited competition procurement.
11.12.070   Reserved.
11.12.010   Competitive sealed bidding.
   A.   Conditions for Use. All contracts for materials and services shall be
awarded by competitive sealed bidding except as otherwise provided in Sections
11.12.020 Competitive sealed proposals,
11.12.030 Professional Services,
11.12.040 Small purchases,
11.12.050 Sole source procurement, and
11.12.060 Emergency and other limited competition procurement.
   B.   Invitation for Bids. An invitation for bids shall be issued and shall
set forth:
      1.   The specifications for materials and services,
      2.   The evaluation criteria,
      3.   Any and all minimum submission requirements, and
      4.   The due date and time by which all submissions shall be received.
   C.   Public Notice. Adequate public notice of the invitation for bids,
including but not limited to any one or more of the following: advertisement,
notice of recommendation for award, award, rejection or cancellation, shall be
given as required by law or county procedure. Under such procedures as the
procurement director may provide, posting on the internet shall be considered
adequate public notice, unless otherwise required by state or federal law or
regulation.
   D.   Prebid Conference. A prebid conference may be conducted prior to bid
opening for the purpose of explaining the bid requirements.
   E.   Late Bids. A bid is late if it is received physically or electronically
after the due date and time at the location designated in the invitation for
bids. A late bid shall be rejected. A late bid shall be returned to the bidder
and shall not be opened except for identification purposes.
   F.   Bid Opening. Bids shall be opened publicly at the opening time and
place designated in the invitation for bids. The amount of each bid and other
relevant information together with the name of each bidder shall be announced
or recorded. Unless otherwise determined by the procurement director, this
record shall be open to public inspection no later than the first business day
following bid opening.
   G.   Correction or Withdrawal of Bids—Cancellation of Awards. The
procurement director is authorized to approve the correction or withdrawal of
inadvertently erroneous bids before or after bid opening and recommend
cancellation of awards or contracts based on bid mistakes, only as follows:
      1.   Mistakes discovered before bid opening may be corrected or the bid
withdrawn by written notice received by the procurement department before the
time set for bid opening.
      2.   After bid opening, and before bid award, a bidder may be permitted
to withdraw its bid without penalty if the bidder submits evidence which
clearly and convincingly demonstrates that a mistake was made, provided that a
bid mistake is evident on the face of the bid, but the intended bid is not
obvious.
      3.   After bid opening, and before bid award, the bid may not be
withdrawn and shall be corrected to the intended bid if a bid mistake is
evident on the face of the bid and the intended bid is obvious.
      4.   Mistakes shall not be corrected after award of the contract except
where the Procurement Director, with the written agreement of the County
Administrator, makes a written determination that it would be unconscionable
not to allow the mistake to be corrected.
      5.   If correction or withdrawal of a bid after bid opening is permitted
or denied under paragraphs (2), (3), or (4) of this section, the Procurement
Director shall prepare a written determination showing that the relief was
permitted or denied under these provisions.
   H.   Multi-Step Sealed Bidding. When it is considered impractical or not
advantageous to initially prepare a specification to support an award based on
price, multi-step sealed bidding may be used. A solicitation may be issued
requesting the submission of unpriced offers to be followed by a solicitation
limited to those bidders whose offers have been determined to be technically
acceptable under the criteria set forth in the first solicitation. Multi-step
sealed bidding shall be conducted pursuant to written procedures.
   I.   Bid Evaluation and Award. Bids will be evaluated to determine which bid
is the most advantageous to the county concerning price, conformity to the
specifications and other factors.
      1.   A product acceptability evaluation may be conducted according to the
criteria and requirements specified in the invitation for bids to determine
whether a bidder's product meets specifications and is acceptable. This
evaluation is used to decide whether to accept or reject a bid and not to
determine whether one bidder's product is superior to another.
      2.   A bid that does not meet specifications is not acceptable and shall
be rejected as nonresponsive.
      3.   The procurement director may reject all bids if rejection is in the
public interest. Any such rejection shall be publicly noticed in the same
manner provided in Section
11.12.010(C).
      4.   The contract shall be awarded to the responsible bidder whose bid is
determined to be the most advantageous to the county concerning price,
conformity to the specifications and other factors. Evaluation of price shall
be made without regard to applicable taxes.
      5.   Multiple contracts may be awarded if determined to be in the best
interest of the county.
(Ord. 2017-27 § 3 (part), 2017; Ord. 2011-14 § 3 (part), 2011; Ord. 2006-90 §
1, 2006; Ord. 2005-44 § 3 (part), 2005; Ord. 1997-45 § 1, 1997)
11.12.020   Competitive sealed proposals.
   A.   Conditions for Use. The use of competitive sealed proposals is
authorized when the use of competitive sealed bidding for materials or services
as described in Section
11.12.010 is not advantageous to the county.
   B.   Request for Proposals. Proposals shall be solicited through a request
for proposals.
   C.   Public Notice. Public notice shall be made in the same manner provided
in Section
11.12.010(C).
   D.   Preproposal Conference. A preproposal conference may be conducted prior
to submission of proposals for the purpose of explaining the proposal
requirements.
   E.   Receipt of Proposals. Proposals shall be opened so as to avoid
disclosure of the contents of any proposal to competing offerors during the
process of negotiation. Late proposals shall be handled in the same manner as
provided in Section
11.12.010(E).
   F.   Evaluation Factors. The request for proposals shall state the relative
importance of price and other evaluation factors.
   G.   Discussion with Responsible Offerors and Revisions to Proposals. As
provided in the request for proposals and county procurement policies and
procedures, discussions may be conducted with responsible offerors who submit
proposals determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for award
for the purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of, and
conformance to, the solicitation requirements. Any clarification of a proposal
shall be in writing, as required in Subsection H of this section. Follow-up
questions for the purpose of clarification of proposals may be requested from
any offeror submitting a proposal.
      1.   Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to
any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals and such revisions may
be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining
best and final offers.
      2.   Discussion and best and final offer materials shall be maintained in
the procurement file as a public record.
      3.   In conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure of any
information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors.
   H.   Best and Final Offers. If the original request for proposals indicates
that a request for best and final offers may be issued, and if discussions are
conducted, a written request for best and final offers shall be issued. The
request shall set forth the date, time and place for the submission of best and
final offers. Best and final offers shall be requested only once, unless there
is a written determination that it is advantageous to the county to conduct
further discussions. The request for best and final offers shall inform
offerors that, if they do not submit a notice of withdrawal or a best and final
offer, their immediate previous offer will be construed as their best and final
offer. Other factors will not be considered. The procurement file shall contain
the basis on which an award is made.
   I.   Proposal Evaluation and Award.
      1.   Proposals shall be evaluated according to the evaluation factors set
forth in the request for proposals. Evaluation of price shall be made without
regard to applicable taxes.
      2.   The procurement director may reject all proposals if rejection is in
the public interest. Any such rejection shall be publicly noticed in the same
manner as provided in Section
11.12.010(C).
      3.   The contract shall be awarded to the responsible and responsive
offeror whose proposal is determined to be the most advantageous to the county
taking into consideration the evaluation criteria set forth in the request for
proposals.
      4.   Multiple contracts may be awarded if determined to be in the best
interest of the county.
(Ord. 2017-27 § 3 (part), 2017; Ord. 2011-14 § 3 (part), 2011; Ord. 2005-44 § 3
(part), 2005; Ord. 1997-45 § 1, 1997)
11.12.030   Professional services.
   A.   Conditions for Use. Except as specified in this section, professional
services expected to exceed the bid threshold determined by A.R.S. § 41-2535
will be procured according to Section 11.12.020. Professional services expected
not to exceed the bid threshold determined by A.R.S. § 41-2535 will be procured
in accordance with written procurement policy approved by the board.
   B.   Other Methods of Procurement. The county administrator, under
appropriate circumstances, may develop contractor-selection processes in
addition to those specified in this title where the county administrator, in
consultation with the procurement director, has made a written determination
that it is in the county's best interest to do so. Any process developed must
be based on the exercise of sound business judgment and have as its objective
obtaining contracts that are the most advantageous to the county.
   C.   Medical Services. Medical services and other professional services
related to the administration of the county's health care functions will be
procured in accordance with written procurement policy approved by the board.
(Ord. 2018-37 § 2, 2018; Ord. 2017-27 § 3 (part), 2017; Ord. 2012-10 § 2, 2012:
Ord. 2005-44 § 3 (part), 2005; Ord. 2001-131 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 1997-45 §
1, 1997)
11.12.040   Small purchases.
   A.   Conditions for Use. This section applies to the procurement of
materials and general services costing less than the bid threshold defined by
A.R.S. § 41-2535, not including architectural and engineering or construction
services. Procurement requirements will not be artificially divided to
circumvent source selection.
   B.   Purchases from the dollar threshold defined in A.R.S. § 11-254.01.C up
to the bid threshold determined by A.R.S. § 41-2535. For purchases of materials
and general services with an estimated aggregate annual cost equal to or
greater than the dollar threshold defined in A.R.S. § 11-254.01.C but less than
the threshold defined by A.R.S. § 41-2535, the procurement department will
issue a request for quotations and will solicit a minimum of three written
quotations, including a quotation from at least one certified small business
enterprise (SBE) if identified as available for the solicited commodities or
services in the Pima County vendor database at the time of the solicitation. A
description of the solicited requirements, the names of the businesses
submitting quotations, and the date and amount of each quotation, will be
documented and maintained as a public record.
   C.   Purchases less than the dollar threshold defined in A.R.S. § 11-
254.01.C. For purchases estimated annually to cost less than the dollar
threshold defined in A.R.S. § 11-254.01.C, the administering department will
obtain as much competition as is practicable, including qualified and available
SBE firms. Any quotes obtained will be maintained in the procurement file as a
public record.
   D.   As defined in Pima County Code, Section
20.16.010(B), the procurement department may "reserve" or restrict its informal
solicitations for specific material and general service commodities that do not
exceed the threshold determined by A.R.S. § 41-2535 per contract year to only
certified local SBE's.
   E.   Sole Source Procurement. All sole source procurement is subject to the
procedures in Section
11.12.050.
(Ord. 2017-27 § 3 (part), 2017: Ord. 2011-14 § 3 (part), 2011; Ord. 2009-88 § 1
(part), 2009: Ord. 2005-44 § 3 (part), 2005; Ord. 2000-75 § 2, 2000; Ord. 2000-
24 § 2, 2000; Ord. 2000-23 § 2, 2000; Ord. 1997-45 § 1, 1997)
11.12.050   Sole source procurement.
   A.   Conditions for Use.
      1.   A procurement may be made for a material or service without
competition if there is documented justification that only one source exists
for the required material or service, or that no reasonable alternative source
exists.
      2.   The administering department shall submit a written request and
justification for sole source procurement to the procurement director who shall
either approve or deny the sole source procurement.
      3.   A record of sole source procurement shall be maintained as a public
record.
   B.   Award. Sole source contracts requiring board approval shall be awarded
based upon the procurement director's written determination that only one
source exists and that applicable procurement procedures have been followed.
(Ord. 2011-14 § 3 (part), 2011; Ord. 2005-44 § 3 (part), 2005; Ord. 1997-45 §
1, 1997)
11.12.060   Emergency and other limited competition procurement.
   A.   Conditions for Use.
      1.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, upon the board's
declaration of an emergency or by written approval of the county administrator,
the procurement director may:
         a.   Make emergency procurement of materials or services if there
exists a threat to public health, welfare, property or safety; or
         b.   Formulate a limited competitive process if a situation exists
which makes compliance with normal purchasing procedures impracticable or
contrary to the public interest. The competition obtained shall be that
appropriate under the particular circumstances.
      2.   A written justification of the basis of the emergency or limited
competition procurement shall be included in the procurement file. In no event
will failure to plan routine requirements be considered justification for the
approval of an emergency or limited competition procurement.
      3.   Normal procurement practices may be waived in order to do all things
necessary to meet the county's emergency needs. An emergency procurement shall
be limited to those materials or services necessary to satisfy the emergency
need.
   B.   Award. Contracts under this section shall be awarded upon the
administering department obtaining the county administrator's written
determination that the procurement is warranted and that the appropriate
procurement procedures have been followed. The procurement director may award
emergency and limited competition contracts below the amount indicated in
Section
11.08.010(B)(5). Emergency and limited competition contracts above this amount
shall be awarded by the board; except that the procurement director is
authorized to approve such contracts exceeding this limit in order to prevent
substantial economic harm to the county, or on projects funded with federal
monies. Contracts awarded under this section shall be reported to the board as
directed.
(Ord. 2011-14 § 3 (part), 2011)
11.12.070   Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-14, § 4, adopted March 1, 2011, repealed §
11.12.070, which pertained to electronic procurement and derived from Ord. No.
1997-45, 1997; Ord. No. 2001-131, 2001 and Ord. No. 2005-44, 2005.
Chapter 11.14
PROCUREMENT FOR ARCHITECTURAL AND ENGINEERING SERVICES
11.14.010   Architectural and Engineering Services contracts.
11.14.010   Architectural and Engineering Services contracts.
   A.   Conditions for Use. Procurement for architectural or engineering
services will be conducted in accordance with Arizona Revised Statutes Title
34, unless precluded by Federal participation.
   B.   Contracts. Contracts for architectural and engineering services will be
awarded using the procedures set forth in Arizona Revised Statutes Title 34 and
county policy D29.1. Where available and appropriate, industry standard
contract forms may be used at the county's discretion.
(Ord. 2018-37 § 3, 2018)
Chapter 11.16
PROCUREMENT FOR CONSTRUCTION
Sections: 
11.16.010   Construction contracts.
11.16.020   Outreach.
11.16.010   Construction contracts.
   A.   Conditions for Use. Procurement for construction shall be conducted in
accordance with Arizona Revised Statutes Title 34. Provisions of this title and
the procedures established pursuant thereto shall apply to construction-related
procurement only to the extent these provisions are not inconsistent with state
law.
   B.   Contracts. Contracts for construction projects shall be awarded using
the procedures set forth in Arizona Revised Statutes Title 34. Where available
and appropriate, industry standard contract forms may be used, at the county's
discretion.
   C.   Modifications. The procurement director or the board of supervisors
will approve necessary modifications to construction contracts as set forth in
this section. Any number of modifications may occur, but will be limited
according to this subsection.
      1.   The procurement director has authority to approve individual
modifications in the scope of work that will result in an increase of not more
than twenty-five percent of the original total contract value, or two hundred
fifty thousand dollars whichever is less. Unless specifically authorized by the
board under the terms of the contract, the procurement director's modification
authority must not exceed a cumulative total of five hundred thousand dollars
per contract. The procurement director must approve modifications prior to the
commencement of that work and will report all such modifications to the board
as directed. When the procurement director approves modifications, the
procurement director may extend the contract term, if necessary, by up to
twenty-five percent of the original construction contract term, or ninety
calendar days, whichever is greater.
      2.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, individual
modifications that will result in an increase of the contract in excess of
twenty-five percent of the original contract value or two hundred fifty
thousand dollars whichever is less, and all modifications when the cumulative
total modifications on one contract exceed five hundred thousand dollars will
be submitted to the board for approval prior to the commencement of work;
except that the procurement director is authorized to approve modifications
exceeding these limits in order to prevent substantial economic harm to the
county. The procurement director will report all such modifications to the
board as directed.
      3.   As authorized by the procurement director, changes to job orders
under job order contracts may be approved by the director of the department
administering the contract or his/her appointee. No such change order may
result in the total value of the job order exceeding the maximum value for job
orders established in the job order contract.
   D.   Project Completion. Upon completion of a project, the administering
department shall submit a final balancing modification for approval. The final
balancing modification shall indicate final quantities and amounts of all pay
items and reference all prior modifications which have affected the contract.
This final document will be maintained in the procurement file as a public
record.
(Ord. 2017-27 § 4, 2017; Ord. 2011-14 § 5 (part), 2011; Ord. 2005-44 § 4, 2005;
Ord. 1997-45 § 1, 1997)
11.16.020   Outreach.
   A.   Conditions for Use. In selecting construction firms for projects
involving less than the competitive bidding amounts established in A.R.S. § 34-
201, a procurement officer shall request price quotations from as many firms as
is practicable, including available, certified SBE firms. The names of firms
submitting quotations, and the date and amount of each quotation, shall be
recorded and maintained as a public record.
   B.   Publication. As part of the project specifications, a procurement
officer shall publish a listing of certified SBE subcontracting firms that are
available and willing to work on each individual project, and describe the
portion of work that each SBE is capable of performing. Such listing shall be
accompanied by:
      1.   A request that the prime contractor obtain price quotes and consider
entering into subcontracts with listed SBE firms; and
      2.   A request that the prime contractor participate in a post-award
conference in order to ascertain why listed SBE firms received or failed to
receive subcontracts.
   C.   Subcontractor Utilization. Procurement officers shall collect and
maintain information regarding actual subcontractor utilization, including a
description of firms utilized, work performed, and dollar participation of
subcontractors. This information shall be forwarded to the procurement
department at the end of each project for purposes of monitoring and reporting.
(Ord. 2011-14 § 5 (part), 2011; Ord. 2009-88 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 1997-45 §
1, 1997)
Chapter 11.20
PROTESTS
Sections: 
11.20.010   Protests.
11.20.010   Protests.
   A.   Applicability. This section applies to procurement of materials,
general and professional services and construction. An interested party may
file a protest regarding any aspect of a solicitation, evaluation, or
recommendation for award.
   B.   Prebidding Protests. Protests regarding solicitation that are apparent
before the bid opening or before the time for receipt of proposals shall be
filed before bid opening or before the time for receipt of proposals.
   C.   Notice of Recommendation for Award. The procurement director shall post
notification of recommendation for awards for all formally advertised
solicitations. Notification shall be pursuant to written procurement
procedures.
   D.   Filing a Protest. A bidder or offeror may file a protest in writing
with the procurement director. Protests filed more than five days after the
protester knew or should have known of the recommendation for award, or after
contract award shall be considered untimely. The protest shall include the
following information:
      1.   The name, address and telephone number of the protester;
      2.   The signature of the protester;
      3.   Identification of the solicitation;
      4.   A statement of the factual grounds of the protest including copies
of relevant documents; and
      5.   A description of the relief requested.
   E.   Procurement Director Action. Upon receiving a protest, the procurement
director must stay the contract award if the award has not been made until the
appeal process, as stated in subsection H, has concluded with or without an
appeal. The procurement director will review the facts presented in the protest
and render a decision.
   F.   Dismissal. Within five days of receipt of the protest, the procurement
director will dismiss a protest, upon a written determination, if:
      1.   The protest does not state a valid basis for protest; or
      2.   The protest is untimely.
   G.   Remedies. If the protest is sustained in whole or part, an appropriate
remedy will be implemented.
      1.   In determining an appropriate remedy, consideration will be given to
all the circumstances surrounding the procurement including, but not limited
to, the seriousness of the procurement deficiency, the degree of prejudice to
other interested parties or to the integrity of the procurement system, the
good faith of the parties, costs to the county, the urgency of the procurement
and the impact of the relief on the department's mission.
      2.   An appropriate remedy may include the following:
         a.   Withdraw staff recommendation and reissue the solicitation;
         b.   Withdraw staff recommendation and issue a new solicitation;
         c.   Withdraw staff recommendation and recommend award of contract
consistent with this title; or
         d.   Such other relief as is determined appropriate.
   H.   Appeal to the Board of Supervisors.
      1.   A protester or any other interested party involved in the
solicitation whose interests may be affected by the ruling may file a written
appeal of the procurement director's decision specifying the reason for the
appeal. A dismissal based on an untimely protest is not appealable. The appeal
must be filed with the clerk of the board within five days of the date of the
procurement director's decision.
      2.   The board will consider the protest at a regularly scheduled meeting
within thirty calendar days of the procurement director's decision. The board
may, with or without a hearing, either accept the decision of the procurement
director, or determine an appropriate remedy.
(Ord. 2017-27 § 5, 2017; Ord. 2011-14 § 6 (part), 2011; Ord. 2001-131 § 1
(part), 2001; Ord. 1997-45 § 1, 1997)
Chapter 11.24
COOPERATIVE PROCUREMENT AUTHORIZED
Sections: 
11.24.010   Cooperative procurement authorized.
11.24.010   Cooperative procurement authorized.
   The procurement director may enter into a cooperative purchasing agreement
to acquire materials and services under the contracts of other public entities,
and may participate in, sponsor, conduct or administer a cooperative purchasing
agreement for the procurement of materials and services with one or more public
entities. The procurement director shall determine, before entering into a
cooperative agreement under which another public entity undertakes procurement,
that the public entity has conducted or will conduct procurement through
competitive procedures reasonably similar to those set forth in this title.
(Ord. 2005-44 § 5, 2005; Ord. 1997-45 § 1, 1997)
Chapter 11.25
MULTI-YEAR CONTRACTS
Sections: 
11.25.010   Authorization.
11.25.010   Authorization.
   A.   Unless otherwise provided in this title, contracts for the annual
requirements of materials or services shall be entered into for an initial term
of up to one year with up to four one-year renewals. The contract term and
conditions of renewal or extension, if any, shall be included in the
solicitation, and monies shall be available for the first fiscal period at the
time of contracting. A contract may be entered into for an initial term
exceeding one year if the director determines awarding such a contract would be
advantageous to Pima County. Payment and performance obligations for succeeding
fiscal periods are subject to the availability and appropriation of monies.
      1.   Before the execution of a contract exceeding one year, it shall be
determined at time of award that:
         a.   Estimated requirements cover the period of the contract and are
reasonable and continuing.
         b.   Such a contract will serve the best interest of Pima County by
encouraging effective competition or otherwise promoting economies in Pima
County procurement.
      2.   If monies are not appropriated or otherwise made available to
support continuation of performance in a subsequent fiscal period, the multiple
year contract shall be canceled and the contractor may only be reimbursed for
the reasonable value of any nonrecurring costs incurred at the county's
request, but not amortized in the price of the materials or services delivered
under the contract, or which are otherwise not recoverable. The cost of
cancellation may be paid from any funds available for such purposes.
(Ord. 2011-14 § 7 (part), 2011; Ord. 2002-94 § 3, 2002; Ord. 2001-131 § 1
(part), 2001)
Chapter 11.28
SUSPENSION AND DEBARMENT OF CONTRACTORS
Sections: 
11.28.010   Title.
11.28.020   Purpose.
11.28.030   Rules.
11.28.040   Causes for debarment or suspension.
11.28.050   Written determinations.
11.28.060   Copies of determinations.
11.28.070   Penalty.
11.28.080   Judicial review
11.28.090   Exclusive remedy.
11.28.010   Title.
   The ordinance codified in this chapter is to be known as the Pima County
"suspension and debarment of contractors ordinance."
(Ord. 1997-45 § 2, 1997; Ord. 1991-101 § 1 (part), 1991)
11.28.020   Purpose.
   This chapter is for the purpose of providing for the suspension and
debarment of any person from consideration for awards of Pima County contracts,
based upon certain types of criminal convictions, civil judgments or contract
violations, or for any other cause deemed to affect responsibility as a Pima
County contractor.
(Ord. 1997-45 § 2, 1997; Ord. 1991-101 § 1 (part), 1991)
11.28.030   Rules.
   The rules for debarment and suspension of contractors set forth in
Chapter 11.32 of this title shall apply to any debarment or suspension
proceeding under this chapter. If there are reasonable grounds for debarment,
any person may be suspended for a period of time not to exceed six months and
may be debarred for a period of time not to exceed three years pursuant to
Chapter 11.32 
(Ord. 1997-45 § 2, 1997; Ord. 1991-101 § 1 (part), 1991)
11.28.040   Causes for debarment or suspension.
   The causes for debarment or suspension include, but are not limited to, the
following:
   A.   Conviction of any person or any subsidiary or affiliate of any person
for commission of a criminal offense arising out of obtaining or attempting to
obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in the performance of
such contract or subcontract;
   B.   Conviction of any person or any subsidiary or affiliate of any person
under any statute of the federal government, this state or any other state for
embezzlement, theft, fraudulent schemes and artifices, fraudulent schemes and
practices, bid rigging, perjury, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction
of records, receiving stolen property or any other offense indicating a lack of
business integrity or business honesty which affects responsibility as a Pima
County contractor;
   C.   Conviction or civil judgment finding a violation by any person or any
subsidiary or affiliate of any person under state or federal antitrust
statutes;
   D.   Violations of contract provisions of a character which are deemed to be
so serious as to justify debarment action, including, but not limited to, the
following:
      1.   Knowingly failing without good cause to perform in accordance with
the specifications or within the time limits provided in one or more contracts,
      2.   Failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance in accordance with
the terms of one or more contracts, except that failure to perform or
unsatisfactory performance caused by acts beyond the control of the contractor
shall not be considered to be a basis for debarment;
   E.   Any other cause deemed to affect responsibility as a Pima County
contractor, including suspension or debarment of such person or any subsidiary
or affiliate of such person by another governmental entity for any cause listed
in this chapter or in
Chapter 11.32;
   F.   Indictment for a criminal offense may be considered as evidence for
purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 1997-45 § 2, 1997; Ord. 1991-101 § 1 (part), 1991)
11.28.050   Written determinations.
   A written determination of debar or suspend shall be issued pursuant to
Chapter 11.32. Such written determination shall:
   A.   State the reasons for the action taken;
   B.   Inform any debarred or suspended person involved of the right to
administrative review as provided in
Chapter 11.32.
(Ord. 1997-45 § 2, 1997; Ord. 1991-101 § 1 (part), 1991)
11.28.060   Copies of determinations.
   A copy to the decision under Section
11.28.050 shall be mailed or otherwise furnished to any debarred or suspended
person and to any intervening party.
(Ord. 1997-45 § 2, 1997; Ord. 1991-101 § 1 (part), 1991)
11.28.070   Penalty.
   Any violation of this chapter, or of
Chapter 11.32, where it is known or reasonably should have been known that a
person is debarred or suspended or otherwise excluded from consideration for an
award of any Pima County contract pursuant to this chapter, may result in
disallowance of costs, annulment or termination of award, issuance of a stop
work order, debarment or suspension, or other remedies as appropriate.
(Ord. 1997-45 § 2, 1997; Ord. 1991-101 § 1 (part), 1991
11.28.080   Judicial review
   Any final decision of the county administrator under this chapter and
Chapter 11.32 is subject to judicial review pursuant to A.R.S. Section 12-901
et seq., by any party to the proceeding before the county administrator.
(Ord. 1997-45 § 2, 1997; Ord. 1991-101 § 1 (part), 1991)
11.28.090   Exclusive remedy.
   Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, including the provisions of A.R.S.
Sections 12-821 et seq., and 12-1501, this chapter and
Chapter 11.32 shall provide the exclusive procedures for asserting a claim
against Pima County arising in relation to any procurement conducted under this
chapter by Pima County.
(Ord. 1997-45 § 2, 1997; Ord. 1991-101 § 1 (part), 1991)
Chapter 11.32
RULES FOR DEBARMENT AND SUSPENSION OF CONTRACTORS
Sections 
11.32.010   Scope of rules.
11.32.020   Definitions.
11.32.030   Authority to debar or suspend.
11.32.040   Initiation of debarment.
11.32.050   Period of debarment.
11.32.060   Notice.
11.32.070   Notice to affiliates.
11.32.080   Imputed conduct.
11.32.090   Reinstatement.
11.32.100   Limited participation and continuance of awards.
11.32.110   Suspension.
11.32.120   Period and scope of suspension.
11.32.130   Notice—Hearing—Determination and appeal.
11.32.140   Master list.
11.32.150   Hearing procedures.
11.32.160   Recommendation by hearing officer.
11.32.170   Final decision by county administrator.
11.32.180   Rehearing.
11.32.010   Scope of rules.
   These rules shall apply in all matters involving the suspension or debarment
of any person from consideration for award of Pima County contracts pursuant to
Chapter 11.28 of this title.
(Ord 1997-45 § 3 (part), 1997; Ord. 1991-102 § (part), 1991)
11.32.020   Definitions.
   A.   "Adequate evidence" means information sufficient to support the
reasonable belief that a certain act or omission has occurred.
   B.   "Affiliate" means any person whose governing instruments require it to
be bound by the decision of another person or whose governing board includes
enough voting representatives of the other person to cause or prevent action,
whether or not the power is exercised. It may also include persons doing
business under a variety of names or where there is a parent-subsidiary
relationship between persons.
   C.   "Construction" means the process of building, altering, repairing,
improving or demolishing any public structure or building, or other public
improvements of any kind to any public real property. Construction does not
include the routine operation, routine repair or routine maintenance of
existing structures, buildings or real property.
   D.   "Contract" means all types of agreements, regardless of what they may
be called, for the procurement of materials, services or construction or the
disposal of materials.
   E.   "Contractor" means any person who submits proposals for, receives an
award or subaward or performs services in connection with, or reasonably may be
expected to be awarded or to perform services in connection with, a
procurement. This term also includes any person who conducts business as an
agent or representative of another contractor.
   F.   "Conviction" means the final judgment by any court of competent
jurisdiction on a verdict or finding of guilty, a plea of guilty or a plea or
nolo contendere to a criminal offense.
   G.   "Debarment" means an action taken by the county administrator under
Chapter 11.28 and these rules to prohibit a person from participating in county
procurements.
   H.   "Governing instruments" means those legal documents that establish the
existence of an organization and define its powers, including articles of
incorporation or association, constitution, charter and by-laws.
   I.   "Indictment" means an indictment for a criminal offense. An information
or other filing by competent authority charging a criminal offense shall be
given the same effect as an indictment.
   J.   "Materials" means all property, including equipment, supplies,
printing, insurance and leases of property, but does not include land, a
permanent interest in land or real property or leasing space.
   K.   "Person" means any corporation, business, individual, union, committee,
club, other organization or group of individuals, however organized, including
any subsidiary or affiliate of any of the foregoing.
   L.   "Preponderance of the evidence" means evidence which is of greater
weight or more convincing than the evidence which is offered in opposition to
it; evidence which as a whole shows that the fact sought to be proved is more
probable than not.
   M.   "Procurement" means buying, purchasing, renting, leasing or otherwise
acquiring any materials, services or construction. Procurement also includes
all functions that pertain to the obtaining of any material, service or
construction, including description of requirements, selection and solicitation
of sources, preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract
administration.
   N.   "Services" means the furnishing of labor, time or effort by a
contractor or subcontractor which does not involve the delivery of a specific
end product other than required reports and performance. Services does not
include employment agreements or collective bargaining agreements.
   O.   "Subcontractor" means a person who contracts to perform work or render
services to a contractor as defined by this section or to another
subcontractor.
   P.   "Subsidiary" means any corporation, partnership, association or legal
entity, however organized, which is owned or controlled by another person.
   Q.   "Suspension" means an action taken by the county administrator under
Section
11.32.110 of these rules, temporarily disqualifying a person from participating
in county procurements.
(Ord 1997-45 § 3 (part), 1997; Ord. 1991-102 §§ 1 (part), 1991)
11.32.030   Authority to debar or suspend.
   The county administrator has the sole authority to debar or suspend a person
from participating in county procurements.
(Ord 1997-45 § 3 (part), 1997; Ord. 1991-102 § 1 (part), 1991)
11.32.040   Initiation of debarment.
   Upon receipt of information concerning a possible cause for debarment, the
county administrator shall investigate the possible cause. If the county
administrator has adequate evidence to believe that a cause for debarment
exists, the county administrator may propose debarment under Section
11.32.060 of these rules.
(Ord 1997-45 § 3 (part), 1997; Ord. 1991-102 § 1 (part), 1991)
11.32.050   Period of debarment.
   A.   The period of time for a debarment shall not exceed three years from
the date of the debarment determination.
   B.   If debarment is based solely upon debarment by another governmental
agency, the period of debarment may run concurrently with the period
established by that other debarring agency.
(Ord 1997-45 § 3 (part), 1997; Ord. 1991-102 § 1 (part), 1991)
11.32.060   Notice.
   If the county administrator proposes debarment, the county administrator
shall notify the person and affected affiliates in writing within seven days by
certified mail, return receipt requested, of the proposed debarment and that a
hearing shall be scheduled in accordance with these rules.
(Ord 1997-45 § 3 (part), 1997; Ord. 1991-102 § 1 (part), 1991)
11.32.070   Notice to affiliates.
   A.   If the county administrator proposes to debar an affiliate, the
affiliate shall have a right to appear in any hearing on the proposed debarment
to show mitigating circumstances.
   B.   The affiliate shall advise the county administrator in writing within
thirty days of receipt of the notice under Section
11.32.060 of these rules of its intention to appear under subsection A of this
section. Failure to provide written notice of appearance within the thirty day
period shall be a waiver of the right to appear in the hearing.
(Ord 1997-45 § 3 (part), 1997; Ord. 1991-102 § 1 (part), 1991)
11.32.080   Imputed conduct.
   A.   The improper conduct of a person or its affiliate or subsidiary, or a
subcontractor, having a contract with a contractor may be imputed to the
contractor for the purposes of debarment where the impropriety occurred in
connection with the person's duties for or on behalf of, or with the knowledge,
approval or acquiescence of, the contractor.
   B.   The fraudulent, criminal or other seriously improper conduct of any
officer, director, shareholder, partner, employee, other individual, affiliate
or subsidiary associated with a contractor may be imputed to the contractor
when the conduct occurred in connection with the individual's, subsidiary's or
affiliate's performance of duties for or on behalf of the contractor, or with
the contractor's knowledge, approval or acquiescence. The contractor's
acceptance of the benefits derived from the conduct shall be presumptive
evidence of such knowledge, approval or acquiescence.
   C.   The fraudulent, criminal or other seriously improper conduct of a
contractor may be imputed to any officer, director, shareholder, partner,
employee, other individual, affiliate or subsidiary associated with the
contractor who participated in, knew of, or had reason to know of the
contractor's conduct.
(Ord 1997-45 § 3 (part), 1997; Ord. 1991-102 § 1 (part), 1991)
11.32.090   Reinstatement.
   A.   The county administrator may at any time after a final decision on a
debarment reinstatement a debarred person or rescind the debarment upon a
determination that the cause upon which the debarment is based no longer
exists.
   B.   Any debarred person may request reinstatement by submitting a petition
to the county administrator supported by documentary evidence showing that the
cause for debarment no longer exists or has been substantially mitigated.
   C.   The county administrator shall require a hearing on the request for
reinstatement.
   D.   The decision on reinstatement shall be in writing, be made within seven
days after the request for a hearing is filed and specify the factors on which
it is based.
   E.   Decisions on reinstatement requests are not subject to judicial appeal.
(Ord 1997-45 § 3 (part), 1997; Ord. 1991-102 § 1 (part), 1991)
11.32.100   Limited participation and continuance of awards.
   A.   The county administrator may allow a debarred or suspended person to
participate in county contracts on a limited basis during the debarment period
upon a written determination that the debarred or suspended person constitutes
the sole source of materials or services for the county. The determination
shall specify the factors on which it is based and define the extent of the
limits imposed.
   B.   Notwithstanding the debarment or suspension of any person, the board of
supervisors may continue agreements in existence at the time the person was
suspended or debarred. A decision as to the type of termination action, if any,
to be taken should be made only after thorough review to ensure the propriety
of the proposed action. Said agreements shall not be renewed or extended.
(Ord 1997-45 § 3 (part), 1997; Ord. 1991-102 § 1 (part), 1991)
11.32.110   Suspension.
   A.   If adequate evidence exists in support of debarment, the county
administrator may suspend a person from receiving any award in accordance with
Sections
11.32.120 and
11.32.130 of these rules.
   B.   The county administrator shall not suspend a person pending debarment
unless compelling reasons require suspension to protect county interests.
(Ord 1997-45 § 3 (part), 1997; Ord. 1991-102 § 1 (part), 1991)
11.32.120   Period and scope of suspension.
   A.   Unless otherwise agreed to by the parties, the period of suspension
shall not be more than thirty days without satisfying the notice requirements
of Section
11.32.130 of these rules.
   B.   For purposes of suspension, a person's conduct may be imputed to an
affiliate or another person in accordance with Section
11.32.080 of these rules.
(Ord 1997-45 § 3 (part), 1997; Ord. 1991-102 § 1 (part), 1991)
11.32.130   Notice—Hearing—Determination and appeal.
   A.   The county administrator shall notify the person suspended by personal
service or certified mail, return receipt requested.
   B.   The notice of suspension shall state:
      1.   The basis for suspension;
      2.   The period, including dates, of suspension;
      3.   That bids or proposals shall not be solicited or accepted from the
person and, if received, will not be considered; and
      4.   That the person is entitled to a hearing on the suspension if the
person files a written request for a hearing with the county administrator
within seven days after receipt of the notice.
   C.   If a suspended party requests a hearing, the hearing officer shall
arrange for a prompt hearing unless the county attorney determines that a
hearing at such time is likely to jeopardize an investigation. In no case shall
the hearing be delayed longer than six months after notice of suspension.
   D.   A hearing requested under this section shall be conducted, to the
extent practicable, in accordance with these rules and the Arizona
Administrative Procedure Act, A.R.S. Section 41-1001 et seq.
(Ord 1997-45 § 3 (part), 1997; Ord. 1991-102 § 1 (part), 1991)
11.32.140   Master list.
   A.   The county administrator shall maintain a master list of debarments and
suspensions.
   B.   The master list shall show as a minimum the following information:
      1.   The names of those persons whom the county has debarred or
suspended;
      2.   The basis of authority for the action;
      3.   The period of debarment or suspension, including the expiration
date; and
      4.   The name of the debarring or suspending agency, if the county's
debarment or suspension is based on debarment or suspension by another
governmental agency.
(Ord 1997-45 § 3 (part), 1997; Ord. 1991-102 § 1 (part), 1991)
11.32.150   Hearing procedures.
   A.   If a hearing is required or permitted under these rules, the county
administrator shall act as a hearing officer or appoint a hearing officer.
   B.   If a hearing is required or permitted under these rules, the hearing
officer shall arrange for a prompt hearing and notify the parties in writing of
the time and place of the hearing.
   C.   The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner without formal
rules of evidence or procedure.
   D.   The cause for debarment must be established by a preponderance of the
evidence. This standard shall be deemed to have been met when the proposed
debarment is based upon a conviction or civil judgment.
   E.   The hearing officer may:
      1.   Hold pre-hearing conferences to settle, simplify or identify the
issues in a proceeding or to consider other matters that may aid in the
expeditious disposition of the proceeding;
      2.   Require parties to state their positions concerning the various
issues in the proceeding;
      3.   Require parties to produce for examination those relevant witnesses
and documents under their control;
      4.   Rule on motions and other procedural items on matters pending before
such officer;
      5.   Regulate the course of the hearing and conduct of participants;
      6.   Establish time limits for submission of motions or memoranda;
      7.   Impose appropriate sanctions against any person failing to obey an
order under these procedures, which may include:
         a.   Refusing to allow the person to assert or oppose designated
claims or defenses, or prohibiting that person from introducing designated
matters in evidence,
         b.   Excluding all testimony of an unresponsive or evasive witness,
and
         c.   Expelling persons from further participation in the hearing;
      8.   Take official notice of any material fact not appearing in evidence
in the record, if the fact is among the traditional matters of judicial notice;
and
      9.   Administer oaths or affirmations.
   F.   A copy of the record of the hearing shall be made available at cost to
the requesting party.
(Ord 1997-45 § 3 part, 1997; Ord. 1991-102 § 1 (part), 1991)
11.32.160   Recommendation by hearing officer.
   A.   The hearing officer shall make a recommendation to the county
administrator based on the evidence presented. The recommendation shall include
findings of fact and conclusion of law.
   B.   The county administrator may affirm, modify or reject the hearing
officer's recommendation in whole or in part, may remand the matter to the
hearing officer with instructions or may make any other appropriate
disposition.
(Ord 1997-45 § 3 (part), 1997; Ord. 1991-102 § 1 (part), 1991)
11.32.170   Final decision by county administrator.
   A decision by the county administrator shall be final. The decision shall be
sent within twenty days after the conclusion of the hearing to all parties by
personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested. The decision
shall state that any party adversely affected may within ten days request a
rehearing with the county administrator.
(Ord 1997-45 § 3 (part), 1997; Ord. 1991-102 § 1 (part), 1991)
11.32.180   Rehearing.
   A.   Any party, including a procurement officer, who is aggrieved by the
county administrator's decision may file a written request for rehearing of the
decision specifying the particular grounds.
      1.   The request for rehearing shall be filed with the county
administrator within ten days after receipt of the decision and shall include
any supporting affidavits.
      2.   The request shall be clearly designated as a "request for
rehearing."
      3.   The county administrator shall within five days after the request is
filed notify interested parties of the request by personal service or certified
mail, return receipt requested.
   B.   An interested party may within ten days after receipt of the notice
file a response including opposing affidavits.
   C.   Any argument not raised in the request or in a response is waived.
   D.   The county administrator may require the filing of written briefs and
may provide for oral argument.
   E.   A rehearing of the decision may be granted for any of the following
causes:
      1.   Irregularity in the proceedings before the county administrator or
an abuse of discretion by the county administrator, depriving the requesting
party of a fair hearing;
      2.   Misconduct of the county administrator, his staff or the hearing
officer or any party;
      3.   Accident or surprise that could not have been prevented by ordinary
prudence;
      4.   Newly discovered material evidence that could not with reasonable
diligence have been discovered and produced at the original hearing;
      5.   Excessive or insufficient penalties;
      6.   Error in the admission or rejection of evidence or other error of
law occurring at the hearing;
      7.   A showing that the decision is not justified by the evidence or is
contrary to law.
   F.   The county administrator's decision concerning a request for rehearing
shall be in writing and shall state the basis of the decision. A decision
granting a rehearing shall be in writing and shall state the basis of the
decision. A decision granting a rehearing shall specify with particularity the
grounds on which the rehearing is granted, and the date, time and place of the
rehearing. The rehearing shall cover only those matters specified in the
decision.
   G.   The county administrator, within the time for filing a request for
rehearing under this section, may on his own initiative order a rehearing of
his decision for any reason for which he might have granted a rehearing on
request of a party.
(Ord 1997-45 § 3 (part), 1997; Ord. 1991-102 § 1 (part), 1991)
Chapter 11.36
NONRETALIATION
Sections: 
11.36.010   Nonretaliation.
11.36.010   Nonretaliation.
   This title prohibits retaliation against anyone who participates or has
participated in the hearing or study process related to the establishment of
the Procurement Code or against anyone who initiates or assists in actions
brought under this title. Such parties will not be adversely affected in the
terms or conditions of conducting business. Any employee of Pima County who
engages in retaliation action will be subject to discipline, up to and
including termination. Any contractor who engages in retaliation action due to
the adoption of the ordinance shall be subject to the sanctions of this title,
up to and including debarment.
(Ord 1997-45 § 3 (part), 1997; Ord. 1997-45 § 3 (part), 1997)
Chapter 11.38
PIMA COUNTY LIVING WAGE
Sections: 
11.38.010   Conditions for use.
11.38.020   Eligible contract.
11.38.030   Covered services
11.38.040   Eligible employee
11.38.050   Wages.
11.38.060   Compliance.
11.38.070   Records.
11.38.080   Reporting.
11.38.010   Conditions for use.
   Employees of contractors entering into eligible contracts with Pima County
for covered services shall be paid a living wage by said contractors for the
hours expended providing services to the county as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 2002-1 § 1 (part), 2002)
11.38.020   Eligible contract.
   An eligible contract shall be a contract awarded by the county having an
estimated cost in excess of the bid threshold, the aggregate dollar amount,
provided for in ARS §§ 11-254.01 and 41-2535 for covered services except for
the following:
   A.   Contacts under which federal or state regulations preclude the
applicability of a living wage;
   B.   Contracts involving programs where the county shares management
authority with other jurisdictions, and intergovernmental and cooperative
agreements;
   C.   Contracts impacted by bond covenants, grant restrictions, governmental
regulations; and
   D.   Contracts for job training and youth or summer employment programs.
(Ord. 2003-36 § 1, 2003; Ord. 2002-1 § 1 (part), 2002)
11.38.030   Covered services
   Covered services are:
   A.   Facility and building maintenance
   B.   Refuse collection and recycling
   C.   Temporary employee services
   D.   Janitorial and custodial
   E.   Landscape maintenance and weed control
   F.   Pest control
   G.   Security
   H.   Moving services
(Ord. 2003-36 § 1, 2003; Ord. 2002-1 § 1 (part), 2002)
11.38.040   Eligible employee
   Any person employed by a contractor holding an eligible contract with the
county who:
   A.   Is not a person who provides volunteer services that are uncompensated
except for reimbursement of expenses such as meals, parking or transportation.
   B.   Expends chargeable time providing services to the county and on county
property; and
   C.   Is at least sixteen (16) years of age.
(Ord. 2002-1 § 1 (part), 2002)
11.38.050   Wages.
   A.   Eligible employees shall receive a wage of not less than nine dollars
($9.00) per hour.
   B.   This rate shall be automatically adjusted each successive year based
upon Consumer Price Index, Western Region.
   C.   If the contract is subject to a prevailing wage requirement or union
agreement, the higher wage shall apply.
   D.   A contractor may request that it be allowed to pay its eligible
employees a wage of no less than eight dollars ($8.00) per hour if the
contractor provides health benefits with a monthly value at least as high as
the difference between a monthly wage based on nine dollars ($9.00) per hour
and the requested monthly wage of no less than eight dollars ($8.00) per hour.
Proof of said benefits shall be provided at the time of bid or proposal
submission, or, as the county may require, in accordance with notification by
the county of its intent to award a contract.
(Ord. 2002-1 § 1 (part), 2002)
11.38.060   Compliance.
   The county procurement director shall monitor compliance, including the
investigation of claimed violations, and promulgate administrative rules and
regulations to implement and enforce this article. In the event of any
violation of the provisions set forth in this chapter, the contractor and any
subcontractor responsible therefor shall be liable for the unpaid wages and
shall pay the eligible employee any amounts underpaid. The provisions in
eligible contracts may allow any one or more of the following remedies in the
event of a written determination of a noncompliance:
   A.   A penalty imposed by the county in the amount of $50.00 for each
incidence of a noncompliance for each day of noncompliance and/or each day it
continues.
   B.   Suspension of further payments on the contract until the violation has
ceased.
   C.   Suspension and/or termination of the contract for cause.
   D.   Debar or suspend the contractor or subcontractor from future county
contracts pursuant to
Chapter 11.28.
   Protests or appeals of the remedies for noncompliance shall be handled under
Chapter 11.20.
(Ord. 2002-1 § 1 (part), 2002)
11.38.070   Records.
   A.   The contractor or subcontractor shall make its records available for
inspection, copying, or transcription by authorized representatives of the
county procurement department, and shall permit such representatives to
interview employees during working hours on the job. If the contractor or
subcontractor fails to submit the required records or make them available, the
county procurement director may, after written notice to the contractor, take
such action as may be necessary to cause the suspension of any further payment,
advance, or guarantee of funds. Furthermore, failure to submit the required
records upon request or to make such records available may be grounds for
debarment action pursuant to
Chapter 11.28.
   B.   Payrolls and basic records relating thereto shall be maintained by the
contractor during the course of the work and preserved for a period for three
years thereafter for all eligible employees. Such records shall contain the
name, address, and social security number of each eligible employee, his or her
correct classification, hourly rates of wages paid, daily and weekly number of
hours worked, deductions made, and actual wages paid.
   C.   The contractor shall submit a payroll record for all eligible employees
to the procurement director within seven days from the end of the payroll
period. The payrolls submitted shall set out accurately and completely all the
information required to be maintained under subparagraph (b) of this section.
(Ord. 2002-1 § 1 (part), 2002)
11.38.080   Reporting.
   On or about December 1, 2002, and every year thereafter, the county
procurement director shall file an annual report on compliance with the county
administrator and the board of supervisors.
(Ord. 2002-1 § 1 (part), 2002)
Chapter 11.40
WORKPLACE HEAT SAFETY
Sections:
   
11.40.010    Declaration of policy.
   
11.40.020    Definitions.
   
11.40.030    Mandatory contract clause.
   
11.40.040 Required elements of a heat injury illness prevention and safety
plan.
   
11.40.050 Nonretaliation.
   
11.40.060    Penalties.
   
11.40.070    Enforcement.
   
11.40.080    Exemptions.
11.40.010 Declaration of policy.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect outdoor workers from heat hazards
by requiring that all contractors or subcontractors who work under a Pima
County contract and whose employees or contract workers work outdoors create a
written Heat Injury and Illness Prevention and Safety Plan. (Ord. 2024-10 § 1
(part), 2024)
11.40.020 Definitions.
   A.   "Heat Injury and Illness Prevention and Safety Plan" means a written
plan that details preventative and remedial measures to provide protection and
relief from heat hazards.
   B.   Subcontractor means an entity or individual with a direct contract with
a county contractor for any portion of the work that is the subject of the
county contract.
   C.   "Work Site" means a location where fifty percent or more work
activities are conducted outside. The term also includes locations where work
activities are conducted inside, but the temperature is not managed by air
conditioning or other devices that reduce heat exposure (examples include, but
are not limited to, sheds, greenhouses, tents and vehicles). (Ord. 2024-10 § 1
(part), 2024)
11.40.030 Mandatory contract clause.
   The following clause must be included in all county contracts: Heat Injury
and Illness Prevention and Safety Plan. Contractor hereby warrants that if
contractor's employees perform work in an outdoor work site under this
contract,
contractor will keep on file a written Heat Injury and Illness Prevention and
Safety Plan. At county's request, contractor will provide a copy of this plan
and documentation of heat safety and mitigation efforts implemented by
contractor to prevent heat-related illnesses and injuries in the workplace.
Contractor will post a copy of the Heat Injury and Illness Prevention and
Safety Plan where it is accessible to employees. Contractor will further ensure
that each subcontractor who performs any work for contractor under this
contract complies with this provision. (Ord. 2024-10 § 1 (part), 2024)
11.40.040 Required elements of a heat injury illness prevention and safety
plan.
   A Heat Injury and Illness Prevention and Safety Plan should include the
following required elements:
   A.   Water access: sufficient amount of cool water available at work sites
   B.   Opportunities for rest/respite from heat (with regular breaks
increasing in frequency as the temperature rises, and as needed)
   C.   Access to shade (and/or alternative cooling methods, preferably
including air-conditioning where available), and access to air conditioning in
vehicles with enclosed cabs.
   D.   Effective acclimatization practices to promote the physiological
adaptation of employees or contract workers newly assigned or reassigned to
work in an outside work site.
   E.   Monitoring protocols: close monitoring and observation of employees
working in heat, potentially including a 'buddy system' where employees are
partnered together
   F.   Communication protocols: specifically, a means of communication between
supervisors and employees.
   G.   Emergency response protocols: specifically, a means of communication
between supervisors and employees in the event of a heat-related emergency.
   H.   Annual training for supervisors and employees that address
environmental and personal risk factors related to heat, the symptoms, and
signs of heat illness and injuries, and the policies and procedures in place to
prevent and remedy heat-related harm.
   I.   The posting of signage at the job site that contains information, in
both English and Spanish, explaining how to (a) recognize and report signs and
symptoms of heat illness and injury; (b) administer appropriate first aid
measures, and (c) report heat-related illness and injury to emergency medical
personnel. The signage must also include a phone number for reporting heat
violations to Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)/Arizona
Division of Occupational Safety and Health (ADOSH) and indicate that such
reports may be made anonymously.
   J.   Providing written notification to all employees and contract workers
regarding their new worker protections under this provision. This notification
shall be provided to existing employees and during the onboarding process for
new employees. The notification shall be provided to each worker in the
language preferred by that worker and must be posted in the workplace.
   K.   Documented evidence of Heat Injury Illness Prevention and Safety Plan
implementation and compliance. (Ord. 2024-10 § 1 (part), 2024)
11.40.050 Nonretaliation.
   Retaliatory action against an employee or contract worker for reporting a
violation is prohibited. (Ord. 2024-10 § 1 (part), 2024)
11.40.060 Penalties.
   A contractor who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter after
receiving notice and an opportunity to comply is subject to sanctions permitted
by law including, but not limited to, cancellation, termination, or suspension
of the county contract. (Ord. 2024-10 § 1 (part), 2024)
11.40.070 Enforcement.
   The County Department primarily responsible for managing any contract may
monitor compliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to
inspections, interviews, and audits. If the Department learns that a contractor
is in violation of this chapter, the contractor will be notified by the
Department for remedy of such violation. If the contractor, after notice of
noncompliance, fails to demonstrate that it has taken appropriate corrective
action for the breach, the Department will notify OSHA/ADOSH and may take other
action as
permitted according to the terms of the contract, including termination. The
county will establish an interdisciplinary Advisory Committee for Extreme Heat
Protocols to support the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 2024-10 § 1 (part),
2024)
11.40.080 Exemptions.
   This chapter does not apply to any county contract with federal, state, or
local governments or their agencies. (Ord. 2024-10 § 1 (part), 2024)
Title 12 (RESERVED)
Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES
Chapters: 
   Division I. - Water (RESERVED)
   Division II. - Sewers
   Division III. - Industrial Waste
   Division IV. - Solid Waste
Division I. Water
(RESERVED)
Division II. Sewers
   
Chapter 13.12 - RESERVED
   
Chapter 13.16 - RESERVED
   
Chapter 13.20 - SANITARY SEWER CONSTRUCTION, CONNECTIONS AND FEES**
   
Chapter 13.24 - SANITARY SEWER USER FEES
   
Chapter 13.28 - MT. LEMMON SEWER CONNECTIONS
   
Chapter 13.32 - MT. LEMMON USER FEE SURCHARGES
Chapter 13.12
RESERVED*
*Editor's note—Ord. No. 2020-36, § 1, adopted October 20, 2020, repealed
Chapter 13.12, which pertained to preliminary sewer layout requirements and
derived from Res. No. 1984-44, 1984.
Chapter 13.16
RESERVED*
*Editor's note—Ord. No. 2020-36, § 1, adopted October 20, 2020, repealed
Chapter 13.16, which pertained to design standards for public sewerage
facilities and derived from Res. No. 1983-133, 1983.
Chapter 13.20
SANITARY SEWER CONSTRUCTION, CONNECTIONS AND FEES**
Sections: 
13.20.100   Acronyms and Definitions.
13.20.150   General Purpose and Applicability.
13.20.200   Capacity.
13.20.250   System Improvement Design.
13.20.300   Agency Agreement.
13.20.350   Private Sewage Connection, Ownership, and Repair.
13.20.400   Sewer Connection Fee.
13.20.450   Protection of the Existing Public Sewer.
13.20.500   System Improvement Construction.
13.20.600   Fees.
13.20.100   Acronyms and Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following acronyms and definitions are
provided.
   A.   Acronyms.
      1.   "AAC" means the Arizona Administrative Code.
      2.   "ADEQ" means the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality or any
successor agency.
      3.   "BCS" means Business Connection Sewer.
      4.   "BOS" means Board of Supervisors.
      5.   "GPD" means Gallons Per Day.
      6.   "HCS" means House Connection Sewer.
      7.   "OSHA" means Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
      8.   "PCC" means Pima County Code.
      9.   "SIP" means Sewer Improvement Plan.
      10.   "WSA" means Wastewater Service Agreement.
   B.   Definitions.
      1.    "Accept", "Accepted", or "Acceptance" means the written notice from
the County agreeing to the concept presented in the plans, studies, or reports
required as part of a review submittal.
      2.   "Agency" means a Unit of federal or state government or a federally
recognized Indian tribe. The term "Agency" does not include school districts.
      3.   "Applicant" means a Person requesting permission: to construct a
system improvement; to connect a property or a Unit to the Public Sewer; or to
conduct construction activities in the vicinity of the Public Sewer.
      4.   "Approve", "Approved", "Approval", or "Approvable" means the
County's written notice confirming that a submittal complies with the
Department's current "Engineering Design Standards" and "Standard
Specifications and Details for Construction."
      5.   "Area Under Development" means the property for which Wastewater
service is requested by the Applicant plus the rights-of-way and utility
easements that abut this property.
      6.   "Assigned" or "Assignable" means a Sewer Connection Fee Credit may
be Transferred to a third party by the Applicant as authorized pursuant to a
written WSA with the County.
      7.   "Augment" or "Augmentation" or "Augmenting" means the construction
of a system improvement for the purpose of increasing the capacity of the
Public Sewer.
      8.   "Base Pipe Size" means the minimum pipe size required to convey the
predicted peak dry-weather flow from the Area Under Development without
exceeding a flow depth ratio of 0.75 d/D (where d is the depth of flow and D is
the diameter of the pipe) based on the Manning equation, using an "n" value of
0.013.
      9.   "Business Connection Sewer" means the Private Sewer connecting a
non-residential building to the Public Sewer. See "Service Lateral."
      10.   "Capacity Allocation" means a formal commitment by the Department
for Public Sewer and treatment capacity for a proposed development.
      11.   "Clearance" means the written Acceptance of a third-party
construction activity within proximity of the Public Sewer.
      12.   "Commercial/Industrial" means a property zoned or used for
recognized commercial or industrial uses. Commercial/Industrial uses include,
but are not limited to: restaurants; bars; laundromats; hotels; motels;
offices; in-home businesses with restroom facilities provided primarily for
customer use; service stations; barber shops; beauty salons; hospitals; nursing
homes; schools; churches; penal institutions; car washes; medical and dental
laboratories; pet clinics; bakeries; industries; manufacturing; machinery; and
meat packing.
      13.   "Construction Documents" means plans, specifications, submittals,
special provisions, and any other documents required by the County for
construction of a system improvement or a connection to the Public Sewer.
      14.   "Construction Permit" means an authorization for the construction
of a system improvement or a connection to the Public Sewer.
      15.   "Contractor" means a Person, acting as an Applicant's agent and who
is, at all times while performing activities regulated by this chapter,
licensed by the Arizona Registrar of Contractors and bonded and insured to act
in the capacity of a Contractor for the type of activity performed.
      16.   "County" means Pima County, a political subdivision of the State of
Arizona governing Pima County, Arizona.
      17.   "Credit" or "Sewer Connection Fee Credit" means a reduction against
the Sewer Connection Fee for eligible construction costs and engineering fees,
not including easement costs, incurred by a Developer at the request of the
County.
      18.   "Department" means the Pima County Regional Wastewater Reclamation
Department or any successor County department.
      19.   "Developer" means a Person contracting with the County to design
and construct a system improvement or connection to the Public Sewer.
      20.   "Development" means one or more properties in common ownership
which are under consideration for service or served by the Department.
      21.   "Director" means the Director of the Department or any successor
County department, including the Director's delegates, and any Person who is,
by operation of law, authorized to carry out the Director's functions.
      22.   "Downstream" means the existing Off-site sanitary sewer system, a
lower pipe elevation than the referenced Area Under Development where the
Development makes connection to the existing sanitary sewer.
      23.   "Easement" means a nonpossessory right created by grant,
reservation, agreement prescription or necessary implication, which one has to
enter upon, cross over, or use land of another for a specific purpose.
      24.   "Flow-through" means wastewater originating from future Development
that would flow through a sanitary sewer located within an Area Under
Development or municipality.
      25.   "House Connection Sewer" means the private sanitary sewer
connecting a residential building and the Public Sewer. The term "HCS" does not
include sewers connecting multi-family buildings to the PSCS. See "Service
Lateral."
      26.   "Multi-family" means more than one residential Unit on a single
lot. This includes duplexes, townhomes, condominiums, and apartments. Multi-
family connections are commercial connections.
      27.   "Non-income Generating" means a dwelling that is homeowner occupied
at the discretion of the Department Director and is not managed or owned by a
limited liability company (LLC), real estate investment company, property
management company, or other entity primarily to generate revenue through
rental income or leasing.
      28.   "Off-site System Improvement" means a necessary system improvement
outside of the boundaries of an Area Under Development in order to connect to
the Public Sewer.
      29.   "Over-sizing" or "Over-sized" means a department-requested increase
in a new pipe size to accommodate system improvement capacity beyond that
determined by the department as necessary to serve the Area Under Development.
      30.   "Owner" means a Person who holds an indicia or proof of ownership
for a property.
      31.   "Person" means an individual, association, company, commission¸
corporation, estate, firm, interstate body, joint stock company, municipality,
partnership, political subdivision of the state, state, trust, or the United
States Government.
      32.   "Private Connection" means [noun] the point at which a Private
Sewer is permanently connected to the Public Sewer; or [verb] the permanent
connection of a Private Sewer to the Public Sewer.
      33.   "Private Sewer" means a privately-owned sanitary sewer or sanitary
sewer system and related facilities designed to convey Sanitary Sewage from one
or more residences or other buildings (including commercial and industrial-use
structures) to the Public Sewer System. The term includes, but is not limited
to, House Connection Sewers and privately-owned pump stations.
      34.   "Property" means a parcel or parcels of land under common control
or ownership.
      35.   "Public Sewer" means all parts of the public sanitary sewer system
that convey or support the conveyance and operation of Sewage (both residential
and Commercial/Industrial).
      36.   "Public Sewer System" means the full Wastewater system owned by
Pima County, including all gravity mains; pumping systems; treatment and
disposal facilities; and all appurtenances required to collect, convey, treat,
monitor, measure, control, store, reclaim, discharge, or recharge the liquid,
gaseous, and solid phases of Sewage.
      37.   "Residential" means one residential structure on a single lot which
is zoned as single family residential and which may include detached
structures.
      38.   "Responsible Party" means for a property, the owner of the property
at the time it was initially connected to the Public Sewer or the owner at the
time of any subsequent increase in Water Meter Size.
      39.   "Right-of-way" means a general term, denoting a strip of land,
property, or interest therein, acquired for or dedicated to transportation and
to other public works purposes.
      40.   "Schedule of Values" means the Department's compiled list of
material and labor costs in the current local market used to estimate the cost
of sanitary sewer improvement construction. The Department will periodically
update the listed costs.
      41.   "Seller" means the entity financially responsible for the design
and construction of contributed Public Sewer infrastructure.
      42.   "Service Lateral" means the Private Sewer line between a
residential, commercial, industrial, or Multi-family building and its
connection to the Public Sewer. The term includes, but is not limited to,
"House Connection Sewer" and "Business Connection Sewer."
      43.   "Sewage" means waste discharged from toilets, baths, sinks,
lavatories, laundries, drains, and other plumbing fixtures in residences,
institutions, public and business buildings, industrial sources, mobile homes,
and other places of human habitation, employment, or recreation.
      44.   "Sewer" means a system of pipes for conveyance for Sewage into
which there is no intentional admission of stormwater, surface water,
groundwater, or materials toxic to Wastewater treatment processes, unless
authorized by the Department.
      45.   "Sewer Connection Fee" means an allocation to each User of the
User's estimated share of the capital cost to provide Wastewater conveyance and
treatment capacity.
      46.   "Sewer improvement plan Improvement Plan" means the set of design
drawings prepared by an Arizona registered professional engineer or architect
and intended for the construction of a system improvement.
      47.   "Small Activity Construction" means minor construction activity
impacting the Public Sewer such as:
         a.   Certain Service Lateral taps into the Public Sewer;
         b.   Single manhole construction;
         c.   Manhole adjustment or reconstruction; and
         d.   Change of pipe or material that does not affect the grade or
location of the existing Public Sewer.
      48.   "Special Facility" means a system improvement intended to be
Transferred into the Public Sewer, and which requires additional operation and
maintenance expenditures above those generally associated with gravity sanitary
sewers. The definition of "Special Facility" includes, but is not limited to,
pump station systems or odor control systems.
      49.   "Stop Construction Order" means a verbal or written order given to
the Contractor's senior on-site representative.
      50.   "Surcharge Fees" means charges imposed by the County on Property
Owners to offset the financial burden associated with the construction of the
System Improvement. Surcharge Fees must be paid either before or at the same
time as the Sewer Connection Fee for each Unit that is being connected.
      51.   "System Improvement" means new Sewage conveyance components that
are owned, designed, permitted, constructed, and tested by a third party and
which are intended for Transfer to County ownership.
      52.   "Temporary Connection" means a connection to the Public Sewer that
is intended only for provision of short-term sanitary sewer service to a non-
permanent facility. Permission to make or maintain a Temporary Connection is
not a valid permanent connection.
      53.   "Transfer" or "Transferred" means a legal conveyance of a System
Improvement or Private Sewer, following County's agreement to receive, from a
private party to County ownership and includes compliance with AAC R18-9-A304,
Notice of Transfer.
      54.   "Undeveloped Properties" means a parcel or property that does not
have a septic system or has never been connected to the Public Sewer.
      55.   "Unit" means an element of property Development, either dwelling or
building, which can be identified as an individual Sewage discharge point for
purposes of wastewater flow calculations and Sewer Connection Fee assessment.
      56.   "User" means a Person who discharges Sewage to the Public Sewer
System.
      57.   "Wastewater" See "Sewage".
      58.   "Wastewater Service Agreement" means a written and fully executed
contract between the County and Applicant concerning provision of sanitary
sewer service to an Area Under Development.
      59.   "Water Meter Size" means the size of meter supplied by a municipal
corporation, special taxing district, or private water company for purposes of
determining Sewer Connection Fee. For private wells/private water systems,
system flow capacity is used to determine Water Meter Size based on City of
Tucson's Water Meter Sizing Guidelines.
(Ord. No. 2025-13 § 1 (part), 2025; Ord. No. 2023-9 § 1, 2023; Ord. 2019-20 § 1
(part), 2019; Ord. 2016-29 § 2, 2016: Ord. 2012-27 §§ 1-15, 2012; Ord. 2006-51
§ 2, 2006; Ord. 2005-112 §§ 1, 2, 3, 2005; Ord. 2005-61 § 1, 2005; Ord. 2004-10
§ 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 2003-29 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 2001-20 § 1 (part), 2001;
Ord. 2000-6 § 1 (part), 2000; Ord. 1997-97 § 1 (part), 1997; Ord. 1996-18 § 1
(part), 1996)
13.20.150   General Purpose and Applicability.
   For the entirety of
Chapter 13.20, the following statements apply.
   A.   Documents incorporated by reference.
      1.   "Pima County Engineering Design Standards" (current adopted
edition).
      2.   "Pima County Standard Specifications and Details for Construction"
(current adopted edition).
   B.   System Improvements and Private Connections must be in full compliance
with the following:
      1.   All requirements of AAC, Title 18, Chapters 5 and 9; and
      2.   All requirements of PCC
Chapter 7.21 Article II, entitled "Sewage System Construction."
   C.   The Director is authorized to develop a variance process for the
Applicant to address deviations from the "Engineering Design Standards" and
"Standard Specifications and Details for Construction."
   D.   The Department has authority to assess fees for customer services
pertaining to the review, permitting, and inspection of System Improvements and
Private Connections to the Public Sewer, and for all costs and services to
support the provisions in
Chapter 13.20.
   E.   The Department has authority to charge for system infrastructure
through a Sewer Connection Fee.
   F.   The Department has the authority to fund and construct system
infrastructure and to seek reimbursement in the form of a Surcharge. See
"Surcharge Fees".
   G.   The Department has authority to charge for Special Facility operation
and maintenance costs.
   H.   For unique situations, the Director has the authority to apply
interpretations of
Chapter 13.20.
(Ord. No. 2025-13 § 1 (part), 2025; Ord. 2019-20 § 1 (part), 2019)
13.20.200   Capacity.
   A.   Purpose and applicability. This section provides requirements for
managing the capacity of the conveyance and treatment systems meeting the
requirements of AAC R18-9-C305. 2.05 General Permit; Capacity, Management,
Operation, and Maintenance of a Sewage Collection System, and R18-9-E301. 4.01
General Permit: Sewage Collection Systems. The Section applies to new or
increases in potential discharge to the Public Sewer.
   B.   Determination of capacity availability. The Department manages the
Public Sewer and treatment capacity needs using three types of analysis. If
capacity is not available, the Department will advise the Applicant of
Applicant's options for constructing additional capacity.
      1.   A Type I Response provides a general analysis of the accessibility
and capacity of the conveyance and treatment systems existing at the time the
analysis is performed. It is not an allocation of capacity.
      2.   A Type II Response provides a more precise analysis of capacity
availability existing at the time the analysis is performed and is based on the
estimated demand for the proposed Development. It is not an allocation of
capacity.
      3.   A Type III Response provides a definitive response regarding the
capacity requested for the Applicant's Development and is required for all new
or potential increases in discharges to the Public Sewer. This may be an
allocation of capacity.
         a.   When a Type III Response allocates capacity for the Applicant's
Development, it expires within one-hundred eighty (180) calendar days. If an
ADEQ Construction Authorization or building permit is issued within that
period, the allocation expires two (2) years following the issuance date.
         b.   If capacity is not fully available, the Applicant will enter into
a WSA to construct System Improvements required to achieve the necessary
capacity.
         c.   Single family Residential Development for only one residence is
exempt.
         d.   The Type III Response is required before Approval of a Private
Sewer connection or a SIP.
(Ord. No. 2025-13 § 1 (part), 2025; Ord. 2019-20 § 1 (part), 2019)
13.20.250   System Improvement Design.
   A.   Purpose and general requirements.
      1.   This section provides requirements for the design of a System
Improvement. These requirements are intended to protect public health and
welfare as well as the environment. They also ensure adequate County access for
operation, maintenance, and repair of the Public Sewer.
      2.   The Department has absolute discretion to determine whether all or
part of a Developer proposed sanitary sewer system will become part of the
Public Sewer.
      3.   The Department may require an Applicant to provide a System
Improvement for capacity and Flow-through service for future connecting
Developments. The Department may also require an Applicant to Augment the
Downstream Public Sewer in order to provide capacity for the Applicant's
Development. and future connecting Developments.
      4.   A System Improvement required for service to the Area Under
Development will be provided at the sole expense of the Applicant.
      5.   As a condition of Approval, off-site Easements recorded by separate
instrument must be identified on the final sealed SIP by the docket and page or
sequence number.
      6.   An Approved SIP is valid for the term of the ADEQ Construction
Authorization, or two (2) years from date of Approval, whichever is later.
   B.   Final plats, Easements, and Rights-of-way.
      1.   Prior to recording the Sewer Improvement Easements, the County will
review and Accept final subdivision plats or final Easements descriptions by
separate instrument. Documents will delineate Easements or Rights-of-way for
the proposed Public Sewer.
      2.   Easements and Rights-of-way will conform to those shown in the SIP.
   C.   Wastewater Service Agreements.
      1.   The Department may require an Applicant to enter into a WSA. The WSA
will fully document any additional construction requirements, compensation
commitments, or other unique considerations.
      2.   An Applicant's failure to fully comply with the terms and conditions
of the WSA will render void any County Type III Response or commitment to
provide Wastewater service to future connections within the Area Under
Development.
      3.   Reimbursement - Sewer Connection Fee Credit. The County may enter
into a WSA with an Applicant for Credit to cover the incremental cost of a
System Improvement incurred for a Department-required Augmentation (Over-sizing
or deepening) beyond the size/depth required to serve the Area Under
Development or for a Department-required extension of the System Improvement
for purposes of providing service for potential future Development not a part
of or owned by the Area Under Development.
         a.   The incremental construction cost for Over-sizing is the
difference in eligible construction costs and engineering fees between the Base
Pipe Size designed to serve the Area Under Development and the System
Improvement size actually constructed at the direction of the Department. The
Department will determine the required Over-sized System Improvement. Eligible
construction costs and engineering fees for oversizing-related incremental
construction costs do not include reimbursement for those items listed in §
109-5.03, Non-Allowable Charges, of the Pima Association of Governments issued
"Standard Specifications and Detail for Public Improvements" as it may, from
time to time, be amended.
         b.   The incremental construction cost for deepening of the sanitary
sewer is the difference in eligible construction costs and engineering fees
between the design depth required to serve the Area Under Development and the
System Improvement depth actually constructed at the direction of the
Department. The Department will determine the required System Improvement
depth.
         c.   For Flow-through extensions, the Credit value will be determined
based on eligible construction costs and engineering fees for the required
length of extension. The Department will determine the required extension
System Improvement to provide Flow-through.
         d.   The value of Credit will be calculated using the Department's
Schedule of Values.
         e.   In the event Applicant can demonstrate, in a form and manner
acceptable to the Department, that the Schedule of Values undervalues the
actual, reasonable aggregate cost of the constructed Over-sized System
Improvement by twenty-five (25) percent or more, the Department will allow the
use of actual construction costs to calculate a Credit value.
         f.   Credits will only be applied as an offset to the Sewer Connection
Fee. Under no circumstances will the County issue cash refunds for Credits.
         g.   The Credits will be valid for ten (10) years from the execution
of the WSA by the BOS.
         h.   A Credit is Assignable.
         i.   The value of Credits applied to offset the Sewer Connection Fee
for connections within an Area Under Development cannot exceed the total Sewer
Connection Fee.
      4.   Effective July 01, 2025, Discounts will no longer be issued to
future or new Developments. Existing WSA's will proceed under the existing
Discount process but will Expire December 31, 2034.
      5.   Special Facility.
         a.   A Special Facility must meet all Engineering Design Standards,
Department specifications for unique components, and operational requirements
of the Department.
         b.   A WSA may be required to address unique circumstances of the
Special Facility Transfer or operation.
(Ord. No. 2025-13 § 1 (part), 2025; Ord. 2019-20 § 1 (part), 2019)
13.20.300   Agency Agreement.
   A.   Applicability. This section applies to an Agency that has or will enter
into an agreement with the County for provision of Wastewater service to
Property owned or managed by the Agency. Such Wastewater may include management
or ownership of all or a portion of the sanitary sewer facilities located
within the boundaries of the Property owned or managed by the Agency.
   B.   Wastewater service. Wastewater service will be provided to an Agency
through a written agreement containing the following elements:
      1.   Compliance with the PCC as set forth in
Chapter 13.20 - Construction, Connections, and Fees;
      2.   Authorization of County to access, without unreasonable
restrictions, the County-owned or managed sanitary sewer facilities for
construction, repair, inspection, maintenance, and operation purposes;
      3.   Agreement to obtain a Type III Response from the Department prior to
any new construction of structures or installation capable of direct or
indirect discharge to the Public Sewer;
      4.   Agreement to pay all appropriate fees, including, but not limited to
a Sewer Connection Fee for all potential discharges to the Public Sewer from
Wastewater sources located within the Agency's boundaries;
      5.   Provisions for the County's enforcement of
Chapter 13.36 Industrial Wastewater within the Agency's Private Sewer or, in
the alternative, the Agency's agreement to enact and enforce its own
Commercial/Industrial Wastewater pretreatment program that is fully compliant
with 40 Code of Federal Regulations, part 403 and applicable to all discharges
to the Private Sewer and Public Sewer located within the Agency boundaries;
      6.   Periodic coordination with the Department concerning the Agency's
Development planning;
      7.   Provisions for the County's use of the Public Sewer located within
the boundaries of Agency for Flow-through purposes; and
      8.   Such other requirements as may be necessary to properly define the
relationship between the parties.
(Ord. No. 2025-13 § 1 (part), 2025; Ord. 2019-20 § 1 (part), 2019)
13.20.350   Private Sewage Connection, Ownership, and Repair.
   A.   Private Connection to the Public Sewer.
      1.   No Private Connection may be approved and constructed until the
location (point) and method of connection are reviewed by the County, a Type
III Response is acquired, and the Sewer Connection Fee is paid or other means
of payment are established by the Director.
      2.   The County may require Flow-through public sanitary sewers to serve
one or more future Developments.
      3.   Private Connection Approvals are valid for two (2) years.
      4.   Issuance of a building permit does not constitute evidence that the
County has Approved the Private Connection.
      5.   Temporary Connections, in lieu of Private Connection, are allowed
with written permission granted by the County.
         a.   A Temporary Connection will be charged appropriate fees.
         b.   Temporary Connections may remain in place for two (2) years,
unless otherwise extended by the Director.
         c.   User fees will apply to all discharges from the Temporary
Connection. See
Chapter 13.24 of this title for sanitary sewer user fees.
         d.   Temporary Connections fees may be applied toward Sewer Connection
Fees when converting the Temporary Connection to a permanent connection
provided the Applicant applies to establish a Private Connection.
   B.   Service Lateral and Private Sewer ownership and maintenance
responsibility.
      1.   All Service Laterals and private sewage systems, including the
portions of Service Laterals traversing public Rights-of-way, are owned by the
Owners of the properties being served.
      2.   It is the Owner's responsibility to maintain the Service Lateral and
Private Sewer, including that portion of the Service Lateral located within the
public Right-of-way.
   C.   Single family Residential Service Lateral repair by the Department.
      1.   The Department may repair portions of a Service Lateral provided:
         a.   The Service Lateral serves only an existing, single-family
residence;
         b.   The portion of the Service Lateral being repaired or replaced
lies entirely within a public Right-of-way;
         c.   Department funds are available for the repair;
         d.   The damage to the Service Lateral was not caused by the Owner or
its agents;
         e.   The Owner has demonstrated, through video or other appropriate
methods, that the damage or blockage is located within public Right-of-way; and
         f.   The Owner agrees, in writing, to provide to the Department all
property access necessary for conducting the repair activities.
      2.   Unless the damage was caused by County actions, the Department is
not authorized to repair any portion of a Service Lateral serving commercial,
industrial, or Multi-family building(s), nor is the Department authorized to
conduct any Service Lateral repair activity, regardless of ownership, outside
of a public Right-of-way.
      3.   The County will not be responsible for any damages resulting from
Department's failure to perform or to timely perform an evaluation or repair of
a Service Lateral pursuant to this Section unless the initial Service Lateral
damage was primarily the result of County activities.
      4.   Following Department repair activity, pursuant to this Section, the
repaired or replaced Service Lateral will remain the Owner's Property.
   D.   Transfer of private sewage systems. Upon request, the Director has the
discretion to Transfer a Private Sewer provided:
      1.   The system complies with all requirements of the current version of
the "Pima County Engineering Design Standards" and meets operational
requirements of the Department;
      2.   The Department has determined that the system components are in good
repair and capable of operating with only routine maintenance; and
      3.   The Director has determined that the Transfer is consistent with
current and planned service responsibilities.
(Ord. No. 2025-13 § 1 (part), 2025; Ord. 2019-20 § 1 (part), 2019)
13.20.400   Sewer Connection Fee.
   A.   General requirements.
      1.   Persons making new connections to the Public Sewer or increasing
their potential to discharge to the Public Sewer through an increase in Water
Meter Size must pay a Sewer Connection Fee to the County. The Sewer Connection
Fee represents the County's allocation to Owners of the capital cost to provide
Wastewater conveyance and treatment capacity and is based on the potential
volume of discharge created by water service to a Property. It is not a
permitting fee.
      2.   For an existing connection to the Public Sewer, an additional Sewer
Connection Fee must be paid prior to installation of a larger Water Meter Size
or, for Users receiving water from private wells, an increase in well-supplied
water capacity.
   B.   Determining the Sewer Connection Fee for new Private Connections to the
Public Sewer.
      1.   The Sewer Connection Fee for Applicants requesting service for new
connections are based on Water Meter Size(s). Sufficient documentation is
required to allow the County to determine the appropriate Sewer Connection Fee.
      2.   For property served by a well, Applicant-provided documentation will
be used to determine equivalent Water Meter Size.
      3.   Sewer Connection Fees are shown in §
13.20.600.
   C.   Facilities with an active private water meter(s) connected to the
Public Sewer and a valid Sewer Connection Fee record can relocate the same size
water meter within the same parcel without incurring additional Sewer
Connection Fees. In the instance there is an increase in the existing Water
Meter Size, well-supplied water capacity for Residential or Commercial/
Industrial/Multi-family, the difference in the fees paid and the current fee
required per §
13.20.600 will be assessed. There will be no reimbursement of Sewer Connection
Fees for a reduction in Water Meter Size. If no Sewer Connection Fee records
are found, the Department may Accept an account who has paid for Wastewater
User Fees since 2010 and charge the difference in Water Meter Sizes based on
the current Sewer Connection Fee schedule.
   D.   For unique situations not addressed above, the Director will have the
discretion to calculate the Sewer Connection Fee.
   E.   Sewer Connection Fee refund.
      1.   Upon request, the County will refund the Sewer Connection Fee paid
for a proposed new connection of a Property if no physical connection to the
Public Sewer is ultimately made; or if the physical changes in a private water
supply system necessary to increase flow are not installed.
      2.   Refund of the Sewer Connection Fee payment negates the Applicant's
permission to connect to the Public Sewer, Applicant's permission to increase
discharges to the Public Sewer, and all Capacity Allocations issued for the
Property.
   F.   Actions to collect an outstanding Sewer Connection Fee.
      1.   In the following circumstances, the Sewer Connection Fee will be
considered outstanding when a Sewer Connection Fee has not been paid at the
time of building permit issuance or if there is an increase in the potential to
discharge resulting from: an increase in the number of water meters serving a
Property; an increase in Water Meter Size(s); or an increase in the delivery
capacity of a private water supply system.
      2.   The Responsible Party, at the time the outstanding Sewer Connection
Fee discovery, is responsible for payment of the outstanding Sewer Connection
Fee, regardless of subsequent changes in Property ownership.
      3.   The amount due includes the outstanding Sewer Connection Fee plus
interest on that amount calculated from the date the Sewer Connection Fee
should have been paid.
      4.   Interest is assessed at the current prime rate plus one (1) percent.
      5.   Errors or omissions in reporting a Sewer Connection Fee to the
Department by the Responsible Party within sixty (60) calendar days of the
finalized building permit will not be charged interest or other expenses.
      6.   The Department will provide written notification to the Responsible
Party that required fees and interest are outstanding. The required notice is
deemed to have been given when the written notification, addressed to the
Responsible Party, has been deposited in the U.S. mail, postpaid.
      7.   Payment in full or arrangements for a payment plan must be made
within sixty (60) calendar days of the notice date.
      8.   Should payment in full or arrangements for a payment plan not be
made within sixty (60) days, the Director is authorized to take all appropriate
actions deemed necessary to collect the unpaid amount plus costs of recovery
including, but not limited to:
         a.   Attorney fees and costs and staff administrative efforts; and
         b.   Recording of a lien on the subject Property or filing suit in the
appropriate state court in Pima County.
(Ord. No. 2025-13 § 1 (part), 2025; Ord. 2019-20 § 1 (part), 2019)
13.20.450   Protection of the Existing Public Sewer.
   A.   Purpose and general requirements. This section provides for the
protection of the Public Sewer from: direct or indirect damage due to third-
party activities; encroachment in the Easement; and interference with
Department access to the Public Sewer. This section does not apply to
authorized activities that modify the Public Sewer.
   B.   All discharges to the Public Sewer must comply with the limits and
prohibitions of
Chapter 13.36 of this title.
   C.   Discharges of swimming pool water to the Public Sewer in excess of
fifteen (15) gallons per minute are prohibited unless prior notice has been
given to the Department and the Department has determined the proposed
discharge will not harm the Public Sewer or cause any portion of the Public
Sewer to exceed its design capacity.
   D.   Discharges of stormwater, surface water, and groundwater to the Public
Sewer are prohibited without prior authorization.
   E.   If the Applicant is only requesting access to the Public Sewer for
evaluation purposes, then the Department may issue a public access manhole
permit.
   F.   All public or private construction projects within a public Right-of-
way or utility Easement occurring in such proximity as to cause harm to impede
access to or impact the subsurface support of the Public Sewer must acquire
Clearance. If necessary, the project may require permitting by the County prior
to the start of construction. As a condition of a Clearance, the Department may
require an inspection observation permit issued by the Department for personnel
to witness construction activity occurring in the vicinity of the Public Sewer.
(Ord. No. 2025-13 § 1 (part), 2025; Ord. 2019-20 § 1 (part), 2019)
13.20.500   System Improvement Construction.
   A.   Purpose and general requirements. This Section provides requirements
for permitting, constructing, and inspecting of System Improvement, and
inspection of Small Activity Construction. Prior to any System Improvement
construction activity, or connection to the Public Sewer, an appropriate County
Construction Permit is required.
      1.   Liability. An Applicant and its Contractor are jointly and severally
liable to the County for any damage to the Public Sewer caused by activities of
the Applicant or its Contractor when constructing a System Improvement or when
conducting construction activities in proximity to or on the Public Sewer.
      2.   Discharges prohibited. Unauthorized discharge to the Public Sewer
from a new or modified System Improvement is prohibited prior to Transfer of
the System Improvement to the County. An Applicant or Applicant's Contractor
that allows unauthorized Sewage flow into or through a System Improvement,
prior to Transfer to the County, may be required to clean the affected length
of the System Improvement and take any other actions as directed by the
Department to restore the interior of the System Improvement to a like-new
condition.
      3.   Indemnification. As a condition of any permit to work within a
public Right-of-way or utility Easement, the Applicant will indemnify, defend
and hold harmless the County, its officers, Departments, employees, and agents
from and against any and all suits, actions, legal or administrative
proceedings, claims, demands, or damages of any kind or nature arising out of
the exercise of the permit which are attributed to any act or omission of the
Applicant, its agents, employees, or anyone acting under its direction,
control, or on its behalf. In the event suit will be brought and the County is
named as a defendant, all costs for counsel, either house counsel or retained
counsel, and any other court costs associated with defending itself will be
paid by the Applicant.
      4.   Warranty. The Seller shall warrant all contributed infrastructure of
the Public Sewer be free from any failures or defects due to poor workmanship,
design, or materials. Contractors installing Public Sewer infrastructure,
contracted through Pima County, are not under obligation to warrant design.
Work that does not comply is considered defective. Should any failure or defect
appear within a period of two (2) years from the date of Transfer to County,
Seller agrees to make necessary repairs as determined by County in accordance
with County-Approved Sewer Improvement Plans, and in accordance with Pima
County Engineering Design Standards, and Standard Specifications and Details
for Construction, at the sole cost of Seller. Should the Seller fail to
promptly correct any failure or defect, County may take whatever actions it
deems necessary to remedy the failure or defect and the Seller will promptly
reimburse County for any expenses or damages it incurs if Seller does not
correct the failure or defect. Aside from Seller's obligation to make
corrections within that two (2)-year period, nothing contained in this section
shall be construed to establish a period of limitation with respect to Seller's
liability for any failures or defects found under the contract.
   B.   System Improvement Construction Permit.
      1.   A System Improvement will be permitted, inspected, and tested
following Department procedures prior to Transfer to County ownership.
      2.   A System Improvement Construction Permit is valid for two (2) years
or the term of the ADEQ construction authorization, whichever expires first.
      3.   The System Improvement Construction Permit may not be renewed.
      4.   Work that does not meet the Approved Construction Documents,
engineering design standards, standard specifications and details for
construction, or submittals is subject to rejection.
      5.   During the construction of the System Improvement, the Contractor
will provide OSHA-compliant access to the trench, installed pipe, and
appurtenances to allow for inspections by the Department or, as appropriate,
the local governmental jurisdiction, prior to closing the excavation. Failure
to provide access may cause re-excavation of work at the Contractor's expense.
      6.   Stop Construction Order.
         a.   The County is empowered to issue a Stop Construction Order for a
specific construction activity, task, or entire project when just cause
requires the County to:
            i.   Protect public health or safety or the state of the
environment;
            ii.   Prevent the introduction of unallowable (in type and/or
quantity) foreign material into the Public Sewer to the detriment of the Public
Sewer or its ability to convey or treat Sewage;
            iii.   Prevent the immediate introduction of any surface water to
the Public Sewer;
            iv.   Prevent damage to Public Sewer from construction activities.
         b.   The Contractor's failure to comply with a Stop Construction Order
will result in a judicial action for injunctive relief.
   C.   Small activity Construction Permit.
      1.   All Small Activity Construction on the Public Sewer must be
permitted, inspected, and tested consistent with Department procedures.
      2.   During construction, the Contractor will provide OSHA-compliant
access to the trench for inspection of the Service Lateral tap, manhole, and
pipe work.
      3.   Work that does not meet the Approved Construction Documents,
standard specifications and details for construction, or submittals is subject
to rejection.
      4.   Stop Construction Order. When just cause requires the County to
protect public health or safety or the state of the environment or to prevent
damage to the Public Sewer, the County is empowered to issue a Stop
Construction Order. The Contractor's failure to comply with a Stop Construction
Order. will result in a judicial action for injunctive relief.
(Ord. No. 2025-13 § 1 (part), 2025; Ord. No. 2023-9 § 2, 2023; Ord. 2019-20 § 1
(part), 2019)
13.20.600   Fees.
   A.   Sewer Connection Fee. - See §
13.20.400
 
Water Meter    FY 2025-2026  FY 2026-2027 Fee FY 2027-2028 Fee FY 2028-2029 Fee
Size           Fee per Water per Water        per Water        per Water
               Connection    Connection       Connection       Connection
5/8", 3/4", or $4,314        $4,443           $4,576           $4,714
1"
 
Commercial/Industrial/Multi-Family Wastewater Utility Fee
Water Meter FY 2025-2026 Fee FY 2026-2027 Fee FY 2027-2028 Fee FY 2028-2029 Fee
Size        per Water        per Water        per Water        per Water
            Connection       Connection       Connection       Connection
Commercial/Industrial/Multi-Family Wastewater Utility Fee
Water Meter     FY 2025-2026  FY 2026-2027  FY 2027-2028 Fee FY 2028-2029 Fee
Size            Fee per Water Fee per Water per Water        per Water
                Connection    Connection    Connection       Connection
5/8" or 3/4"    $4,313.64     $4,443.05     $4,576.34        $4,713.63
1"              $8,996.02     $9,265.90     $9,543.88        $9,830.19
1½"            $28,676.23    $29,536.52    $30,422.61       $31,335.29
2"              $74,040.52    $76,261.74    $78,549.59       $80,906.08
3"              $172,406.55   $177,578.75   $182,906.11      $188,393.29
4"              $385,839.03   $397,414.20   $409,336.63      $421,616.73
Greater than 4" Case by Case  Case by Case  Case by Case     Case by Case
                Basis         Basis         Basis            Basis
 
   The Sewer Connection Fee for Commercial/Industrial/Multi-Family dischargers
with Water Meter Size greater than four (4)-inches in size will be calculated
on a case-by-case basis using the formula
   Sewer Connection Fee (in dollars) = C x G x I
   where:
   "C" represents the cost of capacity factor of twenty-one dollars and thirty-
four cents ($21.34) per gallon per day to convey and treat Wastewater; "G"
represents the discharge potential resulting from the water connection in
gallons of Wastewater discharged during a peak flow day; and "I" represents a
system inflow and infiltration rate factor of 1.175.
(Ord. No. 2025-13 § 1 (part), 2025; Ord. 2019-20 § 1 (part), 2019)
Chapter 13.24
SANITARY SEWER USER FEES [1] 
13.24.100   General Provisions
13.24.200   Account Management.
13.24.300   Septage Authorization, Receiving, and Billing.
13.24.400   Special Facilities.
13.24.500   Agency.
13.24.600   Tables of Service Fees, Rates, and Administrative Fees.
13.24.100   General Provisions
   A.   Purpose
   This chapter defines how the County will recover Department operating and
maintenance costs associated with the management of Sewage within the Public
Sewer System owned and operated by Pima County.
   B.   Authority
   Pima County is authorized by Arizona Revised Statute (A.R.S.) § 11-264(A) to
"purchase, construct or operate a sewage system, including the collection,
transportation, pumping, treatment and disposal of sewage, and charge fees and
levy taxes". A.R.S. § 11-264(C) provides Pima County with authority to file
liens on property for nonpayment of the Public Sewer System User Fees.
   C.   Definitions
   The following definitions apply throughout this chapter:
      1.   "Agency" means a unit of federal government or state government or a
federally recognized Indian tribe. The term "Agency" does not include school
districts.
      2.   "CCF" means a volume unit of measurement for water of one hundred
cubic feet, which is equivalent to 748 gallons.
      3.   "Chemical Oxygen Demand" or "COD" means the amount of chemically
oxidizable material in Sewage as measured using the most recent U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency-approved procedures specified in Title 40 of
the Code of Federal Regulations.
      4.   "Commercial or Industrial User" means a Person discharging Sewage
into the Public Sewer System from a property zoned or used for recognized
commercial or industrial uses. Commercial and/or Industrial Users include, but
are not limited to: restaurants; bars; laundromats; hotels; motels; offices;
in-home businesses with restroom facilities provided primarily for customer
use; service stations; barber shops; beauty salons; hospitals; nursing homes;
schools; dormitories; churches; penal institutions; utilities; car washes;
commercial, medical, and dental laboratories; pet clinics; bakeries; food
processing facilities; industrial facilities; manufacturing facilities;
machinery fabrication and rehabilitation facilities; and meat packing.
      5.   "County" means Pima County, a political subdivision of the State of
Arizona governing Pima County, Arizona.
      6.   "Day" means calendar day unless otherwise specified.
      7.   "Department" means the Pima County Regional Wastewater Reclamation
Department or any successor County Department.
      8.   "Director" means the Director of the Department or any successor
County department, including delegates and any Person who is by operation of
law authorized to carry out the Director's functions.
      9.   "Fiscal Year" means the Fiscal Year of the County, initiating
annually on July 1 and ending on June 30.
      10.   "Hazardous Waste" means any solid waste or combination of solid
wastes meeting the definition of "Hazardous Waste" found in Title 40 of the
Code of Federal Regulations.
      11.   "House Connection Sewer" means the Private Sewer connecting a
residential building and the Public Sewer.
      12.   "Inspector" means a County staff member authorized by the Director
to inspect Sewage generation, conveyance, treatment, and disposal facilities.
      13.   "Industrial Wastewater" means Wastewater generated in a commercial
or industrial process.
      14.   "Irrigation Meter" means the Water Meter used to measure potable
water flow to uses that do not directly or indirectly result in discharges to
the Public Sewer System.
      15.   "Multi-Family Facility" means a building or group of buildings,
each containing more than one Residential Unit, where the Residential Units are
not individually metered for water.
      16.   "Multi-Family User" means a Person managing or controlling a Multi-
Family Facility discharging into the Public Sewer System.
      17.   "Non-Residential User" means any User not meeting the definition of
Residential User.
      18.   "Person" means an individual, association, company, commission¸
corporation, estate, firm, governmental body, interstate body, joint stock
company, municipality, partnership, political subdivision of the state, state,
trust, or the United States Government.
      19.   "Private Sewer" means a privately-owned sanitary sewer or sanitary
sewer system and related facilities designed to convey Sewage from one or more
residences or other buildings (including commercial and industrial use
structures) to the Public Sewer System. The term includes, but is not limited
to, House Connection Sewers and privately-owned pump stations.
      20.   "Private Water Company" means any entity, except a governmental
entity or an entity which is established pursuant to A.R.S. Title 48, which
distributes or sells potable water and which is not regulated as a public
service corporation by the Arizona Corporation Commission under a certificate
of public convenience and necessity. A city or town is not a Private Water
Company.
      21.   "Private Well" means a water well not owned by a governmental
entity, special taxing district, or Private Water Company.
      22.   "Public Sewer System" means the full Wastewater system owned by
Pima County, including all gravity sanitary sewer mains; pumping systems;
treatment and disposal facilities; and all appurtenances required to collect,
transport, treat, monitor, measure, control, store, reclaim, discharge, or
recharge the liquid, gaseous, and solid phases of Sewage.
      23.   "Rate" or "R" means the charge in dollars, per one hundred cubic
feet (CCF) of potable water usage, adopted by the Pima County Board of
Supervisors for the discharge of Sewage to the Public Sewer System.
       24.   "Residential Strength Sanitary Sewage" means Sewage produced by a
typical Residential Unit without a commercial or industrial operation or
discharge.
      25.   "Residential Unit" means a building or part of building designed
for occupancy by one family. Residential Unit includes mobile homes located on
separate residential lots or within a mobile home park provided the mobile home
has an individual, single lot monthly water usage Volume measurement meter.
      26.   "Residential User" means a Person discharging Sewage from a
Residential Unit. Each Residential Users will have an individual, single lot
Water Meter, serviced by a Water Company, or will receive potable water from a
Private Well. Residential Users are presumed to discharge Residential Strength
Sanitary Sewage.
      27.   "Sewage" or "Wastewater" means the wastes from toilets, baths,
sinks, lavatories, laundries, drains, and other plumbing fixtures in
residences, institutions, public and business buildings, mobile homes, and
other places of human habitation, employment, or recreation. Sewage includes
non-prohibited Industrial Wastewater.
      28.   "Septage" has the same meaning as the Septage definition found at
subsection 13.36.040(SS) of the Pima County Code.
      29.   "Septage Discharge Permit" means an individual license, control
mechanism, authorization letter, or contract issued by the Director, which
allows Septage discharge into the publicly owned treatment works.
      30.   "Service Fee" or "S" means the fixed monthly charge set by the Pima
County Board of Supervisors and levied on all Users to cover a portion of the
fixed operating and maintenance costs of the Public Sewer System.
      31.   "Sewer" means a system of pipes for conveyance of Sewage into which
there is no intentional admission of storm water, surface water, groundwater,
or materials toxic to Wastewater treatment processes, unless authorized by the
Department.
      32.   "Strength" means a measure of the relative impact of Sewage on
County treatment processes. Strength factors include, but are not limited to,
measurements of Chemical Oxygen Demand and Suspended Solids concentrations.
Other Wastewater constituent concentrations may be monitored and regulated by
the Department as required to comply with state and federal permits and
regulations, to protect the Public Sewer System, and to use in recovery of
associated Wastewater conveyance and treatment costs. For purposes of
calculating User Fees, Residential Strength Sanitary Sewage is used as the
baseline.
      33.   "Strength Adjusted Rate" or "SAR" means the calculated User Fee
rates applicable to Non-Residential Users. It is the Residential Strength
Sanitary Sewage Rate (R) multiplied by a Strength factor (HS) applicable to
each Non-Residential User Class.
      34.   "Suspended Solids" or "SS" means solids which float on or are
suspended in water, Sewage, or industrial wastes, and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Suspended Solids concentrations are measured
using the most recent U.S. Environmental Protection Agency-approved procedures
specified in Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
      35.   "Unauthorized User" means a Person who connects to, or discharges
into the Public Sewer System without the approval of the Department.
      36.   "User" means a Person who discharges Sewage to the Public Sewer
System.
      37.   "User Class" means a grouping of Users having similar discharge
Strength, conducting a similar business, or living in a similar dwelling unit
type.
      38.   "User Class Average" means the total monthly metered water usage
volume for a User Class divided by the number of Users in the User Class. User
Class Average is calculated by the Department at the beginning of each Fiscal
Year using the previous Fiscal Year's Winter Quarter Average.
      39.   "User Fee" means the Rate (R) or Strength Adjusted Rate (SAR) times
the Volume (V) charge plus the fixed monthly service charge levied on Users of
the Public Sewer System pursuant to this chapter.
      40.   "Volume" or "V" means, for the purposes of this chapter, the lesser
of either the User's WQA or the User's actual metered water usage for the
month, in CCFs.
      41.   "Wastewater" means Sewage.
      42.   "Water Company" means any Private Water Company, regulated utility,
special taxing district, or governmental water utility providing potable water
to Users.
      43.   "Water Meter" means a device designed to measure potable water
usage.
      44.   "Winter Quarter Average" or "WQA" means a calculated estimate of
each User's monthly, potable water usage in CCFs during the months of December,
January, and February of the prior Fiscal Year. WQA's are recalculated
annually. The recalculated WQA becomes effective on the first day of the new
Fiscal Year (July 1) and remains effective until the last day of that Fiscal
Year (June 30).
   D.   Use of Funds.
      1.   Operation and Maintenance Expense Priority.
         a.   Revenues from any source will first be applied to meet all
expenses for the operation and maintenance of the Public Sewer System,
excluding Special Facilities.
      b.   Revenues derived from the sale of treatment-related by-products will
be applied to offset the operation and maintenance expenses.
      2.   Bond Indebtedness. After funding the operation and maintenance
expenses of the Public Sewer System, User Fee revenues will be applied Public
Sewer System bonded indebtedness and other Public Sewer System funds in
accordance with the provisions of revenue bond covenants.
   E.   User Fee Review. The Department will annually review User Fee revenues
and prepare a Rate and/or Service Fee adjustment request to the Pima County
Board of Supervisors if projected revenues will be insufficient to meet the
Department's financial requirements. When proposing Rate and Service Fee
revisions, the Department will:
      1.   Maintain a distribution of Public Sewer System operation and
maintenance costs among Users; and
      2.   Generate sufficient revenue to pay the costs of the Public Sewer
System operation and maintenance, and debt service payments.
F. Financial Management System.
      1.   System Maintenance. With the assistance of the Pima County Finance
and Risk Management Department, a balanced financial management system will be
maintained to accurately account for operation and maintenance costs.
      2.    Revenues and Expenditures. The financial management system will be
based on an adequate budget identifying the bases for determining annual
operating and maintenance costs, costs of capacity for growth, and debt service
payments.
(Ord. No. 2025-14 § 1 (part), 2025; Ord. 2016-29 § 1 (part), 2016)
13.24.200   Account Management.
   This section applies to all Users unless the subsection specifically
identifies one or more of the User Classes for specific regulation.
   A.   User Accounts. Prior to discharging into the Public Sewer System, each
User must establish a billing account. Invoices for User Fees will be issued by
either the User's Water Company, if that company provides sanitary sewer
billing services, or by the County or its billing agent.
      1.   Basis. The account billing will be based on the User Class Average
until the User's WQA is available, or unless alternative data (see Section
13.24.200(D) Account Adjustments) acceptable to the Department is provided.
   2.   Activation Fee. Each new User will pay an activation fee to cover the
administrative costs associated with initiating the new account. The activation
fee amount is provided in §
13.24.600, Table 4.
   3.   User Class. Each User is responsible for verifying proper User Class
designation upon receipt of initial billing or the first bill indicating a
change in designation.
   4.   Private Well. Users served by a Private Well must provide notice to the
Department of any change in User or Owner status.
   5.   Account Termination.
      a.   Termination through a Water Company. Users receiving sanitary sewer
bills through a Water Company may terminate sanitary sewer service by providing
notice either to the Water Company or the Department. Failure to provide timely
notice will result in continued User Fee liability.
      b.   Termination through the Department. Users receiving sanitary sewer
bills directly from the Department must terminate sanitary sewer service by
providing notice to the Department. Failure to provide timely notice will
result in continued User Fee liability.
      c.   Voided Billing. If the Department confirms that a property is not
serviced by the Public Sewer System, the User account will be terminated and
all outstanding User Fee bills will be voided.
   B.   User Fee Calculations. All Users must pay a monthly User Fee for Sewage
collection, treatment, and disposal services provided through the Public Sewer
System.
      1.   Residential Monthly User Fee Calculation. Each Residential User's
monthly User Fee is calculated using the following formula:
Monthly Residential User Fee = S + (V x R) where:
S = Service Fee (in dollars)
V = Volume (in CCF)
R = Rate (dollars per CCF)
      2.   Non-Residential Monthly User Fee Calculation. Each Non-Residential
User's monthly User Fee is calculated using the following formula:
Monthly Non-Residential User Fee = S + (V x SAR) where:
S = Service Fee (in dollars)
V = Volume (in CCF)
SAR = Strength Adjusted Rate = R x HS
R = Rate (dollars per CCF)
HS = Strength factor (from 13.24.600, Table 3)
      3.   Explanation of User Fee Calculation Factors.
         a.   Service Fee. The Service Fee is the same for most User Classes
but may be reduced for certain qualified low income Users. Service Fees for all
User Classes are provided in
13.24.600, Table 1. Criteria for applying for income-based reductions are found
in
13.24.200(D)(1).
         b.   Volume. Volume is determined by one of the three following
methods:
            i.   Water Use Metered by a Water Company. For most Users, the
volumetric portion of the User Fee is based on the User's metered potable water
usage data received from a Water Company. The metered water usage is seasonally
adjusted for billing purposes by averaging water usage during the months of
December, January, and February (the    WQA) to account for landscaping
irrigation during summer months.
            ii.   Unmetered Residential Users Connected to a Private Well. For
Residential Users whose water usage is not metered by a Water Company, the User
Class Average will serve as the Volume.
            iii.   Non-Residential Users Connected to a Private Well. This
provision applies to all Non-Residential Users whose potable water use is not
metered by a Water Company.
               1)   Metered Flow. Non-Residential Users whose potable water
usage or potable water flow is metered using a privately-owned meter must
annually report meter data to the Department on forms approved by the Director.
At a minimum, data will include:
   o   User's full name and service address;
   o   Billing address, if different than service address;
   o   Phone number;
   o   Account number;
   o   Water Meter manufacturer and model number;
   o   Installation date;
   o   Location of meter;
   o   Water Meter readings for November, December, January, and February;
   o   Water Meter volume units, i.e., gallons or CCF.
                  a)   Access. Department Inspectors will have access at all
reasonable times to privately-owned potable water flow metering devices.
                  b)   Meter Quality. Privately-owned potable Water Meters must
be equal in quality and purpose to the meters or metering devices used for
similar purposes by the City of Tucson Water Department and be maintained
according to the manufacturer's specifications.
                  c)   Certain industrial dischargers may, subject to the
Director's discretion, install and operate a privately-owned wastewater flow
measurement device provided the device and sanitary sewer hydraulic
characteristics result in continuous and accurate flow measurement and the
device is designed for and used in the municipal wastewater industry.
   The Department will not purchase, install, maintain, or monitor Sewage
meters unless fully compensated by the User.
               2)   Unmetered Flow. For Non-Residential Users without a method
to directly measure on-site water use or discharges to the Public Sewer System,
the User Class Average will be used to calculate the User Fee unless
alternative data acceptable to the Department is provided.
                  a)   The Department reserves the right to measure either
potable water usage volume or the Wastewater Volume and Strength and to use
such measurements for billing purposes.
                  b)   Department Inspectors will have access at all reasonable
times to conduct flow monitoring and sampling.
                  c)   Flow monitoring will be completed using Department
standards.
                  d)   Measured data will be used to calculate future User Fees
beginning with the next monthly bill.
         c.   Rate and Strength Adjusted Rate.
            i.   Rate. The Rate is the same for most Residential Users but may
be reduced for certain qualifying low-income Users. The Rate is included in
13.24.600, Table 2.
            ii.   Strength Adjusted Rate (SAR). The Non-Residential User's SAR
is a multiple of the Residential User Rate. It adjusts the Rate to account for
the County's additional cost to manage Non-Residential Sanitary Sewage. The SAR
is calculated by multiplying the Rate (R) times a Strength factor (HS).
Strength factors for Non-Residential User Classes are determined by the
Department from industrial averages and from direct monitoring of
representative Non-Residential User discharges. SAR values for all Non-
Residential User Classes are included in
13.24.600, Table 3. The Department reserves the right to calculate a site-
specific SAR at any time based on measured Wastewater Strength.
      4.   Director's Discretion. The Director, upon a finding that the methods
enumerated in Chapter
13.24.200(B) do not reasonably reflect the average Volume discharge of a User
Class, may establish a more accurate method and notify the affected Users.
      5.   False Data Penalty. Filing false data is subject to the penalties of
A.R.S. § 39-161.
   C.   User Billing.
      1.   Payment Due. User Fees are due and payable at the Department's
billing office no later than twenty (20) Days after the "service to" date on
the bill.
      2.   Notification. At the beginning of each Fiscal Year, and in
conjunction with a regular bill, each User will be notified annually of the
Rate and Service Fee being applied to the User Class.
      3.   User Fee Changes. The changes in User Fee Rates and charges will be
reflected in sanitary sewer User bills beginning with the first billing cycle
after the effective date of the Ordinance or as determined by the dates
referenced within the code changes.
      4.   Exclusion. Special Facilities are excluded from annual Rate
notifications (See Section
13.24.400).
      5.   Sub-billings. Users charging a User Fee to a third party for
services provided by the Department (such as landlords issuing User Fee sub-
billings to tenants) must state the User Fee amount billed by the Department as
a separate item on all sub-billings.
   D.   Account Adjustments.
      1.   Income-Based Adjustments Available to Residential Users. Any
Residential User whose current household income meets the following
requirements may apply for a reduced User Fee. Income eligibility is subject to
verification by the Department's agent during the application process.
         a.   Class 1A Income Adjustment. Any Residential User whose current
household income is one hundred (100) percent or less of the federal poverty
level guidelines may apply for re-designation to User Class 1A.
         b.   Class 1B Income Adjustment. Any Residential User whose current
household income is greater than one hundred (100) percent but is less than or
equal to one hundred and twenty-five (125) percent of the federal poverty level
guidelines may apply for re-designation to User Class 1B.
         c.   Class 1C Income Adjustment. Any Residential User whose current
household income is greater than one hundred and twenty-five (125) percent but
is less than or equal to one hundred and fifty (150) percent of the federal
poverty level guidelines may apply for re-designation to User Class 1C.
         d.   Class 1D Income Adjustment. Any Residential User whose current
household income is greater than one hundred fifty (150) percent but is less
than or equal to two hundred (200) percent of the federal poverty level
guidelines may apply for re-designation to User Class 1C.
         e.   Disclosure. To qualify for an income-based adjustment, applicants
must disclose all reportable income sources, including but not limited to
employment, interest, benefits, investments, rentals, businesses, and other
support. False reporting or failure to comply with these reporting requirements
may result in immediate termination of the low-income status. Filing false data
may also result in penalties under A.R.S. § 39-161.
         f.   Status Duration. Residential Users may qualify for an income-
based adjustment under a temporary or long-term status.
            i.   Temporary Status. Residential Users may be eligible for
temporary status based on special circumstance such as proof of zero income,
low-income, or unemployment benefits. Residential Users qualifying under a
temporary status will have a valid adjustment for one (1) year following the
approval by the authorized County agency. Users in this group must recertify
and provide all necessary income documentation prior to the end of each
qualifying year to remain eligible for the following year. Failure to recertify
will result in automatic re-classification to User Class 1.
            ii.   Long-Term Status. Residential Users may be eligible for long-
term status based on proof of fixed income from sources such as Social
Security, Social Security Income, Social Security Disability Income, or a
qualifying pension. Users qualifying for long-term status will have a valid
adjustment for three (3) years following the approval by the authorized County
agency. Users qualifying for long-term status must recertify and provide all
necessary income documentation prior to the end of the third qualifying year to
be eligible for the following three (3) years of income-based adjustments.
         g.   Reapplication Limit. There is no limit on the number of times a
Residential User may re-apply for an income-based reduced Residential User Fee.
      2.   New Move-In. A one-time new move-in adjustment may be made to User
Fees based on documentation of the first two full months of actual metered
water usage.
         a.   This adjustment is available when a new User demonstrates that
the User Class Average is greater than the actual water use.
         b.   Other adjustments provided in this subsection D will not be made
when a new move-in adjustment has been granted.
      3.   Winter Quarter Average. The Director may approve use of actual
Volume data if the actual Volume data is lower than data used for the WQA
calculation and:
         a.   All challenges to changes in WQA must be submitted to the
Department within sixty (60) Days of the User's receipt of the first invoice
showing the billing changes.
         b.   The actual water usage for three (3) consecutive alternate months
that are lower than December, January, and February is brought to the attention
of the Department.
         c.   The alternative data must reflect the same Fiscal Year as the WQA
calculations.
         d.   The WQA adjustment may be made for the Fiscal Year in question,
from the date the data was received by the Department.
         e.   Any data for adjustments must be submitted annually for each
Fiscal Year.
         f.   Other adjustments provided in this subsection D will not be made
when a WQA adjustment has been granted.
      4.   Vacancy. A User may request an adjustment based on monthly vacancy
information.
         a.   The User must provide thirty (30) Days prior notice of vacation,
tenant vacancy, or other verifiable cause of non-occupancy resulting in no
discharge to the Public Sewer.
         b.   Other adjustments provided in this subsection D will not be made
when the vacancy adjustment has been granted.
      5.   Irrigation Flow
   A User's bill may be reduced to reflect the volume of water, as measured by
an Irrigation Meter that is consumed in outdoor irrigation or similar outdoor
use. Subject only to the following exceptions, all Irrigation Meters must be
installed, read, and reported by a Water Company.
         a.   Grandfathered Status Exception. Only Users operating privately-
owned Irrigation Meters who submitted annual irrigation adjustments for the
2015-2016 Fiscal Year are eligible for grandfathered status. Eligibility is
also subject to the following:
            i.   Operation Requirements. All Users operating Irrigation Meters
in grandfathered status must comply with the following criteria:
               1)   Irrigation Meter Maintenance. The Irrigation Meter must be
maintained according to the manufacturer's specifications.
               2)   Access. Department Inspectors will have access to
Irrigation Meters and related water distribution lines at all reasonable times.
               3)   Replacement. Failed or inaccurate Irrigation Meters in
grandfathered status must be replaced with an Irrigation Meters installed,
read, and reported by a Water Company.
            ii.   Data Reporting. Grandfathered status Users must:
               1)   Have initially registered the User's name, property owner's
name, Irrigation Meter make and model number, and Irrigation Meter location
with the Department.
               2)   Annually request adjustments on a Director-approved form by
reporting the information specified in
13.24.200(B)(3)(iii).
            iii.   Forfeit of Grandfathered Status. A grandfathered User will
forfeit the right to use a privately-owned Irrigation Meter if there is a:
               1)   Change in User or property ownership;
               2)   Failure to submit annual data by June 30th;
               3)   Failure to accurately read and provide data;
               4)   Failure to maintain the meter to manufacturer's
specifications; or
               5)   Failure to comply with any other requirement of this
subsection.
         b.   Volume Adjustments for Non-Residential User Classes. A User's
Volume contribution may be adjusted from the WQA to one hundred (100) percent
of the Wastewater flow measured by:
            i.   Direct Wastewater meter reading; or
            ii.   A combination of direct Wastewater flow meter readings and
metered monthly water consumption; or
            iii.   Other acceptable methods approved by the Department.
         c.   The Director may, on a case-by-case basis, allow for use of
privately-owned, non-residential Irrigation Meter if the User is a customer of
a Water Company that does not install, read, and report Irrigation Meters.
Users operating Irrigation Meters pursuant to this exception must comply with
all requirements of the grandfathered status exception above.
      6.   Class Adjustments and Monitoring for Non-Residential Users. User
Class re-designations may be made by the Department at any time based on COD,
SS, or other identified constituent data which are reported to the Department
by the User and form the basis for that User Class.
         a.   All challenges to changes in User Class must be submitted, in
writing, to the Department within sixty (60) Days of the User's receipt of the
first invoice showing the billing changes.
         b.   Verification. User submitted data is subject to County
verification. Prior to completing a User Class re-designation pursuant to this
subsection, the Department will obtain at least two (2) twenty-four (24) hour
samples and flow measurements.
         c.   Detected Differences. If subsequent measurements or other
investigations reveal that such User is discharging COD, SS, or other
identified constituent data significantly in excess of that reported to the
Department:
            i.   The Director may assess and reclassify such User according to
the data obtained by the Department retroactive to the time of the User's
latest data report.
            ii.   The Director may assess applicable delinquency charges,
penalties, and interest as provided in
13.24.200 or in
Chapter 13.36 of the Pima County Code.
      7.   Adjustments Available to Multi-Family Class. A Multi-Family User
whose billing is based on WQA or the User Class Average may request an
adjustment based on average monthly unit occupancy for the previous Fiscal
Year.
         a.   The data may be used to derive an average annual percentage of
unit occupancy by which the WQA consumption determination will be adjusted.
         b.   The User will provide verifiable occupancy data for every month
of the previous Fiscal Year.
         c.   The occupancy data will be filed within sixty (60) Days after
receipt of a bill reflecting a new User Fee or User Class.
         d.   The data may be used to adjust only the applicable Fiscal Year.
         e.   Any adjustment will be subject to a reporting schedule,
verification procedures, or other conditions of service required by the
Department.
         8.   Measured Volume Primacy. The Department bases billing on
estimated discharge volumes. The Department may, at any time, use measured
discharge Volume in place of estimates when calculating User Fees.
      9.   Penalties for False Data. A User filing false data is subject to the
penalties of A.R.S. § 39-161.
   E.   Securing User Account Payment.
      1.   Overdue Accounts.
         a.   Overdue Accounts. For sanitary sewer only accounts:
            i.   Unpaid User Fees are overdue after thirty (30) Days from the
"service to" date on the User Fee bill.
            ii.   Overdue Fee. If the unpaid balance is not paid within ten
(10) Days from the date of the overdue notice, an Overdue Fee will be assessed
and the Director may take appropriate legal actions to ensure that the
delinquency is paid. The Overdue Fee is provided in
13.24.600, Table 4.
         b.   Deposits. The Director may require a User Fee deposit to ensure
payment. The amount of the deposit will not exceed the User's estimated User
Fee for the following twelve months.
   F.   Unauthorized Use of the Sewer.
      1.   Determination. Unauthorized Users of the Sewer may be identified by
dye test, physical connection, CCTV, or a preponderance of evidence such as
existing connection permits, pretreatment inspections, pretreatment permits, or
other reasonable methods.
      2.   Responsibility for Fees. If testing or other evidence indicates a
property is connected to the Public Sewer System, the Unauthorized User is
responsible for any unpaid fees for the connection and discharge into the
Public Sewer System. For purposes of this subsection (F), the term Unauthorized
User means: (i) the Person(s) identified by a Water Company as a customer for
water service to the property; or (ii) if there is no established water
account, the Person(s) discharging to the Public Sewer from the property. If
the Unauthorized User is not the owner of the property and the Unauthorized
User does not pay any of the outstanding User Fees and interest, the owner of
the property is responsible for the unpaid balance.
         a.   User Fees. Unauthorized users will be billed past user fees based
on: (i) the actual water flow as metered by a Water Company; or (ii) if actual
data from a Water Company is unavailable, the appropriate yearly user class
average during either the prior two year period or the period subsequent to the
connection date.
         b.   Interest. Interest will be assessed on the recovered amount at a
rate of prime plus one percent per year.
         c.   The director retains the right to:
            i.   Pursue, for cause, the collection of user fees for a period
greater than two years. The collection of past user fees may extend to the
connection date, or to June 30, 1979.
            ii.   Waive all or part of the unpaid user fees based on undue
hardship such as for those used to qualify for an income-based billing
adjustment in Section
13.24.200(D)(1).
         d.   Establishment of Connection Date. If evidence, such as a user
account for the property, exists, the date of connection is presumed to be the
date supported by the evidence. If a connection date cannot be established, the
Department will utilize the Unauthorized User's first date of possession of the
property as the connection date.
      3.   User Fee Recovery.
         a.   Fees. If a property is found to be connected to the Public Sewer
System, and there is no user account associated with that property, the
Unauthorized User will be billed an account activation fee, an unauthorized use
recovery fee, and past due monthly user fees. These administrative fees are
provided in Section
13.24.600, Table 4. If the Unauthorized User is not the owner of the property
and the Unauthorized User does not pay any of the outstanding User Fees and
interest, the owner of the property is responsible for the unpaid balance.
         b.   Fines or Action. Non-residential unauthorized users are subject
to relevant fines or action specified under
Chapter 13.36, Industrial Wastewater Ordinance for any violation of that
portion of the Pima County Code.
      4.   Legal Action Fee and Cost Recovery.
         a.   Interest. For delinquent charges that require legal action for
collection, Interest will be assessed on all past due amounts at a rate of
prime plus one (1) percent per year from the date of the delinquency.
         b.   Lien and Judicial Action. Pursuant to A.R.S. § 11-264, the County
may file a lien on a property for the nonpayment of User Fees. The County may
also, pursuant to its general authority, pursue judicial enforcement for
nonpayment of User Fees. The County reserves the right to take either action at
any time if the payment of the fees is delinquent for more than ninety (90)
Days.
         c.   Sale. The County, at its discretion, may seek a judicial judgment
of foreclosure and order of sale to enforce its lien.
   G.   Dye Testing
      1.   Determining Whether Property is Connected to the Public Sewer
System. Where the Department does not have a record of an inspected Sewer
connection permit for a property, a dye test may be performed at either the
Department's or the User's request.
         a.   For User Fee Disputes
            i.   If the dye test is requested within sixty (60) Days of the
recipient's initial billing date, the dye test will be performed at the expense
of the Department, but
            ii.   If the dye test is requested after said sixty-Day (60-Day)
period, the dye test will be performed at the expense of the requester. Fees
for dye testing are provided at §
13.24.600, Table 4.
         b.   For Confirmation During Property Transfer. Owners or potential
purchasers (or their agents) may request a Department-performed dye test to
confirm connection of a property to the Public Sewer System. Fees for dye
testing are provided at §
13.24.600, Table 4 and must be paid prior to testing.
         c.   Multiple Dye Tests. In some situations, multiple dye tests may be
required. Fees for multiple dye tests are provided in
13.24.600, Table 4 as related to the connection to the Public Sewer System. The
Department will perform multiple dye tests when the testing can be performed
with the following constraints:
            i.   When the dye tests can be performed within a single service
visit;
            ii.   A single requestor (representing a single owner) is
requesting the dye test; and
            iii.   There are two or more units located on a single property, or
are on properties that are contiguous.
         d.   Department Initiated. The Department may, at its own cost and
with the owner's permission, perform a dye test or CCTV for connection
verification in order to clarify User Fee and billing status.
         e.   CCTV. At the discretion of the Director, a CCTV inspection may be
required in conjunction with a dye test. When film is available, the Department
may review CCTV film in lieu of a full CCTV inspection. CCTV fees are provided
in
13.24.600, Table 4.
   H.   User Protest.
      1.   Submission. Any User may, within sixty (60) Days after receipt of a
bill reflecting a new WQA, User Class designation, or an Unauthorized Use Fee
may protest, in writing, to the Director requesting a review of the change.
Written protests will include itemized objections and will include all
necessary documentation in support of the objections.
      2.   Failure to Make Timely Protest. Failure to protest within sixty (60)
Days following receipt of a bill precludes any adjustment or refund for
payments made for the period prior to the date of protest.
      3.   Burden of Proof.
         a.   Users will have the burden of showing that any or all of the
computations were erroneous, misapplied, or based on substantive proof of
alternate normal water consumption for the previous Fiscal Year.
         b.   The Department reserves the right to conduct monitoring to verify
the User's claim. Monitoring conducted by the Department at the User's request
will be at the User's expense.
      4.   Director's Proceedings.
         a.Rules. The Director may propose rules applicable to protest
proceedings. The Director may adopt standards for measuring the applicability
of established fees and monthly discharge factors for the protesting User.
         b.   Findings. The Director, upon finding that a User's protest is
justified, will adjust the established User Fee or User Class designation and
make equitable reimbursements for overpayments consistent with the limitations
of this chapter.
         c.   Adjustments. The adjustments based on the Director's findings may
require either account adjustments to the User from the County, or additional
payments by the User to the County.
            i.   Account Adjustments. Account adjustments by the County to
Users will be made within sixty (60) Days of the protest resolution.
            ii.   Payment. Upon protest resolution, the User will have thirty
(30) Days to pay the amount due to the County.
   I.   Cost Recovery for Nonstandard Events.
      1.   Residential Misuse of a Sanitary Sewer Connection. The County
reserves the right to reclassify a Residential User to Non-Residential User
status and assign an applicable Strength Adjusted Rate to the User if
monitoring or other reliable and verifiable information exists indicating the
User is discharging Wastewater to the Public Sewer System that is inconsistent
with Residential Strength Sanitary Sewage.
      2.   Hazardous Waste and Prohibited Substances. In addition to any User
Fees established by this chapter, a User who is detected discharging any
Hazardous Waste or any other prohibited substance into the Public Sewer System
in violation of
Chapter 13.36 of the Pima County Code will be subject to the increased cost of
the treatment of the prohibited discharge. This provision will not preclude the
Director from imposing the additional penalties provided in
Chapter 13.36 of the Pima County Code.
         3.   Sanitary Sewer Overflow Cost Recovery. The County reserves the
right to recover the Department's cost of remediating sanitary sewer impacts to
public property resulting from User-caused sanitary overflows.
(Ord. No. 2025-21 § 1, 2025; Ord. No. 2025- 14 § 1 (part), 2025; Ord. 2016-69 §
1, 2016; Ord. 2016-29 § 1 (part), 2016)  
13.24.300   Septage Authorization, Receiving, and Billing.
   A.   Account and Permit. No Person will discharge Septage into the Public
Sewer System unless authorized by a Septage Discharge Permit or a temporary
special authorization issued as required in
Chapter 13.36 of the Pima County Code, in writing, by the Director. Each
Septage Discharge Permit will require the permittee to establish and maintain a
Septage discharge billing account with the Pima County Finance and Risk
Management Department.
      1.   Billing.
         a.   Permitted Dischargers.
            i.   Septage Discharge Permit holders will pay Septage Discharge
fees through a billing arrangement as provided in the Septage Discharge Permit.
            ii.   All Septage discharge fees are due and payable within thirty
(30) Days of receipt of the invoice.
         b.   Special Authorization Dischargers.
            i.   Any Person discharging Septage through temporary special
authorization of the Director will be billed subsequent to the discharge of the
Septage.
            ii.   Fees are due and payable within thirty (30) Days of receipt
of the invoice.
   B.   Septage Discharge Fees.
      1.   Fee Requirement. Any Person discharging Septage into the Public
Sewer System must pay Septage discharge fees.
      2.   Discharge Fee. The fee for any Person discharging Septage to any
portion of the Public Sewer System is calculated using the per gallon rate
provided in
13.24.600, Table 5.
      3.   Review. The Septage discharge fee will be reviewed periodically by
the Department to ensure that it generates sufficient revenue to pay the costs
of construction, operation, maintenance, repair, and replacement of the Septage
receiving station and the associated costs to treat the Septage.
   C.   Septage Payment Deposit.
      1.   Deposit. Any Person whose Septage discharge payment is more than
thirty (30) Days in arrears may be required to provide a deposit or retainer in
a reasonable amount as determined by the Director as a condition of continuing
to discharge.
      2.   Use of Deposit. The Director may apply the deposit or retainer
against any amount unpaid sixty (60) Days after the date of billing.
      3.   Suspension or Termination. The Director may suspend or terminate a
Septage Discharge Permit for non-payment of the Septage discharge fee.
   D.   Legal Action Fee and Cost Recovery. Provided in Chapter
13.24.200(F)(4), Industrial Wastewater Ordinance Chapter
13.36.220, and the Industrial Wastewater Control Enforcement Response Plan for
legal action cost recovery.
   E.   Septage User Protest.
      1.   Protest. Fee protests, including suspension or termination of
discharge privileges, must be made to the Director, in writing, within thirty
(30) Days following notice to the discharger.
(Ord. No. 2025-14 § 1 (part), 2025; Ord. 2016-29 § 1 (part), 2016)
13.24.400   Special Facilities.
   A.   Defined.
      1.    Special Facilities are defined in Section
13.20.100(B)(48) of the Pima County Code.
      2.   If there is a Commercial or Industrial component to the discharge,
provided in
Chapter 13.36 Industrial Wastewater Ordinance of the Pima County Code.
   B.   Special Facilities Charges. Special Facility charges may be levied as a
separate bill within the County financial management system. The User Volume
and the actual operational and maintenance costs may be used as factors in the
billing calculation.
   C.   Access. Department Inspectors will have access at all reasonable times
to metering devices as well as treatment and conveyance areas maintained by
agreement, on all Private Sewer.
   D.   Legal Action Fee and Cost Recovery. If the County is required to take
legal action to recover costs, the provisions of section
13.24.200(F)(4) apply.
(Ord. No. 2025-14 § 1 (part), 2025; Ord. 2016-29 § 1 (part), 2016)
13.24.500   Large Agency.
   A.   Charges. User Fees for Agencies may be levied as a separate bill within
the County financial management system. The User Volume, Strength, and the
actual operational and maintenance costs attributable to the Agency may be used
as factors in the billing calculation.
   B.   Agreement. Agencies will enter into a written agreement with the County
including but not limited to the following:
      1.   User Fees. Agency-specific User Fees will be established based on a
review of Department costs to provide service to each Agency. Factors involved
in developing the User Fees include, but are not limited to:
         a.   A fee reimbursing the Department for the increased costs to
operate and maintain the non-public portion of the sanitary sewer system within
the Agency, as well as cover the impact of the Agency on the Public Sewer
System.
         b.   The reimbursement time period and the method of reimbursement.
         c.   The Volume, Strength, or chemical data from the Agency discharge.
         d.   The User Fee may be either a uniform, fixed monthly charge, or
another method as determined by the Director.
         e.   Additional User Fees such as Service Fees and Rates.
      2.   Pretreatment. For Agencies where the County does not have direct
enforcement authority against the discharger, the Agency will be required to
develop its own Pretreatment program by:
         a.   Adopting a pretreatment sanitary sewer use ordinance that is no
less stringent than as those provided in
Chapter 13.36 Industrial Wastewater Ordinance of the Pima County Code; and
         b.   Instituting pretreatment plans, agreements, and reporting for
dischargers that is no less stringent than as those provided in
Chapter 13.36 Industrial Wastewater Ordinance of the Pima County Code.
      3.   Capacity Management, Operations, and Maintenance (CMOM). When
appropriate, CMOM, as well as spill prevention, may be specified to:
         a.   Ensure that the operation and maintenance of the Agency's
sanitary sewer system is in compliance with the Department's CMOM Permit,
inclusive of:
            i. A capacity assurance program;
            ii.   A spill prevention program;
            iii.   A spill reporting program; and
            iv.   An operation and maintenance program.
         b.   Repair and replace components utilizing an asset management plan.
      4.   Permissions and Assurances. The agreement will also provide the
Department with authority to:
         a.   Review records and data for pretreatment, maintenance, and CMOM
programs.
         b.   Periodically review the appropriateness of the reimbursement
amounts.
         c.   Assure that there is payment of all connections and User Fees for
each connection and User within the Agency boundaries.
   C.   Access. Department Inspectors will have access at all reasonable times
to metering devices on the Agency's sanitary sewers and other appurtenances
specified within the agreement. Department maintenance personnel, equipment,
and any other Department staff necessary to complete the agreed support tasks
will have access at all reasonable times to manholes, metering devices, and any
other appurtenances on the Agency's sanitary sewers as specified within the
agreement.
   D.   Legal Action Fee and Cost Recovery. If the County is required to take
legal action to recover fees, the provisions of section
13.24.200(F)(4) apply.
(Ord. No. 2025-14 § 1 (part), 2025; Ord. 2016-29 § 1 (part), 2016)
13.24.600   Tables of Service Fees, Rates, and Administrative Fees.
Table 1 
Monthly Service Fee for All Users 
User Class Class Name Billing FY 2025- FY 2026-2027 FY 2027-2028 FY 2028-2029
                      Class   2026 Fee Fee          Fee          Fee
User Class Class Name  Billing    FY 2025- FY 2026- FY 2027-2028 FY 2028-2029
                       Class      2026 Fee 2027 Fee Fee          Fee
1          Residential R          $13.390  $13.624  $13.863      $14.105
           Income
1A         Reduced     RA         $2.678   $2.725   $2.773       $2.821
           Residential
           Income
1B         Reduced     RB         $5.356   $5.450   $5.545       $5.642
           Residential
           Income
1C         Reduced     RC         $8.034   $8.175   $8.318       $8.463
           Residential
           Income
1D         Reduced     RD         $10.712  $10.899  $11.090      $11.284
           Residentia
2A         Multi-Famil MF         $13.390  $13.624  $13.863      $14.105
           y
2B         Commercial  C          $13.390  $13.624  $13.863      $14.105
3A through Industrial  SA through $13.390  $13.624  $13.863      $14.105
5S                     SP
 
Table 2 
Rate for Residential Users
 
                               FY 2025-   FY 2026-   FY 2027-2028 FY 2028-2029
User Class Class Name  Billing 2026 Rate  2027 Rate  Rate         Rate
                       Class   (dollars   (dollars   (dollars per (dollars per
                               per CCF)   per CCF)   CCF)         CCF)
1          Residential R       3.738      3.803      3.870        3.938
           Income
1A         Reduced     RA      0.748      0.761      0.774        0.788
           Residential
           Income
1B         Reduced     RB      1.495      1.521      1.548        1.575
           Residential
           Income
1C         Reduced     RC      2.243      2.282      2.322        2.363
           Residential
           Income
1D         Reduced     RD      2.990      3.043      3.096        3.150
           Residential
 
Table 3 
Rates for Multi-Family, Commercial, and Industrial Users 
                                  FY 2025-   FY 2026-   FY 2027-   FY 2028-
User  Class Name Billing Strength 2026 Rate  2027 Rate  2028 Rate  2029 Rate
Class            Class   Factor   (dollars   (dollars   (dollars   (dollars
                                  per CCF)   per CCF)   per CCF)   per CCF)
                                      FY 2025-  FY 2026-  FY 2027-   FY 2028-
User  Class Name     Billing Strength 2026 Rate 2027 Rate 2028 Rate  2029 Rate
Class                Class   Factor   (dollars  (dollars  (dollars   (dollars
                                      per CCF)  per CCF)  per CCF)   per CCF)
2A    Multi-Family   MF      1.0      3.738     3.803     3.870      3.938
2B    Commercial     C       1.0      3.738     3.803     3.870      3.938
3C    Auto body and  SA      2.10     7.849     7.986     8.126      8.268
      fender repair
3K    Mortuary       SB      1.09     4.074     4.145     4.217      4.291
3N    Laundromat     SC      1.09     4.074     4.145     4.217      4.291
4E    Pet clinic     SD      1.20     4.486     4.564     4.644      4.725
      Restaurant,
4G    with seating   SE      2.03     7.588     7.721     7.856      7.993
      and china
4H    Restaurant,    SF      2.32     8.671     8.822     8.977      9.134
      fast food
5A    Car wash,      SG      1.19     4.448     4.525     4.605      4.685
      self-service
5C    Bottling       SI      1.68     6.280     6.390     6.502      6.615
      company
5F    Printing;      SJ      1.01     3.775     3.841     3.908      3.977
      copying
      Electrical
5G    component      SK      1.14     4.261     4.336     4.412      4.489
      manufacturer
5I    Industrial     SL      1.06     3.961     4.031     4.101      4.173
      laundry
5J    Bakery         SM      3.63     13.567    13.805    14.046     14.292
5K    Miscellaneous  SN      2.33     8.709     8.861     9.016      9.174
      food processor
5L    Chemical,      SO      1.25     4.672     4.754     4.837      4.922
      pharmaceutical
5M    Meat packing   SP      2.38     8.896     9.052     9.210      9.371
5S    Car wash, full SH      1.23     4.597     4.677     4.759      4.842
      service
 
Table 4 
Administrative Fees for All Users 
Service Description and/or Cross-Reference Amount
Service                   Description and/or Cross-  Amount
                          Reference
                          The account activation
Account Activation Fee    cost recovery. See Section $20.00
                          13.24.200(A)(2).
                          Recovering the unpaid
                          balance due on the
Overdue Fee               account, including legal   $48.00
                          action costs. See Section
                          13.24.200(E)(1).
                          Research and time
Unauthorized Use Recovery recovering unpaid fees.    $68.00
Fee                       See Section
                          13.24.200(F)(3).
Dye Test - Connection     See Section                $207.00 Dye Test -
Location Single Property* 13.24.200(G).              Connection Location
Multiple Properties*      See Section                $207.00 + $23.00 per
                          13.24.200(G).              additional unit
Review of Existing CCTV   See Section
Video for Connection      13.24.200(G).              $88.00
Location*
                                                     $404.00* Connection to the
Acquire CCTV Video for    See Section                Public Sewer System. CCTV
Connection Location*      13.24.200(G).              use is at the discretion
                                                     of the Department and in
                                                     addition to Dye Testing.
 
Table 5 
Septage Discharge Rate for Septage Disposal Users 
 
Name         Description  Rate
                          (dollars per gallon)
Septage Rate See Section  $0.14
             13.24.300(B)
 
(Ord. No. 2025-14 § 1 (part), 2025; Ord. No. 2017-2 §§ 1-3, 2017; Ord. 2016-29
§ 1 (part), 2016)
   FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-29, § 1, adopted May 3, 2016, repealed the former
Chapter 13.24, §§ 13.24.010—13.24.190, and enacted a new
Chapter 13.24 as set out herein. The former
Chapter 13.24 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Ordinance List for
the chapter's derivation. (Back)
Chapter 13.28
MT. LEMMON SEWER CONNECTIONS
Sections: 
13.28.005   Applicability.
13.28.010   Definitions.
13.28.020   Inclusion by reference.
13.28.030   Approval to connect.
13.28.040   Properties on standby status.
13.28.005   Applicability.
   The provisions of this chapter apply only to those users authorized by the
county and the United States Forest Service Special Use Permit, as amended, to
connect to the public sewage conveyance system. No new connection to the
Summerhaven-area public sewage conveyance system is allowed unless the
connection is authorized by the county and is consistent with the limits of the
United States Forest Service Special Use permit.
(Ord. 2019-1 § 1 (part), 2019; Ord. 2004-110 § 1 (part), 2004)
13.28.010   Definitions.
   Unless an alternate definition is provided in this chapter, the definitions
of Chapters
13.20 - Sanitary Sewer Construction, Connection, and Fees and
13.24 - Sanitary Sewer User Fees are incorporated herein by reference. As used
in this chapter:
   A.   "Standby status" means a priority issued to certain properties with
existing, permitted connections to the SCS but from which there are no current
discharges because there are no improvements on the connected properties. If
improvements are constructed on a property while it is on standby status, the
owner may begin discharging following establishment of an active user fee
account.
   B.   "Summerhaven" means the unincorporated community located on Mt. Lemmon.
(Ord. 2019-1 § 1 (part), 2019; Ord. 2004-110 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1982-92
(part), 1982: prior code § 39.24.010)
13.28.020   Inclusion by reference.
   A.   Unless specifically modified in this chapter, the provisions of Chapter
13.20 - Sanitary Sewer Construction, Connection, and Fees apply to all
connections to the SCS within Summerhaven.
   B.   Unless specifically modified in this chapter, the provisions of Chapter
13.24 - Sanitary Sewer User Fees apply to all wastewater customers within
Summerhaven.
(Ord. 2019-1 § 1 (part), 2019; Ord. 2004-110 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1982-92
(part), 1982: prior code § 39.24.020)
13.28.030   Approval to connect.
   In addition to the provisions of Chapter
13.20, all of the following requirements must be met by an applicant before
approval of a private connection to the Summerhaven SCS:
   A.   There must be an unallocated connection remaining of the maximum number
of connections authorized by the U.S. Forest Service permit. Private connection
submittals will be reviewed in order of date of submittal.
   B.   All property improvements must incorporate industry-recognized, low-
flow toilets, shower heads, and faucet aerators.
(Ord. 2019-1 § 1 (part), 2019; Ord. 2004-110 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1982-92
(part), 1982: prior code § 39.24.030)
13.28.040   Properties on standby status.
   Properties on standby status as of the effective date of this ordinance
retain standby status only through June 30, 2023. As of July 1, 2023, standby
status will be eliminated. Any property on standby status which has not
established a user account as of that date will forfeit any existing rights
resulting from standby status and must reapply for permission to connect to the
SCS as required by §
13.28.030.
(Ord. 2019-1 § 1 (part), 2019; Ord. 2004-110 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 1982-92
(part), 1982: prior code § 39.24.040)
Chapter 13.32
MT. LEMMON USER FEE SURCHARGES
Sections: 
13.32.005    Applicability.
13.32.010    Definitions.
13.32.015    Inclusion by reference.
13.32.020    Mt. Lemmon sewer user fees.
13.32.030    Conservation surcharge.
13.32.060    Conservation surcharge schedule.
13.32.070    Discharge allocations.
13.32.005   Applicability.
   The provisions of this chapter apply only to users connected to the Mt.
Lemmon public sewerage system.
(Ord. 2019-2 § 1 (part), 2019)
13.32.010   Definitions.
   Unless an alternate definition is provided in this chapter, the definitions
of Chapters
13.20 - Sanitary Sewer Construction, Connection, and Fees and
13.24 - Sanitary Sewer User Fees are incorporated herein by reference. For the
purposes of this chapter:
   A.   "Conservation surcharge" means a monthly surcharge, in addition to the
Chapter
13.24 User Fee, charged to users to provide an incentive for water
conservation.
   B.   "Daily flow rate" means the average of the daily flow volume of each
day in a month as measured at the treatment plant discharge. This daily flow
rate shall not exceed the limit provided in the Forest Service Special Use
Permit.
   C.   "Summerhaven" means the unincorporated community located on Mt. Lemmon.
   D.   "Water system" means the source of water and all facilities for
collecting, producing, conditioning, storing or distributing water directly for
all purposes except plant or crop irrigation, which includes, but is not
limited to the following uses: drinking, or production, processing, storing,
handling, serving or transportation of food or drink or washing of related
utensils, equipment or food-contact surfaces, or bathing, or oral or sanitary
hygiene, washing of clothes or dishes.
(Ord. 2019-2 § 1 (part), 2019; Ord. 1985-125 § 1, 1985)
13.32.015   Inclusion by reference.
   A.   Unless specifically modified in this chapter, the provisions of Chapter
13.20 - Sanitary Sewer Construction, Connection, and Fees apply to all
connections to the SCS within Summerhaven.
   B.   Unless specifically modified in this chapter, the provisions of Chapter
13.24 - Sanitary Sewer User Fees apply to all wastewater customers within
Summerhaven.
(Ord. 2019-2 § 1 (part), 2019)
13.32.020   Mt. Lemmon sewer user fees.
   All persons connected to the SCS in Summerhaven will pay sewer user fees as
required by Chapter
13.24 except users will be billed based on monthly billed water volume rather
than winter quarter averaging.
(Ord. 2019-2 § 1 (part), 2019)
13.32.030   Conservation surcharge.
   In addition to the sewer user fee due pursuant to Chapter
13.24, all users connected to the SCS must pay a monthly conservation
surcharge. Conservation surcharges support the unique environment on Mt. Lemmon
by encouraging sustainable water use. Conservation surcharges are listed in §
13.32.060 Table 1, Schedules A and B.
(Ord. 2019-2 § 1 (part), 2019)
13.32.060   Conservation surcharge schedule.
Schedule A. Residential Conservation Surcharges
Schedule A. Residential Conservation Surcharges
Monthly Metered Water Flow Conservation Surcharge
0-4 CCF                    $0.00
Greater than 4 CCF         Total flow minus 4 CCF times $6.00 per CCF
Schedule B. Commercial/Industrial/Multi-family Conservation Surcharges
Monthly Metered Water Flow Monthly Conservation Surcharge
0-40 CCF                   $0.00
Greater than 40 CCF        Total flow minus 40 CCF times $6.00 per CCF
 
(Ord. 2019-2 § 1 (part), 2019; Ord. 1985-125 § 2, 1985)
13.32.070   Discharge allocations.
   A.   The county's U.S. Forest Service permit to operate the public sewerage
system limits monthly average flow and daily maximum flow from the system. In
the event that wastewater flows to the sewerage system routinely exceed eighty-
five percent of the average daily flow rate limit, then a wastewater discharge
allocation to each property being or to be served shall be established by the
Board of Supervisors. Allocation will be based on each user's water usage
during the prior calendar year and will be apportioned to maintain an average
daily flow of effluent from the public sewerage system below the limit and to
ensure that the maximum disposal rate for treated wastewater will not exceed
the permitted daily maximum. The county will provide users written notice of
any allocations developed thirty (30) days before the date when the allocations
take effect.
   B.   As part of any discharge allocation determination, the Board of
Supervisors shall identify penalty charges for users who exceed this
allocation, as well as maximum discharge levels which warrant termination of
service.
   C.   A violation of any wastewater discharge allocation so established shall
be brought to the attention of the Director, who will initiate an investigation
of the alleged violation and will institute an enforcement action consistent
with the Board of Supervisors' policy, if warranted. Any termination of service
will only occur after thirty (30) days' written notice, should violations
continue.
(Ord. 2019-2 § 1 (part), 2019; Ord. 1985-125 § 4, 1985)
Division III. Industrial Waste
   
Chapter 13.36 - INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER
Chapter 13.36
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER [2] 
   
Article I. - General Provisions
   
Article II. - Definitions
   
Article III. - Regulated Wastes
   
Article IV. - Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Application and
Requirements
   
Article V. - Standard Ordinance and Permit Conditions
   
Article VI. - Enforcement
   
Article VII. - Notice Procedure
   
Article VIII. - Rules and Regulations
   
Article IX. - Time Limits
   
Article X. - Reserved
   
Article XI. - Severability
   
Article XII. - Reserved
   
Article XIII. - Hazardous Waste Discharge
   
Article XIV. - Grease Management Program
   
Article XV. - Satellite Collection Systems
   FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-32, adopted June 18, 2013, amended
Chapter 13.16 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Chapter, §§
13.16.010—13.16.300, pertained to similar mater, and derived from prior code §§
39.20.010—39.20.140; Ord. No. 1984-169 and Ord. No. 1991-140, 1991. (Back)
Article I. General Provisions
13.36.010   Purpose and authority.
13.36.020   Title of ordinance.
13.36.030   Administration.
13.36.035   Incorporation by reference.
13.36.010   Purpose and authority.
   The purpose of this chapter is to manage the acceptance of industrial
wastewater into the sewerage system to provide for the protection of Pima
County's sanitary system and the process being utilized; groundwater resources;
effluent; surface water resources; wastewater sludge disposal methods; and
operating personnel through adequate regulation of industrial wastewater
discharges including septage.
   This regulation is accomplished in compliance with a publicly owned
treatment works (POTW) pretreatment program mandated by the Arizona Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (AZPDES) permits issued by the Arizona Department
of Environmental Quality (ADEQ) to Pima County in conformity with Arizona
Administrative Code (AAC) R18-9-A905(A)(3)(d) adopting by reference 40 CFR §
122.44.j, Arizona Revised Statutes (ARS) § 49-391 and the Clean Water Act
(CWA), Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (P.L. 92-500; 86
Stat. 816; 33 United States Code Sections 1251 through 1376); and AAC R18-9-
A905(7) and R18-9-A906.
   It applies to all users discharging non-domestic wastewater to the POTW.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
13.36.020   Title of ordinance.
   The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "industrial
wastewater ordinance."
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
13.36.030   Administration.
   The director of the Pima County regional wastewater reclamation department
(RWRD) shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of the industrial
wastewater ordinance.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
13.36.035   Incorporation by reference.
   The Pima County industrial wastewater ordinance codified in this chapter
incorporates the federal categorical pretreatment standards codified at 40 CFR
§ 403.6 and §§ 405 through 471 adopted by reference in AAC R18-9-A905(A)(8)(b)
and R18-9-A905(A)(9).
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
Article II. Definitions
13.36.040   Definitions.
13.36.040   Definitions.
   Terms as used in this chapter mean:
   A.   ""Act" or "the Act"" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq.
   B.   "Authorized representative" means a person is a duly authorized
representative only if:
      1.   The authorization is made in writing by a person described in
Section
13.36.110(A)(5); and
      2.   The authorization specifies either an individual or a position
having responsibility for the overall operation of the regulated facility or
activity such as plant manager, operator of a well, a well field
superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility for environmental
matters for the user. (A duly authorized representative may thus be either a
named individual or any individual occupying a named position.)
   C.   "Best management practices (BMPs)" means BMPs include schedules of
activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in Section
13.36.050 and Section
13.36.060. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and
practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste
disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
   BMPs related to food service facilities are outlined in the grease
management program (Section
13.36.440).
   D.   "Biosolids" means sewage sludge, also known as biosolids, is the solid
material separated during treatment at a domestic or municipal wastewater
treatment plant and treated to stabilize and reduce pathogens.
   E.   "Blowdown" means the minimum discharge of recirculating water for the
purpose of discharging materials contained in the water, the further buildup of
which would cause concentration in amounts exceeding established limits.
   F.   "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of a wastestream from any
portion of a treatment facility.
   G.   "Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard" means any
regulations defining pollutants or setting pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Clean
Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317), that apply to specific categories of users (40
CFR §§ 403.6 and 405—471) adopted by reference in AAC R18-9-A905(A)(8)(b) and
R18-9-A905(A)(9). This term includes prohibitive discharge standards under 40
CFR § 403.5, including local limits 40 CFR § 403.5(d).
   H.   "Compliance schedule" means increments of progress, in the form of
dates, for the commencement or completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of pretreatment facilities.
   I.   "Composite sample" means a combination of no fewer than four individual
samples obtained at equal time intervals for twenty-four hours or for the
duration of the discharge, whichever is shorter. In the case of a batch
discharge with flow duration of less than fifteen minutes, a single grab sample
will meet the intent of a composite sample.
   J.   "Days" means any specific reference to a number of days shall be
calendar days unless otherwise specified.
   K.   "Department" means the Pima County regional wastewater reclamation
department (RWRD).
   L.   "Director" means the director of the Pima County regional wastewater
reclamation department or the director's designated representative.
   M.   "Discharge" means the intentional or unintentional release of a
substance into the POTW.
   N.   "Discharge limit" means a limit on the amount or concentration of a
regulated waste that is discharged to the POTW.
   O.   "Domestic user" means any person who discharges only domestic
wastewater.
   P.   "Domestic wastewater" means any water-borne wastes, derived from the
ordinary living processes in a residential dwelling unit, of such character as
to permit satisfactory disposal without special treatment by conventional POTW
processes.
   Q.   "Existing source" means a source that is not a new source or a new
indirect discharger.
   R.   "Fats, oils and grease (FOG)" means a polar material either liquid or
solid composed primarily of fat, oil and grease from animal or vegetable
origin. The terms oils and grease, and oil and grease substances shall be
included in this definition.
   S.   "Food service facility" means any facility that prepares or packages
food or beverages for sale or consumption on or off-site, with the exception of
private residences. The term food service facility includes, but is not limited
to: restaurants, bakeries, grocery stores, cafeterias, food courts, food
manufacturers, food packagers, bars, lounges, hotels, movie theaters,
sororities, fraternities, social clubs, private clubs, and schools.
   T.   "Grab sample (discrete)" means an individual sample collected over a
period of time not to exceed fifteen minutes.
   U.   "Gravity grease interceptor (GGI)" means a device that is installed in
a sanitary drainage system to intercept nonpetroleum fats, oils, and grease
from a wastewater discharge and is identified by volume, a minimum thirty-
minute retention time, baffle(s), a minimum of two compartments, a minimum
total volume of three hundred gallons, and gravity separation.
   V.   "Hazardous substance" means any substance meeting the definition of
"hazardous substance" found in the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA) § 101(14) (42 U.S.C. 9601(14) 1980)
including but not limited to, those substances listed at 40 CFR § 300.5 (1990).
   W.   "Hazardous waste" means a hazardous waste as defined in 40 CFR § 261.3.
   X.   "Hydromechanical grease interceptor (HGI)" means a device that is
installed in a sanitary drainage system to intercept nonpetroleum fats, oils,
and grease from a wastewater discharge and is identified by flow rate,
separation and retention efficiency. The design incorporates air entrainment,
hydromechanical separation, interior baffling, and/or barriers in combination
or separately, and one of the following: External flow control with air intake
(vent) directly connected; external flow control without air intake (vent)
directly connected; without external flow control directly connected; and
without external flow control indirectly connected.
   Y.   "Indirect discharge" means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW
by any non-domestic source.
   Z.   "Industrial user" means a source of indirect discharge, the
introduction of pollutants into the POTW by any non-domestic source.
   AA.   "Industrial wastewater" means wastewater generated in a commercial or
industrial process.
   BB.   "Industrial wastewater discharge permit" means an individual control
mechanism, authorization letter, or contract issued by the director, which
allows a discharge into the POTW of industrial wastewater.
   CC.   "Interference" means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, both:
      1.   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
      2.   Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's
AZPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance
with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued
hereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): § 405 of the Clean
Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act, Clean Air Act, Toxic Substances
Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
   DD.   "Liquid waste hauler" means any person carrying on or engaging in the
vehicular transport of wastewater or wastes as part of, or incidental to, any
business for the purpose of discharging such waste into the POTW.
   EE.   "New source" means:
      1.   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there
is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c)
of the Act that will be applicable to such source if such standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
         a.   The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed
at a site at which no other source is located; or
         b.   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         c.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these sources are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing facility, and the extent to which the new
facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing
source, should be considered.
      2.   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
criteria of subsection (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or
adds to existing process or production equipment.
      3.   Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
         a.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite
construction program:
            (i)   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            (ii)   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which
is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or
         b.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of
facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering,
and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
paragraph.
   FF.   "Oil and sand interceptor" means a tank designed to intercept and
collect sand, grit, petroleum, oil, and grease, and prevent their entry into
the sanitary sewer system.
   GG.   "Operator" means a person who operates a business and therefore
controls the operation and indirect discharge.
   HH.   "Owner" means the property or business owner.
   II.   "Pass through" means a discharge that exits the POTW into waters of
the United States in quantities or concentrations that, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of
any requirement of the POTW's AZPDES permit, including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation.
   JJ.   "Person" means an individual, firm, company, association, partnership,
corporation, joint stock company, trust, estate, municipality, state or federal
agency, or an agent or employee thereof.
   KK.   "Petroleum, oil and grease (POG)" means a nonpolar material either
liquid or solid and is composed primarily of petroleum or mineral origin.
   LL.   "Pollutant" means something that causes pollution, including but not
limited to: dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural
waste, pesticides, and certain characteristics of wastewater (pH, temperature,
TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor) discharged into the POTW.
   MM.   "Pollution" means the man-made or man-induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of water.
   NN.   "Pretreatment" means the reduction of the amount of industrial
wastewater, the elimination of industrial wastewater, or the alteration of the
nature of industrial wastewater properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such waste into a POTW. The reduction or
alteration may be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes,
process changes or by other means, except by dilution as a substitute for
pretreatment.
   OO.   "Pretreatment standards or standards" means pretreatment standards
shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards,
and local limits.
   PP.   "Publicly owned treatment works (POTW)" means all of the wastewater
collection, treatment, and disposal systems that are owned, operated or
contracted in part or in whole by Pima County, Arizona.
   QQ.   "Representative sample" means a sample portion of material or
wastestream that is as nearly identical in content and consistency as possible
to that in the material or industrial wastewater being sampled.
   RR.   "Satellite collection system" means any upstream collection system
under the ownership and operational control of a separate jurisdictional
government agency or Native American Nation.
   SS.   "Septage" means an anaerobic wastewater originating from a
residential, commercial, or industrial facility that is not a hazardous waste
and is compatible with the biological wastewater treatment plant process.
   TT.   "Septage discharge permit" means an individual control mechanism,
authorization letter, or contract issued by the director, which allows a
discharge into the POTW of septage.
   UU.   "Significant industrial user" means except as provided for in
paragraphs 2 and 3 of this definition:
      1.   An industrial user that:
         a.   Is subject to categorical pretreatment standards;
         b.   Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand gallons per day or
more of process wastewaters (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler
blowdown wastewater);
         c.   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or
more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW; or
         d.   Has a potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or
for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40
CFR § 403.8(f)(6).
      2.   The director may determine that an industrial user subject to
categorical pretreatment standards under § 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I,
subchapter N is a non-significant categorical industrial user rather than a
significant industrial user on a finding that the industrial user never
discharges more than one hundred gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical
wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown
wastewater unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the
following conditions are met:
         a.   The industrial user, prior to the director's finding, has
consistently complied with all applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements;
         b.   The industrial user annually submits the certification statement
required in 40 CFR § 403.12(q) together with any additional information
necessary to support the certification statement; and,
         c.   The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated
wastewater.
      3.   Upon finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (1)(b)
of this part has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the
director may at any time, on the director's own initiative or in response to a
petition received from an industrial user, and in accordance with the
procedures in 40 CFR § 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be
considered a significant industrial user.
   VV.   "Significant noncompliance" means an industrial user is in significant
Noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria:
      1.   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which sixty-six percent or more of all the measurements taken for the
same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a
numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as
defined in 40 CFR § 403.3(l);
      2.   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which thirty-three percent or more of all of the measurements for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of
the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits
as defined in 40 CFR § 403.3(l) multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for
BOD, TSS, and FOG, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
      3.   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by 40 CFR § 403.3(l) (daily maximum, longer-term average, instantaneous
limit, or narrative standard) that the director determines has caused, alone or
in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through (including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
      4.   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to human health, welfare or the environment or has resulted in the director's
exercise of emergency authority under Section
13.36.195 of this chapter to halt or prevent such a discharge;
      5.   Failure to meet, within ninety days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
      6.   Failure to provide, within forty-five days after due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
      7.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
      8.   Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a
violation of best management practices, which the director determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
   WW.   "Slug load" means any industrial wastewater discharged at a volume or
concentration that will cause interference or upset of the POTW; any sample,
the concentration of which exceeds five times the allowable discharge
limitation; or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but
not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge.
   XX.   "Solid waste" means any garbage, or refuse, sludge from a wastewater
treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control
facility and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semi-solid, or
contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and
agricultural operations, and from community activities, but does not include
solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage, or solid or dissolved
materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point
sources subject to permit under 33 U.S.C. 1342, or source, special nuclear, or
by-product material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68
Stat. 923).
   YY.   "Source" means any building, structure, facility, or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants.
   ZZ.   "Spill protection facilities" means a physical barrier that provides
protection from accidental discharge or spill into the POTW of prohibited,
hazardous, or other industrial wastewaters that are regulated through this
chapter.
   AAA.   "Toxic pollutant" means any pollutant listed as toxic under § 307(a)
(1) of the CWA of 1977, 40 CFR 122.2 definitions, or, in the case of "sludge
use or disposal practice," any pollutant identified in regulations implementing
§ 405(b) of the CWA.
   BBB.   "Upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional
and temporary noncompliance with discharge limits because of factors beyond the
reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the
extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, and lack of preventive maintenance or careless
or improper operation.
   CCC.   "User" means an industrial user or a significant industrial user.
   DDD.   "Wastewater" means the liquid and water-carried industrial or
domestic waste from dwellings, commercial establishment, industrial facilities,
and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and storm water
that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or
permitted to enter the POTW.
   EEE.   "Wastewater sludge" means the solids or semisolids, residues, and
precipitate separated from or created in wastewater.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
Article III. Regulated Wastes
13.36.050   General prohibitions.
13.36.060   Prohibited wastes.
13.36.070   Discharge limits.
13.36.075   Variances.
13.36.080   Additional discharge limits.
13.36.090   Health care related wastes.
13.36.100   Septage disposal.
13.36.050   General prohibitions.
   A.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any sewer that
directly or indirectly connects to the POTW, any waste which:
      1.   May have an adverse or harmful effect on the POTW, POTW personnel or
equipment, POTW effluent quality, or public or private property;
      2.   May otherwise endanger the public, the environment or create a
public nuisance;
      3.   Exceeds limitations as set by this chapter or the director;
      4.   Causes the POTW to violate state or federal regulations or permits.
   These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not
they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national,
state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   B.   Prohibited wastes described in this article shall not be discharged to
the POTW. Included within the prohibition is the discharge of any wastes that
adversely affect water reclamation, water reuse, sludge disposal, or air
quality.
   C.   The director, in determining the acceptability of specific wastes,
shall consider the nature of the waste and the adequacy and nature of the
collection, treatment and disposal system available to accept the waste.
   D.   The director may establish discharge limitations for industrial users
that have a reasonable potential to degrade wastewater quality to the level
that it prevents or inhibits the POTW's efforts to reclaim the water, for
sludge disposal, or causes any unusual operation or maintenance problems in the
POTW.
   E.   The director may grant a variance from this chapter for any
technological standard as outlined in Section
13.36.075.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
13.36.060   Prohibited wastes.
   Except as provided elsewhere in this article, prohibited wastes shall
include:
   A.   Industrial wastewater that may be adverse or harmful to the POTW, the
sewerage conveyance system, POTW personnel, POTW equipment, or POTW effluent
quality, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, solvent, fuel oil or any other
liquids, solids, or gases which may create or tend to create a fire or
explosion hazard in the POTW, or may be injurious in any other way to the POTW,
including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flash point of
less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit using the test method specified
in 40 CFR § 261.21;
      2.   Any solids or viscous substances of such size or in such quantities
that they may cause obstruction to flow in the sewer or be detrimental to POTW
operations. These objectionable substances include, but are not limited to,
asphalt, dead animals, ashes, sand, mud, straw, industrial process shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, grass clippings, tar, plastic resins, wood,
blood, manure, grease, bones, hair, fleshings, entrails, paper cups, paper
dishes, milk cartons or other similar paper products, either whole or ground;
      3.   Any amounts of petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or
products of mineral oil origin in amounts that would cause or tend to cause
interference or pass through;
      4.   Any biodegradable fats, oils, or greases, such as lard, tallow or
vegetable oil, in concentrations that may cause adverse effects on the POTW;
      5.   Any wastes containing a concentration in excess of the discharge
limitations specified in Section
13.36.070 or in any permit;
      6.   Any waste in such concentration or volume that is toxic to humans,
animals, and the local environment or to biological wastewater treatment
processes or which causes interference, upset, or pass-through at the POTW;
      7.   Any waste having a pH lower than 5.0 or greater than eleven standard
units; or which causes incrustations, scale, or precipitates on sewer walls; or
having any corrosive or detrimental characteristics that may cause injury to
the POTW or service and maintenance personnel;
      8.   Any waste having a temperature of one hundred forty degrees
Fahrenheit or higher at the discharge point, or which causes the POTW influent
to exceed one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit;
      9.   Any waste containing substances that may precipitate, solidify, gel,
polymerize, or become viscous under conditions normally found in the sewerage
system, causing reduced capacity;
      10.   Any waste producing discoloration of treatment plant effluent,
which may violate water quality standards;
      11.   Any solid waste, other than that normally found in domestic
wastewater, that is not ground sufficiently to pass through a three-eighths-
inch mesh screen;
      12.   Any waste containing detergents, surface active agents, or other
substances, which may cause excessive foaming in the sewerage system;
      13.   Any sludge from a water or wastewater treatment plant not owned or
operated by Pima County regional wastewater reclamation department. The
director may issue an industrial wastewater discharge permit for a user to
discharge this substance upon a finding that the discharge will not adversely
affect the operation of the POTW and that the pollutant concentrations do not
exceed those in the sludge produced by the POTW. No such permit shall be issued
that would violate any other federal, state or local rule, regulation or
standards;
      14.   Any hazardous wastes discharged to any portion of the POTW by
truck, rail or dedicated pipeline;
      15.   Any trucked or hauled pollutants except at discharge points
designated within the POTW by the director, or septage receiving facility;
      16.   Any slug load; or
      17.   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.)
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which,
either alone or in combination with other pollutants, may cause interference
with the POTW.
   B.   Industrial wastewater which may be dangerous to the public, the
environment, or which creates a public nuisance, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Any excessive quantities of radioactive materials;
      2.   Any waste containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in
such quantities that, alone or in combination with other waste substances, may
create a hazard for humans, animals, or the local environment; interfere
detrimentally with wastewater treatment processes; cause a public nuisance; or
cause any condition requiring emergency response in the POTW;
      3.   Any pollutants which can result in the formation or presence of
toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW that may cause or tend to cause
worker health and safety problems;
      4.   Any strongly odorous waste or waste tending to create odors;
      5.   Any industrial wastewater in such concentration or volume that may
cause failure in effluent toxicity testing;
      6.   Any recognizable portions of the human anatomy; or
      7.   Any aqueous film forming foam (AFFF), such as from firefighting
activities, that contains any intentionally added per- and poly fluoroalkyl
substances (PFAS) including but not limited to PFOA, PFOS, and GenX-like
chemicals.
   C.   Industrial wastewater that may cause dilution or POTW hydraulic loading
problems, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Any water added for the purpose of diluting wastes which would
otherwise exceed maximum concentration limits;
      2.   Any rainwater, stormwater runoff, groundwater, street drainage, roof
drainage, yard drainage, water from yard fountains, ponds, lawn sprays or
uncontaminated water;
      3.   Any deionized water, steam condensate or distilled water in amounts
which could cause problems with hydraulic loading;
      4.   Any blowdown or bleed water from heating, ventilating, air
conditioning or other evaporative systems exceeding one-third of the makeup
water in a twenty-four-hour period; or
      5.   Any single pass cooling or heating water.
(Ord. 2020-10 § 1, 2020; Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
13.36.070   Discharge limits.
   The amount and nature of allowable discharges will be specified in the
permit, and the characteristics of any discharge shall not exceed those
specified in this article.
   A.   Discharge Limits for Regulated Substances—Composite Sample:
 Substance Limit
           (mg/l)
   Substance              Limit
                          (mg/l)
a. Arsenic—Total        0.4
b. Barium—Total         10.0
c. Boron—Total          5.0
d. Cadmium—Total        0.10
e. Chromium—Total       1.20
f. Copper—Total         1.2
g. Lead—Total           0.5
h. Manganese—Total      83.0
i. Mercury—Total        0.05
j. Nickel—Total         3.98
k. Silver—Total         5.0
l. Zinc—Total           2.6
m. Cyanide—Total        0.6 1
n. Selenium—Total       0.5
o. Oil and Grease         200 1
p. Sulfide—Total        2.0 1
q. Chlorine—Total       10.0 1
1  Based on a Grab Sample
 
   B.   Discharge Limits Based Upon Fume Toxicity (mg/l): (Based on Grab
Samples.)
 Compound Limit
          (mg/l)
    Compound                                   Limit
                                               (mg/l)
a.  Acrylonitrile                              1.24
b.  Benzene                                    0.13
c.  Bromomethane                               0.002
d.  Carbon disulfide                           0.06
e.  Carbon tetrachloride                       0.03
f.  Chlorobenzene                              2.35
g.  Chloroethane                               0.42
h.  Chloroform                                 0.42
i.  Methylchloride (Chloromethane)             0.007
j.  1,2-Dichlorobenzene                        3.74
k.  1,4-Dichlorobenzene                        3.54
l.  1,1-Dichloroethane                         4.58
m.  1,2-trans-Dichloroethene                   0.28
n.  1,2-Dichloropropene                        3.65
o.  1,3-Dichloropropene                        0.09
p.  Ethylbenzene                               1.59
q.  1,2-Dichloroethane (Ethylene dichloride)   1.05
r.  Heptachlor                                 0.003
s.  Hexachloro-1,3-butadiene                   0.0002
t.  Hexachloroethane                           0.96
u.  Methyl ethyl ketone                        249.0
    (2-butanone) (MEK)
v.  Methylene chlorid                          4.15
    (Dichloromethane)
w.  Tetrachloroethylene                        0.53
x.  Toluene                                    1.35
y.  1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene                     0.43
z.  1,1,1-Trichloroethane                      1.55
aa. Trichloroethylene                          0.71
bb. Vinyl chloride                             0.003
cc. 1,1-dichloroethylene (Vinylidene chloride) 0.003
dd  Aroclor 1242                               0.01
ee. Aroclor 1254                               0.005
 
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
13.36.075   Variances.
   The director may allow variances in the ordinance codified in this chapter
when strict adherence would less adequately provide for the protection of the
POTW. The variance shall secure substantially the objectives of the portion of
the ordinance to which the variance is granted. Variances may be allowed when:
   A.   A substitution for or change in a standard material results in the use
of a material which can be clearly demonstrated to be of equal or superior
quality;
   B.   A strict adherence to a design standard or standard details would be
impractical or impossible because of field conditions such as existing utility
facilities or incompatible existing sewerage facilities; or
   C.   An emergency situation prohibits strict adherence to a design standard
or standard detail.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
13.36.080   Additional discharge limits.
   A.   quantitative or other limitations intended for application to general
users and not for inclusion only on individual permits, shall be proposed to
the board of supervisors by the director after a public hearing. The director
shall provide notification at least forty-five days prior to the public hearing
by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in Pima County and by a
written notice to any person who has filed a request for notification with the
director. The notice shall contain a brief description of the nature of the
proposal to be considered, the time and place of the hearings, and the
projected date that a proposal shall be made to the board of supervisors for
approval of discharge limits.
   B.   When the director determines that a user is discharging to the POTW any
waste not previously identified as prohibited in such amounts as may interfere,
pass through, or upset the operation of the POTW, the director shall: (1)
advise the user of the impact of the contribution on the POTW; (2) develop a
discharge limitation for such user to correct the interference with the POTW;
and (3) require the user to comply with the discharge limits.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
13.36.090   Health care related wastes.
   A.   Regulated Facilities. Hospitals, clinics, offices of medical doctors,
mortuaries, morgues and long-term health care facilities:
      1.   May discharge through a waste grinder after director approval as a
condition of the industrial wastewater discharge permit. The installation will
have inlet size and design features suitable for its intended use and
constructed such that all particles pass through a maximum three-eighths-inch
mesh opening;
      2.   Shall not discharge to the sewer by any means:
         a.   Solid wastes generated in the rooms of patients who are isolated
because of a suspected or diagnosed communicable disease;
         b.   Recognizable portions of the human anatomy;
         c.   Equipment, instruments, utensils and other materials of a
disposable nature that may harbor or transmit pathogenic organisms and that are
used in the rooms of patients having a suspected or diagnosed communicable
disease which by the nature of the disease is required to be isolated by public
health agencies;
         d.   Wastes excluded by other provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Limit of Authority. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit
the authority of the Pima County department of environmental quality, Pima
County health department or other health authorities to define wastes as being
infectious and, with the concurrence of the director, to require that they will
not be discharged to the POTW.
   C.   Dental Facilities. Dental facilities built prior to August, 2013 need
not implement the requirement for a new dental facility or obtain an industrial
wastewater discharge permit until such time as they are updated or the
discharge from their facility is identified as exceeding the ordinance limits
listed in Section
13.36.070. Any new dental facility or existing facility making a modification
requiring the submittal of plans for construction or tenant improvements must
install mercury amalgam separators to control mercury bearing wastestreams and
are exempted from the requirement to obtain an industrial wastewater discharge
permit as long as best management practices for amalgam waste as promulgated by
the American Dental Association (October, 2007) are implemented to control
mercury bearing wastestreams including but not limited to the use of an amalgam
separator; staff training on amalgam waste handling, management and disposal;
and vacuum system/amalgam separator maintenance recordkeeping.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
13.36.100   Septage disposal.
   A.   Approval to Discharge.
      1.   No hauler shall discharge septage to the POTW without first
obtaining a septage discharge permit.
      2.   Haulers of septage will discharge at the Pima County regional
wastewater reclamation facility site designated in their permit.
   B.   Discharge Requirements.
      1.   The hauler shall use the POTW septage tracking form specified in the
permit to record each load that is delivered to the POTW.
      2.   Prior to discharge of septage, the hauler shall allow the director
to sample and analyze the contents to ensure compliance with discharge limits
and requirements. The hauler shall provide a suitable sampling tap or
equivalent appurtenance. The hauler may be required to suspend discharging
septage until the analysis is complete. The director shall refuse authorization
to discharge any septage that does not provide for the protection of the POTW,
groundwater resources, effluent and wastewater sludge disposal methods, and
operating personnel.
   C.   Sanitation and Safety Standards. It shall be the responsibility of the
hauler to discharge wastes in such a manner as to keep the area clean and free
from spills or other debris. All spills shall be promptly cleaned up.
   D.   General Requirements and Applicability.
      1.   The hauler is responsible for protecting the POTW by ensuring that
the hauled septage is not hazardous waste and is compatible with the biological
wastewater treatment process.
      2.   All requirements listed here are in addition to any other rule or
regulation established by Pima County health department, Pima County department
of environmental quality, or state or federal regulatory agencies.
   E.   Septage Discharge Permit Application.
      1.   A septage discharge permit is required to discharge hauled septage
waste into the POTW.
      2.   The permit application, or reapplication, shall contain at least the
following information:
         a.   A completed septage discharge permit application/questionnaire
form signed and dated by a person described in Section
13.36.110(A)(5) or by a duly authorized representative of that person;
         b.   Type of waste sources serviced: domestic/commercial, industrial,
septic tank, cesspool, chemical toilet, airline sewage cart, or grease traps;
         c.   Vehicle information including year, make, model, license plate
and tank capacity information for each vehicle in the fleet that will be
carrying septage to the septage receiving station.
      3.   The application fee for a septage wastewater discharge permit
application is one hundred fifty dollars. Fees shall be paid to Pima County
regional wastewater reclamation department at the time of application.
      4.   The director may require the submittal of other information to
assist in the determination of permit requirements.
      5.   The director shall issue a written or electronic notice of
administrative completeness or deficiencies to a permit applicant within
fifteen business days. If the director determines that the application is not
administratively complete, the director shall include a comprehensive list of
the specific deficiencies. The administrative completeness review time frame
and the overall time frame are suspended from the date the notice is issued
until the date the director receives the missing information from the
applicant. The director may issue an additional written or electronic notice of
administrative completeness or deficiencies based on the applicant's submission
of missing information. Once the application is administratively complete, the
substantive review time frame begins and the director shall respond to permit
applications within thirty business days of receipt of a completed permit
application. During the substantive review time frame, the director may make
one comprehensive written or electronic request for additional information. The
substantive review time frame and overall time frame are suspended from the
date the request is issued until the date that the county receives the
additional information from the applicant. The total overall timeframe for the
permit application process shall be forty-five business days not counting time
response time by the applicant. By mutual written or electronic agreement, the
director and an applicant for a permit may extend the substantive review time
frame and the overall time frame. An extension of the substantive review time
frame and the overall time frame may not exceed twenty-five per cent of the
overall time frame.
      6.   All users shall reply to the director and submit any permit
application or questionnaire forms and any other related lists, plans,
analyses, flow information or other materials, as requested by the director,
within thirty days of receipt of any such forms or requests unless given an
extension by the director.
      7.   Permit decisions may be appealed to the director by responding in
writing to the director within thirty-three days of the issuance of the permit
decision. The appeal should include a detailed description of the portion of
the permit and/or permit decision the applicant is appealing and their
justification for the requested revision of the permit. The director shall
respond to the applicant in writing within thirty business days.
      8.   Subsequent to an appeal to the director, an appeal may be made to
the board of supervisors by filing a request with the clerk of the board of
supervisors in the event that satisfactory resolution of permit application
decisions is not agreed upon.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
Article IV. Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Application and Requirements
13.36.110   Industrial wastewater discharge permit application.
13.36.120   Industrial wastewater discharge permit fees.
13.36.110   Industrial wastewater discharge permit application.
   A.   A permit is required to discharge industrial wastewater.
      1.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any industrial
wastewater directly or indirectly to the POTW without first obtaining an
industrial wastewater discharge permit or an authorization letter. The director
shall set requirements at least as stringent as applicable state or federal
rules, regulations or pretreatment standards.
      2.   A permit shall be required for all food service facilities, except
those that were built in accordance with previously adopted editions of a
plumbing code and those that install and maintain an appropriate pretreatment
device and implement the best management practices program as outlined in
Article XIV of this chapter. Facilities shall be responsible for ensuring that
the discharges from their operations are in compliance with the provisions set
forth in this chapter. Any food service facility found to be in violation with
any part of this chapter may be required to obtain an industrial wastewater
discharge permit and correct the deficiencies.
      3.   The director may require a separate permit for each connection to
the POTW.
      4.   The director may require a separate permit from each tenant as well
as the owner or manager of any multi-tenant property, including, but not
limited to: shopping centers, medical centers, and industrial or commercial
parks.
      5.   All permit applications shall be signed as follows:
         a.   For a corporation: by a responsible corporate officer. For the
purpose of this section, a responsible corporate officer means:
            i.   A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
            ii.   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management
decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility, including
having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations; to initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure
long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; to
ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and to
whom authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated in accordance
with corporate procedures.
         b.   For a partnership or sole proprietorship: By a general partner or
the proprietor, respectively; or
         c.   For a municipality, state, federal or other public agency: By
either a principal executive officer or ranking elected official. For purposes
of this section, a principal executive officer of a federal agency includes:
            i.   The chief executive officer of the agency, or
            ii.   A senior executive officer having responsibility for the
overall operations of a principal geographic unit of the agency.
      6.   All reports required by permit and other information requested by
the director shall be signed by a person described in Section
13.36.110(A)(5) or by a duly authorized representative of that person. If an
authorization under this section is no longer accurate because a different
individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the
facility, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of Section
13.36.040(A) must be submitted to the director prior to or together with any
reports to be signed by the individual.
      7.   Any person signing a document shall make the following
certification:
         I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations.
   B.   Application Submittal—All Users.
      1.   All users required to obtain a permit shall file with the director
an application in the form prescribed by the director and accompanied by the
permit application fee.
      2.   The permit application, or reapplication, shall contain at least the
following information:
         a.   A completed industrial wastewater discharge permit application/
questionnaire form signed and dated by a person described in Section
13.36.110(A)(5) or by a duly authorized representative of that person;
         b.   Any drawing, plan, diagram, site plan, or plumbing plan of the
property requested by the director showing accurately all plumbing and sewerage
necessary to satisfy permitting requirements;
         c.   Wastewater discharge flow information and water consumption
information;
         d.   The North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) Code
and Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code required by state law or 40
CFR which best characterizes the industrial discharge activities undertaken on
the property;
         e.   Identification and listing of all hazardous materials or
hazardous substances that are, or are expected to be generated, consumed, used
or stored on the property including the quantities thereof, storage and spill
prevention facilities, and method of disposal for any such materials or wastes.
      3.   For only significant industrial users in addition to the
requirements in subsection (B)(2), above:
         a.   Chemical analysis of any industrial wastewater constituent that
may be discharged to the POTW for the determination of permit requirements;
         b.   Identification and listing of all environmental control permits
held by the applicant that are applicable to the property or to any operation,
process, or facility thereon;
         c.   Any applicable U.S. EPA Categorical determination made by the
applicant using 40 CFR §§ 405 to 471 as adopted in AAC R18-9-A905(A)(9). If the
applicant is regulated under the above provisions, the applicant shall identify
all applicable pretreatment standards (for existing or new sources as
appropriate) by subsections. If the applicant determines that it is not so
regulated it shall so state. At least ninety days prior to commencement of
discharge, new sources shall submit a report which contains the information in
a baseline monitoring report as required by 40 CFR § 403.12(b) as adopted in
AAC R18-9-A905(A)(8)(b). Within 90 days following commencement of the
introduction of wastewater into the POTW, new sources shall submit a ninety-day
compliance report as required in 40 CFR § 403.12(d) as adopted in AAC R18-9-
A905(A)(8)(b).
      4.   The director may require the submittal of other information to
assist in the determination of permit requirements.
      5.   The director shall issue a written or electronic notice of
administrative completeness or deficiencies to a permit applicant within
fifteen business days. If the director determines that the application is not
administratively complete, the director shall include a comprehensive list of
the specific deficiencies. The administrative completeness review time frame
and the overall time frame are suspended from the date the notice is issued
until the date the director receives the missing information from the
applicant. The director may issue an additional written or electronic notice of
administrative completeness or deficiencies based on the applicant's submission
of missing information. Once the application is administratively complete, the
substantive review time frame begins and the director shall respond to permit
applications within thirty business days of receipt of a completed permit
application. During the substantive review time frame, the director may make
one comprehensive written or electronic request for additional information. The
substantive review time frame and overall time frame are suspended from the
date the request is issued until the date that the county receives the
additional information from the applicant. The total overall timeframe for the
permit application process shall be forty-five business days not counting time
response time by the applicant. By mutual written or electronic agreement, the
director and an applicant for a permit may extend the substantive review time
frame and the overall time frame. An extension of the substantive review time
frame and the overall time frame may not exceed twenty-five per cent of the
overall time frame.
      6.   All users shall reply to the director and submit any permit
application or questionnaire forms and any other related lists, plans,
analyses, flow information or other materials, as requested by the director,
within thirty days of receipt of any such forms or request unless given an
extension by the director.
      7.   Permit decisions may be appealed to the director by responding in
writing to the director within thirty-three days of the issuance of the permit
decision. The appeal should include a detailed description of the portion of
the permit and/or permit decision the applicant is appealing and their
justification for the requested revision of the permit. The director shall
respond to the applicant in writing within thirty business days.
      8.   Subsequent to an appeal to the director, an appeal may be made to
the board of supervisors by filing a request with the clerk of the board of
supervisors in the event that satisfactory resolution of permit application
decisions is not agreed upon.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
13.36.120   Industrial wastewater discharge permit fees.
   A.   Application. The application fee for significant industrial users is
eight hundred dollars and for all other users is one hundred fifty dollars.
Fees shall be paid to Pima County regional wastewater reclamation department at
the time of application.
   B.   Renewal. The application fee for significant industrial users is eight
hundred dollars and for all other users is one hundred fifty dollars. Fees
shall be paid to the Pima County regional wastewater reclamation department at
the time of reapplication.
   C.   Modification. A permit modification may be applied for and granted
without a fee required.
   D.   Refund. Permit application fees shall be refunded when a determination
is made that the original submittal does not require a permit.
   If the director does not issue to the applicant the written or electronic
notice granting or denying a permit within the overall time frame or within the
mutually agreed upon time frame extension, the county shall refund to the
applicant the permit application fee and shall excuse payment of any
application fees that have not yet been paid.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
Article V. Standard Ordinance and Permit Conditions
13.36.130   General requirements.
13.36.140   Reserved.
13.36.150   Notification requirements.
13.36.160   Reporting requirements.
13.36.130   General requirements.
   A.   State and Federal Requirements. All users shall comply with all
applicable federal rules, regulations or pretreatment standards, or any
applicable more stringent state or local rules, regulations or standards,
whether or not contained in a permit.
   B.   Separation of Wastes. All domestic wastewater from restrooms, showers,
drinking fountains, and similar sources shall be kept separate from all
industrial wastewaters until the industrial wastewaters have passed through any
required pretreatment facility or device and the industrial wastewater
monitoring facility. The director may waive this condition if Section
13.36.130(E) is utilized.
   C.   Sample Location. As a condition of the permit, all discharged
industrial wastewater shall pass through a designated sampling location. This
sample location shall be located so as to allow unrestricted physical access by
the director.
   D.   Accidental Discharge Protection (Spill Protection and Slug Discharge
Control). All users shall provide protection from the accidental discharge or
spill into the POTW of prohibited, hazardous or other waste materials which are
regulated through this chapter. Such protection shall be provided and
maintained at the users' expense. No user shall commence discharge to the POTW
without accidental discharge protection facilities or procedures. The user
shall notify the POTW immediately of any changes at its facility affecting
potential for a slug discharge.
   E.   Combined Wastewater Formula.
      1.   The combined wastewater formula will be used by users that mix
regulated wastewaters with other regulated or unregulated wastewaters prior to
pretreatment.
   The alternative concentration limits shall be derived using the formula
found in 40 CFR § 403.6(e):
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4363.png]
   Where:
   C T = The alternative concentration limit for the combined wastestream.
   C i = The categorical pretreatment standard concentration limit for a
pollutant in the regulated stream i.
   F i = The average daily flow (at least a thirty-day average) of stream i to
the extent that it is regulated for such pollutant.
   F D = The average daily flow (at least a thirty-day average) from: (a)
boiler blowdown streams, noncontact cooling streams, stormwater streams, and
demineralizer backwash streams; provided, however, that where such streams
contain a significant amount of a pollutant, and the combination of such
streams, prior to pretreatment, with an industrial user's regulated process
wastestream(s) will result in a substantial reduction of that pollutant, the
control authority, upon application of the industrial user, may exercise its
discretion to determine whether such stream(s) should be classified as diluted
or unregulated. In its application to the control authority, the industrial
user must provide engineering, production, sampling and analysis and such other
information so that the control authority can make its determination; or (b)
sanitary wastestreams where such are not regulated by a categorical
pretreatment standard; or (c) from any process wastestreams which were or could
have been entirely exempted from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to
paragraph 8 of the NRDC v. Costle (568 F.2d 1369 (DC Cir. 1977)) Consent Decree
for one or more of the following reasons: (1) the pollutants of concern are not
detectable in the effluent from the industrial user; (2) the pollutants of
concern are present only in trace amounts and are neither causing or likely to
cause toxic effects; (3) the pollutants of concern are present in amount too
small to be effectively reduced by technologies known; or, (4) the wastestreams
contain only pollutants which are compatible with the POTW.
   F T = The average daily flow (at least a thirty-day average) through the
combined treatment facility (includes F i and F D and unregulated streams).
   N = The total number of regulated streams.
      2.   An alternative discharge limit may not be used if the alternative
limit is below the analytical detection limit for any of the regulated
pollutants. As a result, the combined wastewater formula cannot be used, and
wastestreams must be segregated.
   F.   Duty to Reapply. The user shall submit a new application with the
appropriate fee one hundred eighty days before the existing permit expires.
   G.   Duty to Comply.
      1.   The user must comply with all conditions of the permit. Any permit
noncompliance constitutes a violation of the ordinance codified in this chapter
and is grounds for enforcement action as provided for in
Article VI.
      2.   The user shall comply with effluent standards or prohibitions
established under § 307(a) of the Clean Water Act for toxic pollutants within
the time provided in the regulations that establish these standards or
prohibitions.
   H.   Need to Halt or Reduce Activity not a Defense. It shall not be a
defense for a user in an enforcement action that it would have been necessary
to halt or reduce the permitted activity in order to maintain compliance with
the conditions of the permit.
   I.   Duty to Mitigate. The user shall take all reasonable steps to minimize
or prevent any discharge in violation of the permit which has a reasonable
likelihood of adversely affecting human health or the environment.
   J.   Proper Operation and Maintenance. The user shall at all times properly
operate and maintain all facilities and systems of treatment and control (and
related appurtenances) which are installed or used by the user to achieve
compliance with the conditions of a permit or the ordinance codified in this
chapter. Proper operation and maintenance also include adequate laboratory
controls and appropriate quality assurance procedures. This provision requires
the operation of back-up or auxiliary facilities or similar systems which are
installed by a user only when the operation is necessary to achieve compliance
with the conditions of the permit.
   K.   Duty to Provide Information. The user shall furnish within thirty days,
any information the director may request to determine whether cause exists for
modifying, revoking and reissuing, or to determine compliance with the permit.
The user shall also furnish to the director upon request, copies of records
required to be kept by the permit.
   L.   Inspection and Entry.
      1.   The user shall allow the director, upon compliance with ARS § 11-
1603-1606 notification and presentation of photo identification, to:
         a.   Enter upon the users premises, at reasonable times, where a
regulated facility or activity is located or conducted, or where records must
be kept under conditions of the permit.
         b.   Have access to and copy, at reasonable times, any records that
must be kept under conditions of the permit.
         c.   Inspect, at reasonable times, any facilities, equipment
(including monitoring and control equipment), practices, or operations
regulated or required under the permit.
         d.   Sample or monitor at reasonable times, for the purposes of
assuring permit compliance or as otherwise authorized by the ordinance codified
in this chapter, any substances or parameters at any location.
         e.   The user has the right to a split or duplicate of any samples
taken during the inspection if the split or duplicate of any samples, where
appropriate, would not prohibit an analysis from being conducted or render an
analysis inconclusive.
      2.   The director shall have the right to set up on the user's property,
or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling
and/or metering of the user's operations.
      3.   The director may require the user to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own
expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be
calibrated based on manufacturer recommendation to ensure their accuracy.
      4.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the director access to the user's
premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
      5.   Where a user has security measures in place which require proper
identification and clearance before entry onto its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with its security group so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, the director shall be permitted to enter without
delay for the purposes of performing inspections and monitoring.
   M.   Monitoring and Records.
      1.   Samples and measurements taken for the purpose of monitoring shall
be representative of the permitted activity.
      2.   The user shall retain records of all monitoring information,
including all calibration and maintenance records and all original strip chart
recordings for continuous monitoring instrumentation, documentation associated
with best management practices (BMPs), copies of all reports required by the
permit, and records of all data used to complete the application for the
permit, for a period of at least three years from the date of the sample,
measurement, report or application. This period may be extended by request of
the director at any time.
      3.   Records of monitoring information shall include:
         a.   The date, exact place, and time of sampling or measurements;
         b.   The individual(s) who performed the sampling or measurements;
         c.   The date(s) analyses were performed;
         d.   Laboratory(s) which performed the analyses;
         e.   The analytical techniques or methods used;
         f.   Chain of custody forms;
         g.   Any comments, case narrative or summary of results produced by
the laboratory. These comments should identify and discuss QA/QC analyses
performed concurrently during sample analyses and should specify whether
analyses met project requirements and 40 CFR 136. The summary of results must
include information on initial and continuing calibration, surrogate analyses,
blanks, duplicates, laboratory control samples, matrix spike and matrix spike
duplicate results, sample receipt conditions, holding times and preservation;
and
         h.   The results of such analyses.
      4.   Collection, preservation and analysis of compliance samples must be
conducted according to test procedures approved by 40 CFR § 136 as adopted in
AAC R18-9-A905(A)(7), unless other test procedures have been specified in the
permit.
         a.   Except as indicated in subsections b and c below and unless time-
proportional composite or grab sampling is approved by the director (sampling
must be representative of the discharge), the user must collect wastewater
samples using twenty-four-hour flow-proportional composite sampling techniques.
         b.   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, sulfides,
and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques. Samples collected may be composited prior to the analysis as
follows: for cyanide, and sulfides, the sample may be composited in the
laboratory or in the field; for volatile organic compounds and oil and grease,
the samples may be composited in the laboratory.
         c.   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and
ninety-day compliance reports in 40 CFR § 403.12(b) and (d), a minimum of four
grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, oil and grease, sulfide, and
volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do
not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the
director may authorize a lower minimum. For reports required by 40 CFR § 403.12
(e) and (h), the user is required to collect the number of grab samples
necessary to assure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements.
      5.   All compliance samples shall be analyzed by a laboratory licensed in
conformance with environmental laboratories consisting of Article 1 and A.R.S.
§§ 36-495 through 495.15.
   N.   Compliance Schedule. The director shall require the development of a
compliance schedule by users for the installation of technology required to
meet applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements. When a new
requirement is placed upon a user, a compliance schedule may be established to
allow the user to come into compliance.
   O.   Signatory Requirement. All applications, reports, or information
submitted to the director shall be signed and certified by a person meeting the
requirements of Section
13.36.110(A)(5) and (6) or by an authorized representative.
   P.   Re-Opener Clause. A permit shall be modified to incorporate an
applicable standard or limitation promulgated or approved after the permit is
issued if that standard or limitation is more stringent than the limitation in
the permit, or controls a pollutant not limited in the permit.
   Q.   Minor Modification of Permit. The director may modify a permit to make
corrections or allowances for changes in the permitted activity listed in this
section. Any permit modification not processed as a minor modification under
this section must be made for cause. Minor modifications may only:
      1.   Correct typographical errors;
      2.   Change an interim compliance date in a schedule of compliance,
provided the new date is not more than one hundred twenty days after the date
specified in the existing permit and does not interfere with attainment of the
final compliance date requirement;
      3.   Allow for a change in ownership or operational control of a facility
(after notice to the director) where the director determines that no other
change in the permit is necessary, provided that a written agreement containing
a specific date for transfer of permit responsibility, coverage, and liability
between the current and new user has been submitted to the director; or
      4.   Implement the compliance schedule for a user which is a new source.
No such change shall affect a user's obligation prior to discharge.
   R.   Major Modification or Termination of Permit. The director may modify or
terminate a permit for cause. The following are causes for modifying or
terminating a permit during its term, or for denying a permit renewal
application:
      1.   Significant noncompliance (as defined in Section
13.36.170(F) of
Article VI) by the user with any condition of the permit;
      2.   The user's failure in the application or during the permit issuance
process to disclose fully all relevant facts, or the user's misrepresentation
of any relevant facts at any time;
      3.   A determination that the permitted activity endangers human health
or the environment and can only be regulated to acceptable levels by
modification or revocation; or
      4.   A change in any condition that requires either a temporary or a
permanent reduction or elimination of any discharge controlled by the permit.
   S.   Availability of Reports. Except for data determined to be confidential
by 40 CFR § 2.201 Subpart B, all reports prepared in accordance with the terms
of the permit shall be available for public inspection at the offices of the
Pima County regional wastewater reclamation department's industrial wastewater
control section after director approval. Permit applications, permits, and
effluent data shall not be considered confidential. Environmental audit reports
prepared in accordance with A.R.S. § 49-1401 et seq. shall be held as
confidential and not disclosed as provided for in A.R.S. § 49-1404.
   T.   Removed Substances. Regulated wastes or other pollutants removed in the
course of treatment or control of wastewaters shall be properly disposed of in
a manner such as to prevent any pollutant from such materials from entering the
POTW.
   U.   Severability of Permit Conditions. The provisions of the permit are
severable, and if any provision of the permit, or the application of any
provision of the permit to any circumstance, is held invalid, the application
of such provision to other circumstances, and the remainder of the permit,
shall not be affected thereby.
   V.   Civil and Criminal Liability. Except as provided in permit conditions
on by-pass and upset, nothing in the permit shall be construed to relieve the
user from civil or criminal penalties for noncompliance.
   W.   Permit Actions. The permit may be modified, suspended or revoked for
cause. The filing of a request by the user for a permit modification,
reissuance, or a notification of planned changes or anticipated noncompliance
does not stay any permit condition.
   X.   Property Rights. The permit does not convey any property rights of any
sort, or any exclusive privilege.
   Y.   Comment Period. The permit holder has thirty-three days from the date
of the mailing of the permit in which to comment in writing to the director.
   Z.   Permit Duration. Permits are issued for a specified time period, not to
exceed five years.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
13.36.140   Reserved.
13.36.150   Notification requirements.
   A.   Notification of Accidental Discharge, Spill, Slug Loading, Bypass,
Upset or Other Noncompliance.
      1.   Notification.
         a.   In the event of bypass, upset, accidental discharge, spill, or
slug load, which may endanger health, the environment, or the POTW, the user
shall notify the Pima County regional wastewater reclamation department by
telephone immediately upon discovery of the occurrence.
         b.   The user shall notify the industrial wastewater control section
by telephone within twenty-four hours from the time the user becomes aware of
the circumstances in which any discharge exceeds any effluent limitation in the
permit, or exceeds a maximum discharge limitation for any of the pollutants
listed in this chapter.
         c.   The notification shall include location of discharge, type of
waste, discharge concentration and volume, and corrective actions taken by the
user.
         d.   Within five days following notification, the user shall submit to
the director a detailed written report containing such information and
describing the cause of the discharge and measures to be taken by the user to
prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the
user of any expense, loss, damage, fines, civil penalties or other liability
which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW or any other person or
property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil
penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other
applicable law.
         e.   The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit
the results of the repeat analysis to the director within thirty days after
becoming aware of the exceedance.
      2.   Other Noncompliance Notification. The user shall report all
instances of noncompliance at the time monitoring reports are submitted. The
reports shall contain the information listed in subsections (A)(1)(c) and (d)
of this section.
      3.   Other Information. When the user becomes aware that it failed to
submit any relevant facts in a permit application, or submitted incorrect
information in a permit application or in any report to the director, it shall
promptly submit such facts or information.
   B.   Bypass.
      1.   Bypass not Exceeding Limitations. The user may allow any bypass to
occur which does not cause effluent limitations to be exceeded, but only if it
is also for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses
are not subject to the provisions of subsections (B)(3) and (B)(4) of this
section.
      2.   Notice.
         a.   Anticipated Bypass. If the user knows in advance of the need for
a bypass, it shall submit prior notice, at least ten days before the date of
the bypass.
         b.   Unanticipated Bypass. The user shall submit notice of an
unanticipated bypass as required in subsection (A)(1) of this section.
      3.   Prohibition of Bypass. Bypass is prohibited, and the director may
take enforcement action against a user for bypass, unless:
         a.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury,
or severe property damage. Severe property damage means substantial physical
damage to property, damage to treatment facilities which causes them to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can be
reasonably expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage
does not mean economic loss by delays in production;
         b.   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities or retention of untreated wastes or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and,
         c.   The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (B)(2) of
this section.
      4.   The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering
its adverse effects, if the director determines that it will meet the three
conditions listed above in subsection (B)(3) of this section.
   C.   Upset.
      1.   Effect of an Upset. An upset constitutes an affirmative defense to
an action brought for noncompliance with such technology-based permit effluent
limitations if the requirements of subsection (C)(2) of this section are met.
      2.   Conditions necessary for a Demonstration of Upset. A user who wishes
to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through
properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence
that:
         a.   An upset occurred and that the user can identify the cause(s) of
the upset;
         b.   The permitted facility was at the time being properly operated;
         c.   The user submitted notice of the upset as required in subsection
(A)(1) of this section; and
         d.   The user complied with any remedial measures required under
Section
13.36.130(J).
      3.   Burden of Proof. In any enforcement proceeding, the user, seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset, has the burden of proof.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
13.36.160   Reporting requirements.
   A.   Planned Changes. The user shall give notice to the director as soon as
possible of any planned physical alterations or additions to the permitted
facility when:
      1.   The alteration or addition to a permitted facility may meet one of
the criteria for determining whether a facility is a new source.
      2.   Within ninety days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source,
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any
user subject to categorical pretreatment standards and requirements shall
submit to the director a report indicating the nature and concentration of all
pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process.
   The report shall state whether the applicable categorical pretreatment
standards or requirements are being met and, if not, what additional operations
and maintenance or pretreatment is necessary. This statement shall be reviewed
by an authorized representative of the user and certified; or
      3.   Any anticipated facility expansions, production increases, or
process modifications which will result in new, different, or increased
discharges of pollutants must be reported by submission of a new permit
application or, if such changes will not violate the discharge limitations
specified in the permit, by notice to the Pima County regional wastewater
reclamation department. Following such notice, the permit may be modified to
specify and limit any pollutants not previously limited or change existing
limits or other requirements. Approval must be obtained prior to any new
discharges. The user shall allow forty-five business days for review.
   B.   Anticipated Noncompliance. The user shall give advance notice to the
director of any planned changes in the permitted facility or activity which may
result in noncompliance with permit requirements.
   C.   Transfers. Permits are not transferable to any person except after
notice to the director. The director may require modification or reissuance of
the permit to change the name of the user and incorporate such other
requirements as may be necessary under this chapter.
   D.   Monitoring Reports. Monitoring results shall be reported at the
intervals specified in the permit.
      1.   Monitoring results must be reported on a self-monitoring report form
(SMRF), or a form approved by the director to the extent that the information
reported may be entered on the form for the report period.
      2.   If the user monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by
the permit, using test procedures approved under 40 CFR § 136 or as specified
in the permit, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the
calculation and reporting of the data submitted in the SMRF.
      3.   Calculations for all limitations which require averaging of
measurements shall utilize an arithmetic mean unless otherwise specified by the
director in the permit.
      4.   In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a
best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user must
submit documentation required by the director or the pretreatment standard
necessary to determine the compliance status of the user.
   E.   Reduced Periodic Reporting. The director may reduce the requirement for
periodic compliance reports to a requirement to report no less frequently than
once a year, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by
the EPA/state, where the industrial user's total categorical wastewater flow
does not exceed five thousand gallons per day.
   Reduced reporting is not available to industrial users that have in the last
two years been in significant noncompliance (SNC), as defined in Section
13.36.040 of this chapter. In addition, reduced reporting is not available to
an industrial user with daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant
levels that vary so significantly that, in the opinion of the director,
decreasing the reporting requirement for this industrial user would result in
data that are not representative of conditions occurring during the reporting
period.
   F.   Compliance Schedules. Reports of compliance or noncompliance with, or
any progress reports on, interim and final requirements contained in any
compliance schedule of the permit shall be submitted no later than fourteen
days following each scheduled date.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
Article VI. Enforcement
13.36.170   Issuance of notification of violation.
13.36.180   Notification of permit suspension.
13.36.190   Notification of permit revocation.
13.36.195   Emergency termination of service.
13.36.200   User enforcement appeal.
13.36.210   Liability of user.
13.36.220   Judicial proceedings.
13.36.230   Levels of action.
13.36.170   Issuance of notification of violation.
   A.   Notification of Violation.
      1.   Whenever the director finds that a user is in violation of any
article of this chapter, any part of a permit, or any order for corrective
action, the director shall serve or cause to be served upon such user, a
written notification of violation (NOV). The notification of violation shall be
served and shall state the nature of the alleged violation. The notification of
violation may include, but not be limited to:
         a.   An order for corrective action;
         b.   A schedule to attain compliance;
         c.   An order to show cause why the matter should not be referred to
the Pima County attorney's office for appropriate legal action;
         d.   An order to cease discharge;
         e.   A suspension or revocation of the user's permit; or
         f.   An order to respond in writing to the allegations.
   Additional orders and changes to a suspension or revocation may follow the
initial order at the discretion of the director or as additional information
becomes available.
      2.   The current water quality standards for phenolics, codified at AAC
R18-11-101 through 304, are suspended, pending further administrative rule
making proceedings by the director of ADEQ, and shall not be enforced against
any user pursuant to Title 49, Arizona Revised Statutes. Until such further
administrative rule making proceedings are concluded, no person shall discharge
phenol compounds to surface waters at levels or in combinations sufficient to
be toxic to humans or local animal, plant or aquatic life. Phenol (total) is an
indicator and, in and of itself, is not a violation unless there is a
corresponding violation of the Appendix A Numeric Water Quality Standards for
Surface Waters Table 1, Water Quality Criteria by Designated Use found in AAC
R18-11.
   B.   Response to Notification of Violation.
      1.   The user shall respond in writing to the director within the time
specified referenced in the notification of violation. In no instance shall an
initial response be submitted any later than ten days from receipt of the
notice by the user. The response shall be complete, containing all information
and data required by the notification of violation.
      2.   If the response to a notification of violation requires an order to
show cause, the user shall respond by demonstrating why the director should not
ask the Pima County attorney to file an action in superior court requesting
injunctive relief and penalties.
   C.   Resolution of Notification of Violation. Upon review of a response to a
notification of violation, the director may accept the response as complete and
satisfactory. If this is the case, the director shall consider the issue
regarding the notification of violation closed. The director will notify the
user in writing regarding the closure of the notification of violation. The
closure of the notification of violation does not preclude further enforcement
action.
   D.   Deficient Response to Notification of Violation. Upon review of a
response to a notification of violation, the director may determine the
response to be deficient. If such a determination is made, the director may
take any one or more of the following actions:
      1.   Require any non-submitted or incomplete information be provided;
      2.   Suspend or revoke the user's permit;
      3.   Order the user to cease discharge;
      4.   Seek penalties as justified by the violations; or
      5.   Any other action the director determines to be appropriate.
   E.   Compliance Schedule. When the user is found to be in noncompliance, a
compliance schedule may be made part of an enforcement order. The deadline
dates in the enforcement order will be subject to the same civil penalties and
will be as enforceable as a discharge limit.
   F.   Published List of Significant Violators. To comply with the public
participation requirements of 40 CFR Part 25 as outlined in ARS § 49-391(C) for
the enforcement of National Pretreatment Standards, the director shall at least
annually publish notification, in a newspaper of general circulation that
provides meaningful public notice in the municipality in which the POTW is
located, of industrial users which, at any time during the previous twelve
months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment
requirements.
[1.] For purposes of this provision, a significant industrial user (or any
industrial user that violates 40 CFR § 403.8, paragraphs [f][2][viii][c], [d],
or [h] of this section) is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets
one or more of the following criteria:
         a.   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here
as those in which sixty-six percent or more of all the measurements taken for
the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any
magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including
instantaneous limits, as defined in 40 CFR § 403.3(l);
         b.   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those
in which thirty-three percent or more of all of the measurements for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of
the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits
as defined in 40 CFR § 403.3(l) multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for
BOD, TSS, and FOG, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
         c.   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by 40 CFR § 403.3(l) (daily maximum, longer-term average, instantaneous
limit, or narrative standard) that the director determines has caused, alone or
in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
         d.   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in
the director's exercise of emergency authority under Section
13.36.195 to halt or prevent such a discharge;
         e.   Failure to meet, within ninety days after the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
         f.   Failure to provide, within forty-five days after the due date,
required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
         g.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
         h.   Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a
violation of best management practices, that the director determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
13.36.180   Notification of permit suspension.
   A.   Reason for Permit Suspension. The director shall use the emergency
authority specified below as reason to suspend a permit when:
      1.   The suspension is necessary to cease a discharge from a user which
may present a hazard to the public health, safety or welfare, or to the
environment or pass-through, interference, or upset to the POTW; or
      2.   The suspension is necessary to cease the discharge of a user that
has displayed a pattern of noncompliance with the provisions contained in this
chapter.
   When notified of a permit suspension, the user shall immediately cease
discharge of all industrial wastewater to the POTW.
   B.   Failure to Comply with Permit Suspension. In the event of a failure of
the user to comply voluntarily with the notification of permit suspension, the
director shall take such steps as necessary to ensure compliance up to and
including termination of service by court order or physical barrier.
   C.   Reinstatement of Suspended Permit. The director shall, by written
statement, reinstate the users permit upon proof of satisfactory compliance
with all requirements of the notification of permit suspension. Damages and
costs incurred by pima county in suspending the permit and disconnecting the
industrial sewer shall be paid by the user before reinstatement of the permit.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
13.36.190   Notification of permit revocation.
   A.   Reason for Revocation of Permit.
      1.   The director may revoke a permit upon finding that the user has
violated any provision of this chapter, including but not limited to the
following:
         a.   Failure to notify the director of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
         b.   Failure to provide prior notification to the director of changed
conditions pursuant to Section
13.36.160;
         c.   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application;
         d.   Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements;
         e.   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
         f.   Refusing to allow timely access to the facility premises or
records;
         g.   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
         h.   Failure to pay penalties;
         i.   Failure to pay sewer user fees as required by the users
industrial wastewater discharge permit;
         j.   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
         k.   Failure to provide advanced notice of transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; and
         l.   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, BMP or any
other terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.
      2.   Individual wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon
cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership.
      3.   Any user whose permit has been revoked shall immediately cease all
discharge of any industrial wastewater to the POTW.
   B.   Failure to Comply with Permit Revocation. In the event of a failure of
the user to comply voluntarily with the notification of permit revocation, the
director shall take such steps as necessary to ensure compliance.
   C.   Resolution of Permit Revocation. Before any further discharge of
industrial wastewater may be made by the user, it must apply for and obtain a
new industrial wastewater discharge permit, pay all charges that would be
required upon initial application, and pay all delinquent fees, charges and
such other sums as the user may owe to Pima County. Damages and costs incurred
by Pima County in revoking the permit and disconnecting the industrial sewer
shall be paid by the user before issuance of a new permit.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
13.36.195   Emergency termination of service.
   A.   The director may suspend wastewater treatment service to any person
when it is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents or
may present any imminent and substantial endangerment to the health or welfare
of persons or the environment, or will cause interference to the POTW.
   B.   A person notified of the suspension of wastewater treatment service
shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. If such person fails to
comply with the suspension notification, the director shall take necessary
steps, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or
minimize damages to the POTW, endangerment to individuals or the environment.
The director may reinstate wastewater treatment service upon proof of the
elimination of the noncompliant discharge.
   C.   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a show cause
hearing prior to any emergency termination of service under this section.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
13.36.200   User enforcement appeal.
   An enforcement action appeal may be made to the board of supervisors by
filing a request with the clerk of the board of supervisors in the event that
satisfactory resolution of Sections
13.36.170, 13.36.180 and 13.36.190 is not agreed upon.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
13.36.210   Liability of user.
   Any user who discharges or causes the discharge of wastewater which causes
damage to the POTW, interference, pass-through, upset, bypass or SSO or any
other damages resulting in costs to the POTW shall be liable for all damages
occasioned thereby.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
13.36.220   Judicial proceedings.
   A.   Initiation of Legal Action. Whenever the director finds that a user has
violated any of the provisions of this chapter, the director may ask the county
attorney to take appropriate legal action. This legal action may include, among
other things, the following:
      1.   Prohibitive injunctions;
      2.   Mandatory injunctions for corrective action and cleanup;
      3.   Civil penalties in accordance with this chapter and A.R.S § 49-391;
      4.   Criminal penalties pursuant to A.R.S. § 11-251.5;
      5.   Recovery of civil damages, penalties, and costs to the POTW;
      6.   Recovery of expenses experienced by the POTW in responding to or
repairing damages for which the user liability is incurred under Section
13.36.210.
   B.   Civil and Criminal Penalties for Violation.
      1.   The civil penalties for violation of any article of this chapter,
any part of a permit written and issued in compliance with this chapter, or any
requirement of a notification of violation written and issued in compliance
with this chapter, shall not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars for each
violation. For continuing violations, each day may constitute a separate
offense.
      2.   The civil penalties for non-submittal of reports, noncompliance with
the reporting or application requirements required in this chapter or permit,
or failure to complete an increment of progress of a compliance schedule, shall
not exceed one thousand dollars for each day in which the requirements are not
fulfilled.
      3.   Any person who attempts to deceive a government agency by submitting
documents to the agency or by making statements to a representative of the
agency which they know to be false, or by destroying or concealing or refusing
to deliver papers or records required by the agency to be kept for its
information, is subject to prosecution for tampering with a public record, or
fraudulent schemes and practices. Tampering with a public record is a Class 6
Felony (A.R.S. § 13-2407), and carries a maximum penalty of one and one-half
years imprisonment and/or a $150,000.00 fine. Fraudulent schemes and practices
is a Class 5 Felony (A.R.S. § 13-2311), and carries a maximum penalty of two
years imprisonment and/or a one hundred fifty thousand dollar fine.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
13.36.230   Levels of action.
   A.   Enforcement of Judicial Action. Participation in any communication
concerning violations will not exempt a user of this chapter from formal
enforcement or judicial action.
   B.   Written Permission Requirement. All final determinations from the
director will be in writing.
   C.   Separate Actions. Any judicial proceedings initiated because of a
violation of any section of this chapter shall not exempt a user from any
judicial proceedings initiated because of a violation of any other provision of
this chapter.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
Article VII. Notice Procedure
13.36.240   Notices.
13.36.240   Notices.
   Any notice required to be given by the director under this chapter shall be
in writing and served in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested.
The notice shall be served upon a representative of the user, at the last
address known to the director, or the occupants or owners of record of property
upon which the alleged violations occurred.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
Article VIII. Rules and Regulations
13.36.250   Rules and regulations.
13.36.250   Rules and regulations.
   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 11-1607, all applicable ordinances, substantive policy
statements and enforcement response plans shall be filed in the office of the
clerk of the board of supervisors. A copy shall be available in the Pima County
regional wastewater reclamation department director's office. Any and all
materials incorporated by reference in this document shall also be open to
public inspection at these offices. The county will publish or place on the
county website.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
Article IX. Time Limits
13.36.260   Time limits.
13.36.260   Time limits.
   Any time limit provided in any written notice or in any provision of this
chapter or in any regulation adopted pursuant to it shall be extended only by
written directive of the director, following the written request of the user
involved. The request must contain adequate justification for the extension of
the time limit.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
Article X. Reserved
Article XI. Severability
13.36.280   Severability.
13.36.280   Severability.
   If any provision of the ordinance codified in this chapter is invalidated by
judicial action, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall
continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
Article XII. Reserved
Article XIII. Hazardous Waste Discharge
13.36.300   Hazardous waste discharge.
13.36.300   Hazardous waste discharge.
   The user shall notify the POTW and ADEQ waste management division in writing
of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of,
would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR § 261.
   The user shall make notification of any hazardous waste discharges. By lack
of this notification, the user is asserting that it is not discharging a waste
that, if otherwise disposed of, would be considered a hazardous waste as
defined by 40 CFR 261. The permittee shall comply with 40 CFR § 403.12(p),
which sets forth reporting and notification requirements for the discharge into
the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be defined as a
hazardous waste by 40 CFR § 261.
   At no point shall discharge covered by this domestic sewer exclusion for
discharge of hazardous waste exceed the local discharge limits set forth in
Section
13.36.070 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
Article XIV. Grease Management Program
13.36.400   Statement of policy.
13.36.410   Operation and maintenance of pretreatment devices.
13.36.420   Hydromechanical and gravity grease interceptor and other
alternative pretreatment device design criteria.
13.36.430   Fats, oils and grease sources.
13.36.440   Best management practice requirements.
13.36.450   Record-keeping requirements.
13.36.400   Statement of policy.
   The Pima County regional wastewater reclamation department's industrial
wastewater control section is authorized to determine the compliance status of
food service facilities (FSF) where fats, oils and grease (FOG) of vegetable or
animal origin are discharged directly or indirectly to the POTW. These
discharges can contribute to line blockages or sanitary sewer overflows.
   For the purpose of this chapter and pretreatment requirement determination,
FSF's are defined as those facilities the Pima County health department
requires to install and utilize a manual ware-washing three compartment sink.
   The purpose of these rules is to set forth uniform requirements for all food
service facilities that discharge into any public or private collection system
connected to the POTW. Any new FSF or existing facility making a modification
requiring the submittal of plans for construction or tenant improvements must
meet the requirements of this grease management program. Facilities without
pretreatment, or whose grease-bearing waste-streams are not connected to a
pretreatment device, must upgrade their system to the requirements of this
chapter or obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit.
   Existing facilities that were built to previously adopted plumbing codes'
standards need not bring current their pretreatment system unless they are
found to have caused or contributed to grease accumulation in the line or odor
generated by grease accumulation.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
13.36.410   Operation and maintenance of pretreatment devices.
   All pretreatment devices shall be maintained in efficient operation at all
times by the owner or operator at their expense.
   Food service facilities are required to have a suitable and adequate
pretreatment device, and must regularly inspect, clean and maintain such device
in accordance with this article or the manufacturers' recommendations.
   In maintaining these pretreatment devices, the owner/operator shall be
responsible for the proper removal and disposal of the captured material.
Records shall be maintained of the dates, name of person/company, and the
amount of material removed.
   Pretreatment device maintenance performed by liquid waste haulers shall
consist of removing the FOG, solids and water from the device and properly
disposing of the material in accordance with all federal, state and local laws.
proper maintenance practices include evacuating the entire contents in the
following manner:
      • Remove floatable FOG material;
      • Remove settled solids;
      • Remove and scrape baffles, baffle slots, interior walls and other
detachable components;
      • Remove remaining FOG, solid material and water ("pump-in-full" — no
"skimming"); and
      • Reinstall all components removed during the cleaning process.
   Under no circumstances shall any liquid removed from any pretreatment device
be placed back into any pretreatment device.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
13.36.420   Hydromechanical and gravity grease interceptor and other
alternative pretreatment device design criteria.
   Pretreatment devices shall be designed and installed in accordance with the
sizing criteria found in this section. A sampling port/box/T, which will
accommodate the collection of a valid oil and grease sample, shall be included
on all pretreatment device installations.
   A.   Hydromechanical grease interceptors (HGI), which are generally
installed inside, may be used when there are four or fewer fixtures. The
minimum size HGI installed shall be rated no less than twenty-five gallon per
minute with a fifty pound grease retention capacity. A flow control device
shall be installed so that the flow through the device shall at no time be
greater than the rated flow. If a dishwasher or food waste disposal unit is
used in the facility, an HGI cannot be used and an appropriately sized GGI or
alternative pretreatment device capable of accepting these wastes must be
installed.
   Hydromechanical grease interceptors must be cleaned at least monthly. An HGI
located indoors should be cleaned during non-business hours to prevent
objectionable odors/germs from being released into the facility.
   B.   A gravity grease interceptor (GGI) is typically installed outside and
in the ground when a FSF has greater than four fixtures, or when dishwasher or
food waste disposal units are used in the facility. The minimum sized GGI to be
installed shall be three hundred gallons. Gravity grease interceptors shall be
installed such that they are easily accessible for inspection, cleaning and the
removal of FOG and solid material. A GGI shall meet the following minimum
criteria: no obstruction to prevent the proper access and cleaning of the GGI;
access covers located such that the influent and effluent sanitary "T" and
compartment transition points (if applicable) are accessible for proper
cleaning and inspection; and an access cover for each chamber and constructed
with the appropriate traffic rating.
   The GGI must be pumped-in-full at least every six months or when the total
accumulation of surface FOG (including floating solids) and settled solids
reaches twenty-five percent of the GGI's overall depth.
   C.   Gravity grease interceptor sizing criteria:
   V(min) = F x R x S
   Where:
   V(min)= Minimum gravity grease interceptor operating volume, gallons
   F = Flow rate (maximum), gallons per minute
   R = Retention time = 30 minutes
   S = Storage factor = 25 percent
   Thus: V (min) = F x 30 x 1.25
   To calculate flow rate (F), use Drainage Fixture Units (DFU) values found in
the tables below.
   The flow rate shall be determined based on the total flow rate from all
equipment and plumbing fixtures connected to the gravity grease interceptor
using one of the following equations:
      1.   Drainage fixture units less than or equal to forty:
   F = (0.8 x DFU)
      2.   Drainage fixture units greater than forty:
   F = (0.3 x DFU) + 20
   Where:
   DFU = Drainage fixture units, defined by the tables below.
The below fixture counts are for determining the size of a gravity grease
interceptor.
Drainage Fixture Units for Food Service Facilities.
Fixture Type Drainage Fixture Unit (DFU) Value
Drainage Fixture Units for Food Service Facilities.
Fixture Type                                Drainage Fixture Unit (DFU) Value
2-Compartment Sink                          2
3-Compartment Sink                          3
Automatic Dishwasher greater than 2 inch    6
Drain
Automatic Dishwasher less than 2 inch Drain 3
Food Prep Sink                              2
Food Waste Grinder                          4
Hand Sink                                   1
Mop Sink/Mop Basin                          2
Pre-Rinse Sink                              3
Pre-Rinse Sink w/Food Waste                 4
Rotisserie w/Drain                          3
Tilt Soup Kettle                            3
Wok Stove                                   4
For Fixtures not listed above use Table 709.2 below of the 2012 International
Plumbing Code.
 
Drainage Fixture Units for Fixture Drains or Traps.
Fixture Drain or Trap Size (inches) Drainage Fixture Unit (DFU) Value
Drainage Fixture Units for Fixture Drains or Traps.
Fixture Drain or Trap Size (inches) Drainage Fixture Unit (DFU) Value
1½ inches                          1
1½ Inches                          2
2 inches                            3
2½ inches                          4
3 inches                            5
4 inches                            6
 
GGI sizing is summarized below:
Gravity Grease Interceptor Sizing Minimum Size (gallons)
GGI sizing is summarized below:
Gravity Grease Interceptor Sizing  Minimum Size (gallons)
Up to 10 DFUs                      300
11—16 DFUs                       500
17—25 DFUs                       750
26—33 DFUs                       1,000
34—44 DFUs                       1,250
45—66 DFUs                       1,500
67—111 DFUs                      2,000
Greater than 112 DFUs Contact IWC.
 
   Retention Time:
   The minimum retention time of thirty minutes is based on Wastewater
Engineering, Treatment, Disposal and Reuse, Third Edition, Metcalf and Eddy,
Inc., McGraw-Hill, Inc., page 1028.
   Storage Factor:
   A minimum of twenty-five percent storage is required for fats, oils, grease
and settled solids for gravity grease interceptors.
   Providing additional interceptor capacity may reduce an interceptor's
maintenance frequency. However, solids accumulation and low flows in an
interceptor may, over an extended period of time, produce a corrosive
environment which can damage the structural integrity of the interceptor. An
oversized interceptor can also generate odor problems.
   D.   If an alternative pretreatment device is used instead of an HGI or GGI,
the design must be submitted to the director for prior approval. The
information submitted to the director must include, but not be limited to, the
number of DFUs the device is going to service, and the manufacturer's
recommended sizing criteria.
   E.   The introduction of emulsifying agents such as chemicals, solvents or
enzymes, either directly or indirectly into the pretreatment device, other than
what is considered typical business operational practices such as dishwashing
or sanitation, is strictly prohibited.
   Products which reduce FOG, such as bacteria, may be used in the pretreatment
device, in addition to the regular maintenance program, but shall not be a
consideration in determining sizing or maintenance frequency.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
13.36.430   Fats, oils and grease sources.
   A.   All fixtures, equipment and drain lines located in a facility's food
preparation or clean-up areas, which are sources of FOG, shall be connected to
a pretreatment device except as outlined in Section
13.36.400 of this article. Dishwashers or other fixtures discharging
emulsifying agents, such as detergents, should be located such that their
potential to adversely impact the operation is minimized. All wastestreams
containing FOG within FSF shall be directed to a pretreatment device.
   B.   The following types of equipment or fixtures have been identified as
sources of FOG and shall be connected to a pretreatment device:
      • Pre-rinse and or pre-wash sinks;
      • Two, three or four compartment sinks;
      • Meat prep sinks;
      • Wok stoves;
      • Kitchen floor drains;
      • Floor sinks;
      • Mop sinks 1 ;
      • Food prep sinks;
      • Hand sinks 2 ;
      • Dishwashers;
      • Self cleaning ventilation/exhaust hood and
      • Good waste disposal units 3 .
1 Depending on use, the requirement to drain through a pretreatment device may
be appealed to the director as outlined in Section
13.36.075.
2 A hand wash sink located in the kitchen area shall either discharge through a
pretreatment device or have a sign posted above it stating clearly in all
applicable languages: "HANDWASH SINK ONLY! NO FOOD PREPARATION OR DISHWASHING
ALLOWED."
3 Discharges from food waste disposal units must drain through a minimum three-
eighths-inch screen or solids separator prior to the pretreatment device.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
13.36.440   Best management practice requirements.
   Best management practices (BMPs) are policies, practices, or procedures
implemented to mitigate the adverse effects of FOG.
   All FSFs must develop and implement BMPs which, at minimum, shall include
the following:
      • Pouring all grease and oil from pots and pans into a waste grease
container stored in close proximity to the pot washing sink and not down the
drain;
      • Scraping off of all solids or FOG on plates, pots and pans into the
garbage can;
      • Pre-washing plates with cold water over a small screened catch basin
positioned over the drain and disposing the contents of the catch basin in a
garbage can;
      • Disconnecting all food waste disposal devices, unless the Discharge is
screened or goes through a solids separator prior to Discharge;
      • The posting of signs above vegetable prep sinks not protected by a
grease Pretreatment device, stating clearly in all applicable languages: "NO
WASHING OF POTS, PANS, DISHES OR UTENSILS - VEGETABLE PREP SINK ONLY";
      • Periodic training of current and new employees regarding the effective
use of the BMPs.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
13.36.450   Record-keeping requirements.
   All pretreatment device maintenance, compliance reports and related
correspondence must be retained on-site by the user for a minimum of three
years. A separate maintenance log shall be maintained on-site for each device.
Maintenance logs shall include the following information: device location and
volume; maintenance dates; volume removed in gallons; name of company and
person(s) performing maintenance; and disposal location (facility where the
material was disposed).
   Records associated with waste cooking oil collection and disposal shall also
be kept on-site by the user for a minimum of three years. Waste cooking oil
collection logs shall include the following information: collection date;
volume collected in gallons; name of company and person(s) performing
collection; and disposal methods.
   Records of compliance with BMP training shall be maintained by each FSF.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
Article XV. Satellite Collection Systems
13.36.500   Applicability.
13.36.510   Publicly-owned satellite collection systems.
13.36.500   Applicability.
   All entities owning or operating a satellite collection system shall comply
with the requirements of this article.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
13.36.510   Publicly-owned satellite collection systems.
   A satellite collection system under control of a separate jurisdictional
governmental agency or Native American Nation shall enter into an agreement
with Pima County that addresses the following requirements:
   A.   Agreement by the contributing jurisdiction to adopt a pretreatment
sewer use ordinance that is no less stringent than Pima County's ordinance.
   B.   Compliance with industrial wastewater ordinance requirements by
industries that would be subject to Pima County's ordinances if they discharged
to the collection system owned and operated by Pima County. Specifically, the
contributing jurisdiction shall agree to adopt local limits for industrial
discharges into its collection system that are at least as stringent as Pima
County's local limits, or should agree to a specific maximum total mass loading
of pollutants for discharge to Pima County's POTW.
   C.   Indication of whether the contributing jurisdiction or Pima County is
responsible for issuing control mechanisms to industrial users located within
the contributing jurisdiction. If joint control mechanisms are to be issued,
the agreement should indicate which party will take the lead in preparing the
draft control mechanisms.
   D.   Agreement by the contributing jurisdiction to providing Pima County
access to all records compiled as part of the contributing jurisdiction's
pretreatment program activities, including notice to Pima County of key
activities such as enforcement actions and permit issuances.
   E.   Granting to Pima County the power to enter into the facilities of
industrial users to periodically verify compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements. Procedures and responsibility for conducting
inspections and other compliance evaluation activities should be established
explicitly.
   F.   Agreement as to whether the contributing jurisdiction or Pima County
has primary responsibility for enforcing pretreatment standards and
requirements against industrial users located within the contributing
jurisdiction. If the contributing jurisdiction has primary responsibility for
enforcing the ordinance, the agreement should specify that Pima County can
enforce if the contributing jurisdiction fails to do so.
   G.   Where it has primary responsibility for permitting, compliance
monitoring, and/or enforcement, the contributing jurisdiction should agree that
Pima County has the right to take legal action as necessary to enforce the
terms of the agreement and/or to take action directly against noncompliant
industrial users in the event that the contributing municipality is unable or
unwilling to do so. The agreement should also provide for remedies available
against the noncomplying municipality, including indemnification and specific
performance of pretreatment activities.
   H.   If no industrial users are located within the contributing
jurisdiction, the agreement should state: (1) no industrial users are currently
located within the contributing jurisdiction, and (2) none shall be allowed to
operate unless prior notification is provided to Pima County and a new
agreement is entered into addressing implementation and enforcement of the
pretreatment program. A similar agreement might be appropriate if the only
existing nondomestic users are light commercial establishments.
   I.   Operation of the contributing jurisdiction's collecting system so as to
comply with the requirements of Pima County's CMOM permit number 20061111.
   J.   Prevention or reduction to the extent possible of stormwater or
infiltration of groundwater from entering the Pima County collection system.
   K.   Notification of Pima County of new connections to Pima County's system,
and assurance of compliance with Pima County's capacity assurance program.
   L.   Assurance of the payment of connection and user fees as adopted by Pima
County.
   M.   Provision for spill-reporting systems.
   N.   O&M provisions that protect the system, including proper O&M as
required by 40 CFR 122.41(d).
   O.   Reporting of unpermitted discharges from satellite systems to waters of
the United States or storm sewer systems owned or controlled by Pima County.
   P.   All reasonable steps to minimize or prevent any discharge in violation
of Pima County's permit that have a reasonable likelihood of adversely
affecting human health or the environment.
(Ord. 2013-32 (part), 2013)
Division IV. Solid Waste
   
Chapter 13.40 - SOLID WASTE
   APPENDIX
Chapter 13.40
SOLID WASTE
13.40.010   Definitions.
13.40.020   Waste acceptance.
13.40.030   Fees.
13.40.040—13.04.060 Reserved.
13.40.070   Enforcement
13.40.010   Definitions.
   A.   Unless noted otherwise, the definitions in Title 49, Chapter 4 of the
Arizona Revised Statutes, are hereby incorporated by reference.
   B.   "Acceptable solid waste" means municipal solid waste which is not
unacceptable waste and which has been determined by the director to be
acceptable for disposal or processing in Pima County solid waste facilities.
Solid waste typically generated by residences and by commercial establishments,
such as stores, offices, markets, restaurants, hotels, and schools, are
generally acceptable without prior approval. All other wastes generated by
commercial establishments require approval by the director prior to disposal.
   C.   "Acute hazardous waste" means any waste listed in 40 CFR § 261.33(e).
   D.   "Appliances" means clothes washers and driers, dishwashers, garbage
disposals, trash compactors, conventional ovens, ranges, and stoves, and other
non-Freon containing items which are acceptable to local salvage companies.
   E.   "Bulky waste" means large items of solid waste including, but not
limited to concrete, conduit, furniture, large auto parts, pipe, tanks, trees,
branches, stumps, and other waste whose large size precludes or complicates
their handling by normal collection, processing, or disposal methods.
   F.   "Commercial hauler" means any person who:
      1.   Uses a commercially licensed vehicle to transport the waste;
      2.   Is hauling more than one ton of acceptable solid waste;
      3.   Charges for or receives compensation, either directly or indirectly,
for delivering solid waste to an approved site, including hauling incidental to
a job, such as landscaping, for which compensation is charged or received;
      4.   Is disposing of waste generated from work requiring a construction
or building permit.
   G.   Commingled recyclables means a largely uncontaminated mixture of
various types of recyclable materials in a form that is acceptable to materials
processors.
   H.   "Compacted" means compressed through hydraulic or mechanical means.
   I.   "Conditionally exempt small quantity generator" means a facility or
person that:
      1.   Generates no more than one hundred kilograms or two hundred twenty
pounds of hazardous waste in a calendar month;
      2.   Generates no more than one kilogram or 2.2 pounds of acute hazardous
waste in a calendar month;
      3.   Generates no more than one hundred kilograms or two hundred twenty
pounds of any residue or contaminated soil, waste, or other debris resulting
from the cleanup of a spill, into or on any land or water, of any acute
hazardous waste; and
      4.   Accumulates no more than one thousand kilograms of hazardous wastes
at any one time.
   J.   "Conditionally exempt small quantity generator waste" means wastes that
would be classified as hazardous waste by 40 CFR §§ 261.20—261.35 but are
exempted by 40 CFR § 261.5 because they are generated by conditionally exempt
small quantity generators and as defined by rules adopted pursuant to A.R.S.
Section 49-922.
   K.   "Construction debris" includes but is not limited to nonputrescible and
nonhazardous materials generated during construction, remodeling, repair, and
demolition of structures or roads. Construction debris includes inert material
and asphalt, dry wall, pipes, wood, wall coverings, floor coverings, glass,
scrap metal, roofing materials (excluding friable asbestos-containing
materials), and plumbing, heating, and electrical parts.
   L.   "Department" means Pima County department of environmental quality.
   M.   "Director" means the Pima County department of environmental quality
director or authorized representative.
   N.   "Freon containing appliance" means air conditioners, refrigerators,
freezers and other items requiring special handling and removal of Freon prior
to salvage.
   O.   "Green waste" means vegetative materials including but not limited to
leaves, grass, branches, brush, trees, shrubs, and similar materials, largely
uncontaminated with other materials.
   P.   "Hazardous waste" means a hazardous waste as defined in 40 CFR § 261.
   Q.   "Infectious waste" means unsterilized waste and material which are
generated from nonmedical care of human beings, livestock and animals, but does
not include waste generated in the diagnosis, treatment or immunization of
humans or animals or other related biological hazards pursuant to A.R.S.
Section 49-851.
   R.   "Loose" means uncompacted.
   S.   "Materials recovery facility" means a facility owned or operated by
Pima County where co-mingled recyclables are accepted and processed for
marketing.
   T.   ""Non-standard waste" means any solid non-hazardous municipal waste
that requires review to determine if the waste is acceptable solid waste, or
that requires special handling at a solid waste facility. Non-standard waste
must be approved prior to acceptance.
   U.   "Non-standard tires" means off-road tires, oversized tires or other
tires that are used on agricultural, construction mining, and other vehicles
not registered with the Arizona Department of Motor Vehicles for on-road use,
and are not funded under the State Waste Tire Fund Program.
   V.   "Operational" means in a condition to accept and process materials
according to the designated purpose of the facility, as so declared by the
director by publishing a notice of operational status in a newspaper of general
circulation in Pima County. The notice shall state the effective date of
operational status.
   W.   "Prior approval" means an evaluation of acceptability, consisting of
written approval from the director in response to a written request for
acceptance of a particular waste material or waste stream to a solid waste
facility.
   X.   "Recyclable material" means newsprint, aluminum cans, steel and bimetal
cans, glass food and beverage containers (clear, green, brown), plastic
beverage containers made of PET or HDPE, non-waxed corrugated cardboard, and
other materials that are routinely acceptable for recycling at local materials
processing companies.
   Y.   "Recycling convenience center" means bins located at a solid waste
facility for the deposit of recyclable material.
   Z.   "Regulated asbestos-containing waste" means material as defined in 40
CFR § 61.142.
   AA.   "Residential hauler" means a hauler of waste who is not a commercial
hauler as defined in this section.
   BB.   "Sanitary landfill" means a facility owned or operated by Pima County
and approved by the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality as a facility
at which solid waste is placed in or on land for the purpose of long-term
storage or disposal.
   CC.   "Solid waste" means waste, as defined in A.R.S. Section 49-701, which
includes any garbage; trash; rubbish; refuse; sludge from a waste treatment
plant, water supply treatment plant or pollution control facility; and other
discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
material, but does not include domestic sewage or hazardous waste. For county
solid waste facilities, solid waste does not include liquids or other materials
prohibited for disposal in construction debris landfills by 40 CFR § 257 or in
a municipal solid waste landfill by 40 CFR § 258.
   DD.   "Solid waste facilities" means solid waste disposal, transportation,
or processing facilities owned or operated by Pima County including sanitary
landfills, construction debris landfills, transfer stations, non-standard waste
facilities, tire transfer stations, tire collection facilities and recycling
convenience centers.
   EE.   "Transfer station" means a facility owned or operated by Pima County
for the collection of acceptable solid waste to be subsequently transferred to
a sanitary landfill.
   FF.   "Unacceptable wastes" means wastes that could be expected to adversely
impact the facility processes or operations, the health and safety of facility
workers or users, or the quality of the soil, water, or air in the vicinity of
the facility.
      1.   The following wastes are unacceptable for disposal at any Pima
County solid waste facility:
         a.   Hazardous waste as defined in 40 CFR §§ 261.20—261.35
         b.   Wastes that would be hazardous by 40 CFR §§ 261.20—261.35
standards except that they are exempted because they are generated by
households or conditionally exempt small quantity generators, or for other
reasons as specified in 40 CFR § 261.4(b) or 40 CFR § 261.5.
         c.   Wastes that are prohibited from disposal in a sanitary landfill
by any federal or state regulation, law, or ordinance.
         d.   Batteries from vehicles (lead-acid batteries).
         e.   Dioxin-containing wastes that have a total aggregate
concentration in waste extract of chlorinated dioxins and similar compounds of
one part per billion or above according to the methods in 40 CFR § 268 that
apply to waste categories F020-F023 and F026-F028.
         f.   Explosives.
         g.   Fuel tanks and chemical storage tanks, unless approved by the
director.
         h.   Infectious waste, unless treated or packaged in a method approved
by the director.
         i.   Medical sharps, unless packaged in a rigid container as approved
by the director.
         j.   Motor vehicles.
         k.   Paint and paint products, except for small amounts of residuals
in containers.
         l.   PCB-containing wastes that are regulated under 40 CFR § 761.
         m.   Pesticides and herbicides.
         n.   Special wastes as defined by A.R.S. 49-851, unless approved by
the director.
         o.   Radioactive wastes.
         p.   Septic tank pumpings and untreated sewage.
         q.   Used oil, as regulated by A.R.S. Section 49-801.
         r.   Any other waste determined by the director to be unacceptable.
(Ord. 2013-34 § 1 (part), 2013; Ord. 2001-88 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 1994-84 § 1
(1) 1994; Ord. 1994-24 § 1, 1994: Ord. 1993-30 § 1 (part), 1993)
13.40.020   Waste acceptance.
   A.   It is the intent of this ordinance to encourage all reasonable efforts
to receive only acceptable solid wastes for disposal, and to exclude from
disposal, whenever feasible, all unacceptable wastes, at solid waste
facilities. Prior approval is not required for solid wastes that do not have a
potential, as determined by the director, to be unacceptable wastes. For all
other wastes, disposal at solid waste facilities is prohibited unless prior
approval has been received.
   B.   For all solid waste requiring prior approval, the waste generator must,
prior to disposal, submit data on the waste including source, quantity,
description, and possibly waste analysis results, and other relevant
information.
   C.   Bulk or non-containerized liquids and sludges are not acceptable for
disposal, except that non-hazardous dried sludge from wastewater treatment
facilities may be acceptable as a non-standard waste for disposal at sanitary
landfills with prior approval.
   D.   Regulated asbestos-containing wastes are prohibited at all county solid
waste facilities.
   E.   Only inert materials, construction debris, demolition debris, and green
waste are acceptable at construction debris facilities. Further, household
waste, food, paper, cardboard, and plastic waste are specifically excluded from
construction debris facilities.
   F.   Motor vehicle tires shall not be accepted for land disposal at a solid
waste facility except by methods approved by the Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality. Motor vehicle tires are accepted at tire collection
facilities or tire transfer stations. All tires shall be managed at Pima County
solid waste facilities in accordance with the state of Arizona waste tire
program, as established in A.R.S. Sections 44-1301 through 44-1307. Non-
standard tires may be accepted at the waste tire facility.
   G.   All generators and haulers of non-standard waste and non-regulated
asbestos-containing waste must submit a manifest for each load. Pima County
reserves the right to inspect and sample all incoming waste loads to county
solid waste facilities.
(Ord. 2013-34 § 1 (part), 2013; Ord. 2013-27, §§ 1, 2, 2013; Ord. 2001-88 § 1
(part), 2001; Ord. 1994-84 § 1(2), 1994; Ord. 1994-24 § 2, 1994: Ord. 1993-30 §
1 (part), 1993)
13.40.030   Fees.
   A.   Applicable Fees. Fees for use of solid waste facilities are as set
forth in the fee schedule adopted by the board of supervisors.
   B.   Special Handling Fee. Haulers of non-standard wastes and non-regulated
asbestos wastes that require special handling services shall be charged a fee
set forth in the fee schedule.
   C.   Evaluation Fee. Waste loads or waste streams that receive an evaluation
of acceptability may be charged a fee set forth in the fee schedule.
   D.   Uncovered Load Fee. A fee shall be charged for all loads in which
refuse or other materials are not securely contained, covered or adequately
restrained by nets, tarpaulins, the enclosing vehicle body, or other means to
preclude blowing litter or falling objects that may pose a road hazard to the
motoring public. The uncovered load fee shall be set forth in the fee schedule.
   E.   Determination of Hauler Status. The site cashier shall determine
whether a particular load is from a commercial or residential hauler, whether
it is bulky or not, and whether the load is securely covered or properly
restrained. The facility user shall pay the fee based on these decisions.
   F.   Fee Reduction for Nonprofit Organizations. The director may grant a
fifty percent discount in the fee to a nonprofit organization for wastes that
result from recycling, resale, or redistribution activities. To qualify, an
organization must present a written request for the fee discount, along with
documentation of nonprofit status. This waiver only applies to the first ten
tons per month for an organization.
   G.   Fee Waivers for Illegal Dump Cleanups. The director may waive the
disposal fee for a waste delivered from a resident if the waste is from an
illegal dump that another party has illegally dumped on the property of said
resident or if the waste is from a community cleanup.
(Ord. 2013-34 § 1 (part), 2013; Ord. 2007-67 § 1, 2007; Ord. 2001-88 §§ 2—6,
2001; Res. 1999-166 §§ 1 and 2, 1999; Res. 1996-150, 1996; Ord. 1994-84 § 1(3),
1994: Ord. 1994-24 § 3 (part), 1994: Ord. 1993-30 § 1, (part), 1993)
13.40.040—13.04.060 Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-34, § 2, adopted August 6, 2013, repealed §§
13.40.040—13.04.060, which pertained to use of funds; billing and delinquency
respectively and derived from Ord. No. 1993-30; Ord. No. 1994-24, 1994; Ord.
No. 1994-84, 1994 and Ord. No. 2001-88, 2001.
13.40.070   Enforcement
   The director may enforce the provisions of this chapter by denying a user
access to the solid waste facilities. The director may suspend or revoke the
use privileges of any user who evades payment of the proper charges. In
addition, the director may suspend or revoke the use privileges of any user who
scavenges. Such denial of access or suspension or revocation of privileges may
be appealed to the board of supervisors which may affirm, set aside, increase
or lessen these administrative sanctions. Users must obey all signs posted at
solid waste facilities. Any user of a Pima County solid waste facility not
obeying the facility rules may lose the right to use solid waste facilities.
(Ord. 2013-34 § 3, 2013; Ord. 1994-84 § 1(5) (part), 1994: Ord. 1994-24 § 3
(part), 1994: Ord. 1993-30 § 1 (part), 1993)
APPENDIX
Ordinances Codified in Title 13
Ordinance Number Adopted
Ordinance Number Adopted
Ord. 1982-92     6/7/82
Res. 1983-133    6/14/83
Ord. 1984-13     2/7/84
Res. 1984-44     3/20/84
Ord. 1984-169    9/4/84
Ord. 1985-118    7/2/85
Ord. 1985-119    7/2/85
Ord. 1985-125    7/16/85
Ord. 1986-45     8/19/86
Ord. 1986-47     3/25/86
Ord. 1986-164    8/19/86
Ord. 1986-165    8/19/86
Ord. 1987-21     2/10/87
Ord. 1987-22     2/10/87
Ord. 1987-87     5/19/87
Ord. 1987-220    12/8/87
Ord. 1987-221    12/8/87
Ord. 1988-203    12/6/88
Ord. 1988-12     1/17/89
Ord. 1988-13     1/17/89
Ord. 1989-123    8/21/89
Ord. 1990-6      1/2/90
Ord. 1990-95     9/11/90
Ord. 1990-96     9/11/90
Ord. 1991-28     3/12/91
Ord. 1991-108    10/8/91
Ord. 1992-33     5/5/92
Ord. 1993-30     2/16/93
Ord. 1993-93     7/6/93
Ord. 1993-94     7/6/93
Ord. 1994-24     4/12/94
Ord. 1994-84     6/21/94
Ord. 1996-18     2/20/96
Reso. 1996-150   10/8/96
Ord. 1997-97     12/9/97
Ord. 1998-84     12/1/98
Reso. 1999-166   8/3/99
Reso. 2000-121   6/20/2000
Ord. 2001-88     6/18/2001
Ord. 2004-10     4/13/2004
Ord. 2004-11     4/13/2004
Ord. 2004-27     5/4/2004
Ord. 2004-110    1/14/2005
Ord. 2005-62     7/18/2005
Ord. 2005-112    1/11/2006
Ord. 2006-51     10/20/2006
Ord. 2006-52     10/20/2006
Ord. 2006-95     1/19/07
Ord. 2007-39     7/20/07
Ord. 2007-67     10/26/07
Ord. 2007-89     10/26/07
Ord. 2007-109    1/18/08
Ord. 2007-110    1/18/08
Ord. 2009-7      1/13/2009
Ord. 2009-14     2/17/2009
Ord. 2010-11     3/9/2010
Ord. 2011-89     2/6/2011
Ord. 2012-27     5/15/2012
Ord. 2012-45     8/20/2012
Ord. 2012-76     12/18/2012
Ord. 2013-27     5/7/2013
Ord. 2013-32     6/18/2013
 
Title 14 RENEWABLE ENERGY INCENTIVE DISTRICT (REID)
   
Chapter 14.01 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
Chapter 14.02 - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICT
   
Chapter 14.03 - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS—INCENTIVE PLAN
   
Chapter 14.04 - MAPS
Chapter 14.01
GENERAL PROVISIONS
14.01.010   Short title.
14.01.020   Legislative intent and purpose.
14.01.030   Definitions.
14.01.010   Short title.
   The ordinance codified in this title shall be known as the "Renewable Energy
Incentive District Ordinance" and will be referred to herein as "this title."
(Ord. 2012-16 § 1 (part), 2012)
14.01.020   Legislative intent and purpose.
   As allowed under A.R.S. Section 11-254.07, Pima County may create a
renewable energy incentive district (REID) with specific sites and an incentive
plan designed to promote the development of utility-scale solar energy systems
on environmentally-suitable lands within unincorporated Pima County.
(Ord. 2012-16 § 1 (part), 2012)
14.01.030   Definitions.
   A.   Certain terms used in this title shall be defined for purposes of this
title only, as follows:
      1.   Incentive Plan. As adopted by the board of supervisors (refer to
Section
14.03.020). The plan has incentives in the form of expedited reviews, reduced
fees, and reduced regulations offered by various development review
departments.
      2.   Tier 1 Renewable Energy Incentive District. Specific, mapped sites
with applicable performance standards and an incentive plan established by the
board of supervisors to provide site development incentives to promote the
development and operation of utility-scale renewable energy systems subject to
meeting the site location criteria of Section
14.02.010(B) and public notice requirements as set forth in A.R.S. Section 11-
254.07.
      3.   Tier 2 Renewable Energy Incentive District. Specific, mapped sites
with applicable performance standards and an incentive plan established by the
board of supervisors to provide site development incentives to promote the
development and operation of utility-scale renewable energy systems subject to
meeting the site location criteria of Section
14.02.020(B) and public notice requirements as set forth in A.R.S. Section 11-
254.07.
      4.   Tucson International Airport and Ryan Airfield Renewable Energy
Incentive District. Specific, mapped sites with applicable performance
standards and an incentive plan established by the board of supervisors to
provide site development incentives to promote the development and operation of
utility-scale renewable energy systems subject to meeting the public notice
requirements as set forth in A.R.S. Section 11-254.07 and any additional
requirements for development on airport properties as determined by the Tucson
Airport Authority.
      5.   Utility-Scale Solar Energy System. A low-water use system that
generates energy primarily intended for off-site consumption. For the purposes
of this title, only photo voltaic systems or other technology that does not use
any more water than would be used by a photo voltaic system are allowed.
Accessory uses may include buildings associated with electrical operational
infrastructure such as inverters and transformers.
(Ord. 2012-16 § 1 (part), 2012)
Chapter 14.02
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICT
14.02.010   Establishment of Tier 1 renewable energy incentive district (REID).
14.02.020   Establishment of Tier 2 renewable energy incentive district (REID).
14.02.030   Establishment of the Tucson International Airport and Ryan Airfield
properties as designated renewable energy incentive district (REID) sites.
14.02.010   Establishment of Tier 1 renewable energy incentive district (REID).
   A.   Initiation of Tier 1 Renewable Energy Incentive District Sites. The
designation of REID sites shall be considered for initiation by the board of
supervisors at the request of the property owner, the planning and zoning
commission, development services department, or other entity.
   B.   Criteria for Evaluation. Tier 1 renewable energy incentive district
sites shall be evaluated for designation based on the following criteria:
      1.   Minimum site area of five acres or larger;
      2.   The property has previously been disturbed, or is underutilized, or
is a vacant property;
      3.   Lies outside of the conservation land categories established in the
regional environmental element of the comprehensive plan, and any subsequent
amendments:
         Important riparian area,
         Biological core management area,
         Multiple use management area,
         Special species management area,
         Scientific research area;
      4.   Lies outside of the designated high and moderate sensitivity
archaeological areas;
      5.   Has been inventoried for cultural resources with no cultural
resources encountered;
      6.   Lies outside of the Pima pineapple cactus priority conservation
areas;
      7.   Lies outside of operating mining areas;
      8.   Is not on or within federally-owned land;
      9.   Is not located within lands owned and managed for conservation
purposes nor within three hundred feet of such a property;
      10.   Is not located on a restricted peak, ridge, or steep slope as
defined in
Chapter 18.61;
      11.   Is not located within three hundred feet of residential structures
existing at the time of site establishment;
      12.   Is not a designated common area, open space, or landscaping area
within a recorded subdivision plat;
      13.   Is not parkland;
      14.   Does not support a high density of saguaros or ironwoods;
      15.   Is not tribal land;
      16.   Has at least one potential route and point of vehicular access to
the site.
      17.   Lies outside of floodways, flow corridors, riverine floodplains,
and sheet flood areas with one hundred-year flood depths greater than two feet
as determined by the regional flood control district.
      18.   Additional criteria, as amended by the board of supervisors.
   C.   Public Notice and Hearing Requirements for Designation.
      1.   Board of Supervisors Public Hearing. A minimum of fifteen days prior
to the hearing, the planning division shall provide notice by:
         a.   Publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county seat; and
         b.   Mailing written notice to all property owners of the proposed
renewable energy incentive district site, as by the site's parcel boundaries,
and all property owners within a minimum of three hundred feet of the proposed
district site's parcel boundaries, except that notice shall be expanded to
include owners of property within one thousand feet of the district site's
parcel if existing zoning of the district is RH, GR-1, SR or SR-2.
      2.   Expansion of Notice. The board of supervisors may expand the
notification area to greater than three hundred or one thousand feet,
respectively, which shall be noticed prior to a public hearing.
      3.   Failure to Provide Notice. Notice is based on the ownership of the
property as shown on the county assessor records. The unintentional failure to
give written notice to a property owner or the unintentional omission of the
name of a property owner shall not invalidate an action of the board of
supervisors.
   D.   Map Notation. Tier 1 renewable energy incentive district sites shall be
shown on county zoning maps by their underlying tier designation plus the
suffix "REID-1."
(Ord. 2012-16 § 1 (part), 2012)
14.02.020   Establishment of Tier 2 renewable energy incentive district (REID).
   A.   Initiation of Tier 2 Renewable Energy Incentive District Sites. The
designation of REID sites shall be considered for initiation by the board of
supervisors at the request of the property owner, the planning and zoning
commission, development services department, or other entity.
   B.   Criteria for Evaluation. Tier 2 renewable energy incentive district
sites shall be evaluated for designation based on the following criteria:
      1.   Minimum site area of five acres;
      2.   The subject property has been previously disturbed, or is
underutilized, or is a vacant property;
      3.   Lies outside of the conservation land categories established in the
regional environmental element of the comprehensive plan, and any subsequent
amendments:
         Important riparian area,
         Biological core management area,
         Multiple use management area,
         Special species management area,
         Scientific research area;
      4.   Lies outside of the designated high sensitivity archaeological
areas;
      5.   Lies outside of operating mining areas;
      6.   Is not on or within federally-owned land;
      7.   Is not located within lands owned and managed for conservation
purposes nor within three hundred feet of such a property;
      8.   Is not located on a restricted peak, ridge, or steep slope as
defined in
Chapter 18.61;
      9.   Is not located within three hundred feet of residential structures
existing at the time of site establishment;
      10.   Is not a designated common area, open space, or landscaping area
within a recorded subdivision plat;
      11.   Is not parkland;
      12.   Does not support a high density of saguaros or ironwoods;
      13.   Is not tribal land;
      14.   Has at least one potential route and point of vehicular access to
the site;
      15.   Lies outside of floodways, flow corridors, riverine floodplains,
and sheet flood areas with one hundred-year flood depths greater than two feet
as determined by the regional flood control district;
      16.   Additional criteria, as amended by the board of supervisors.
   C.   Public Notice and Hearing Requirements for Designation.
      1.   Board of Supervisors Public Hearing. A minimum of fifteen days prior
to the hearing, the planning division shall provide notice by:
         a.   Publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county seat; and
         b.   Mailing written notice to all property owners of the proposed
renewable energy incentive district site, as by the site's parcel boundaries,
and all property owners within a minimum of three hundred feet of the proposed
district site's parcel boundaries, except that notice shall be expanded to
include owners of property within one thousand feet of the district site's
parcel if existing zoning of the district is RH, GR-1, SR or SR-2.
      2.   Expansion of Notice. The board of supervisors may expand the
notification area to greater than three hundred or one thousand feet,
respectively, which shall be noticed prior to a public hearing.
      3.   Failure to Provide Notice. Notice is based on the ownership of the
property as shown on the county assessor records. The unintentional failure to
give written notice to a property owner or the unintentional omission of the
name of a property owner shall not invalidate an action of the board of
supervisors.
   D.   Map Notation. Tier 2 renewable energy incentive district sites shall be
shown on county zoning maps by their underlying tier designation plus the
suffix "REID-2."
(Ord. 2012-16 § 1 (part), 2012)
14.02.030   Establishment of the Tucson International Airport and Ryan Airfield
properties as designated renewable energy incentive district (REID) sites.
   A.   Initiation of Tucson International Airport and Ryan Airfield properties
as renewable energy incentive district sites. The designation of REID sites
shall be considered for initiation by the board of supervisors at the request
of the Tucson Airport Authority.
   B.   Notwithstanding the criteria established for the Tier 1 and Tier 2 REID
sites, the Tucson International Airport and Ryan Airfield properties shall be
designated REID sites subject to the same public notice and hearing
requirements for designation, performance standards, and incentive plan as for
the Tier 1 and Tier 2 sites, and subject to any additional requirements for
development on airport properties as determined by the Tucson Airport
Authority.
   C.   Map Notation. Tucson International Airport and Ryan Airfield renewable
energy incentive district sites shall be shown on county zoning maps by their
underlying designation plus the suffix "REID-TIA" and "REID-RYAN."
(Ord. 2012-16 § 1 (part), 2012)
Chapter 14.03
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS—INCENTIVE PLAN
14.03.010   Performance standards.
14.03.020   Incentive plan.
14.03.010   Performance standards.
   A.   Water Use. Only photo-voltaic systems or other technology that does not
use any more water than would be used by a photo-voltaic system shall be
allowed;
   B.   Noise or Vibration During Facility Operation. No noise or vibration
shall be permitted which is discernible beyond the lot line to the human sense
of feeling for three minutes or more duration in any one hour of the day
between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m., or of thirty seconds or more
duration in any one hour during the hours of seven p.m. to seven a.m.;
   C.   Smoke. No emission of smoke from any source shall be permitted;
   D.   Odors. No emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter shall be
permitted in such qualities as to be offensive in such a manner as to create a
nuisance or hazard beyond the property lines;
   E.   Fly Ash, Dust, Fumes, Vapors, Gases and Other Forms of Air Pollution
During Facility Operation. No emission shall be permitted which can cause any
damage to health, to animals or vegetation, or other forms of property, which
can cause any excessive soiling;
   F.   Liquids and Solid Waste. No wastes shall be discharged in the streets,
drainageways or any property which is dangerous to the public health and
safety, and no waste shall be discharged in the public sewage system which
endangers the normal operation of the public sewage system;
   G.   Solar energy systems shall be located such that prolonged and/or
substantial concentrated solar radiation or glare shall not be directed onto
abutting properties, roadways, or impact nearby aircraft flight operations;
   H.   To the extent possible, transmission lines that serve renewable energy
systems shall be located to minimize their impacts on conservation land
categories established in the regional environmental element of the
comprehensive plan, and any subsequent amendments: Important riparian area,
biological core management area, multiple use management area, special species
management area, scientific research area;
   I.   Suitable warning signs containing a telephone number for emergency
calls shall face all access approaches to the facility. No advertising on the
signs is allowed;
   J.   The site shall be maintained in a trash and debris free manner;
   K.   A letter of acknowledgement from the applicable utility company shall
be submitted upon permit application and kept on file; and
   L.   Any renewable energy system which becomes inoperable shall at the
owner's expense be made operational or shall be removed from the property
within one year of the date system became inoperable. An appropriate
reclamation and closure plan, including recycling, subject to the planning
director's approval shall be required prior to removal.
(Ord. 2012-16 § 1 (part), 2012)
14.03.020   Incentive plan.
   A.   Development Services Department.
      1.   Development Standards (Main and Accessory Structures):
         a.   No conditional use permit (CUP) shall be required.
         b.   Minimum site area: Five acres.
         c.   Minimum REID site boundary setback: Three hundred feet from
residential structures existing at the time of REID site establishment. Three
hundred feet from the boundaries of lands owned and managed for conservation
purposes existing at the time of REID site establishment.
         d.   Minimum setback requirements within REID site:
            i.   Front: None.
            ii.   Side: None.
            iii.   Rear: None.
         e.   Height limitations: None.
         f.   Minimum distance between structures: None.
         g.   Barbed wire may be used on fences or walls for security purposes
provided the barbed wire is greater than six feet above ground level. The
barbed wire shall not count towards the maximum fence or wall height.
         h.   Requests for facilities on REID sites located within the
Approach-Departure Corridors 1, 2, and 3 of the Airport Environs Zone shall be
distributed for review by Davis-Monthan staff.
      2.   
Chapter 18.61, Hillside Development Overlay Zone: The chapter shall be waived
in part as follows:
         a.   The chapter shall not apply to slopes created by prior uses such
as mining and sand and gravel operations; and
         b.   The average cross-slope shall be calculated based on the entire
property.
      3.   
Chapter 18.71, Development Plan Standards: A REID site plan drawn to scale,
presented at an optional pre-application meeting with staff, and showing the
following requirements shall be in lieu of a standard development plan:
         a.   General location of any buildings and structures;
         b.   General location of solar structures;
         c.   Access point(s);
         d.   Setbacks if abutting residential development;
         e.   Required bufferyards (on boundaries abutting residential
development); and,
         f.   Location of parking.
      4.   
Chapter 18.72, Native Plant Preservation (NPPO), shall be waived in part as
follows:
         a.   An inventory and mitigation plan for any saguaros, ironwoods and
safeguarded species as listed in Table 18.72.040-1 of the zoning code on the
site shall be conducted by a qualified practitioner as defined in Section
18.72.070 and provided upon submittal of the REID site plan;
         b.   Where saguaros, ironwoods, and safeguarded species cannot be
preserved in place, they shall be transplanted on site or replaced at a 1:
1 mitigation ratio when transplantation is not feasible. Pima pineapple cactus
shall be transplanted and supplemented with one additional Pima pineapple
cactus. Pima pineapple cactus will be replaced at a 2:1 mitigation ratio when
transplantation is not feasible. Replacement specimens for saguaros shall be a
minimum of four feet in height. The size of replacement specimens for ironwood
and safeguarded species will conform to Table 18.72.090-1.
         c.   The proposed location of transplanted plants shall be shown on
the REID site plan, or if necessary for clarity on a separate plan, but a
separate plan is not otherwise required;
         d.   Replacement specimens and transplanted plants may be located in
any required bufferyard; and
         e.   Off-site mitigation is an option subject to approval by the
planning director or their designee.
      5.   
Chapter 18.73, Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening Standards: Bufferyards
shall be waived in part as follows:
         a.   Fifty percent of the width and plant density requirements of the
standard required bufferyard shall be provided; or
         b.   The developer may provide written approval by the abutting
property owner(s) to the chief zoning inspector or their designee to waive the
above bufferyard requirement in whole or part; and
         c.   Greater design flexibility shall be allowed for required walls
when there is an applicable issue by the regional flood control district.
      6.   
Chapter 18.75, Off-street Parking and Loading Standards, shall be waived in
part as follows:
         a.   Enough parking spaces for employees and visitors shall be
provided on-site;
         b.   A paved entrance drive shall be provided in accordance with the
subdivision development standards manual; and
         c.   Parking area shall provide unrestricted access by emergency
services vehicles.
      7.   
Chapter 18.77, Roadway Frontage Standards: Sections
18.77.040(A) through
18.77.040(E)(4) (Portion of Scenic Routes) shall be waived. Section
18.77.040(E)(5) shall apply except the total number of cables on an existing
overhead system may be increased to serve a REID solar facility.
      8.   
Chapter 18.78, Gateway Overlay Zone: The chapter shall be waived.
      9.   
Chapter 18.81, Grading Standards, shall be waived in part as follows: A Type 1
grading permit instead of a Type 2 grading permit shall be required with the
exception that Section
18.81.060(B)(10) and its associated requirements shall apply.
      10.   Fees: The development plan base fee and applicable building permit
fees in accordance with the adopted fee schedule shall apply. No additional
fees for landscaping, NPPO, or grading review shall apply.
   B.   Cultural Resources.
      1.   Expedited review process through all stages of cultural resources
compliance process. Tier 2 sites shall comply with county cultural resources
requirements (per Section
14.03.020(A)(9)).
         a.   If a Tier 2 site has not been inventoried for cultural resources,
or was inventoried more than ten years ago, then a cultural resources field
survey must be done to identify, inventory, and evaluate the significance of
any cultural or historic resources within the site. All work shall be conducted
by a cultural resources professional permitted by the Arizona State Museum and
provided upon submittal of the REID site plan.
         b.   If the Tier 2 site inventory finds significant cultural or
historic resources, then the applicant shall develop and implement an
appropriate mitigation treatment plan. The mitigation treatment can range from
documented avoidance of the resources to mitigation of impacts on the resources
by archaeological data recovery (excavation) if avoidance is not possible. All
work shall be conducted by a cultural resources professional permitted by the
Arizona State Museum and provided upon submittal of the REID site plan.
      2.   Coordinate review with utilities, rights-of-way, and other
infrastructure components.
   C.   Department of Environmental Quality.
      1.   Expedited processing and waiver of the sixty-day notice requirements
of any applicable Class I, II and III permit applications.
      2.   Waiver of the fifteen thousand dollars (as may be amended by the
board of supervisors) accelerated processing fee for Class I, II, and III
permit applications.
      3.   Waiver of any applicable fugitive dust activity permit fees.
   D.   Regional Flood Control District.
      1.   Expedited site plan review subject to avoiding disturbance of
natural drainage and avoiding or minimizing disturbance of regulated riparian
habitat.
      2.   Expedited construction proposal review for REID projects that:
         a.   Elevate all equipment to regulatory flood elevation;
         b.   Provide erosion and scour protection for all equipment;
         c.   Maintain all roadways on site at grade; and
         d.   Elevate all security barriers or fencing to the base flood
elevation, or provide sufficient setbacks from property lines to prevent
adverse impact to neighboring property.
      3.   In lieu of Section
14.03.020(D)(2) above, an applicant shall submit an analysis prepared by an
Arizona registered civil engineer, which proposes an alternative design.
      4.   No fees shall apply.
   E.   Department of Transportation. No roadway development impact fees shall
apply.
(Ord. 2012-16 § 1 (part), 2012)
Chapter 14.04
MAPS
Section: 
14.04.010   REID site maps.
14.04.010   REID site maps.
Note: The REID site maps are available in PDF, click HERE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4365.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4367.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4369.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4371.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4373.png]
 
(Ord. 2014-5, § 1, 2014; Ord. 2013-46, § 1, 2013; Ord. 2012-16 § 1 (part),
2012)
Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapters: 
   
Chapter 15.04 - BUILDING CODES
   
Chapter 15.08 - ELECTRICAL CODE
   
Chapter 15.12 - OUTDOOR LIGHTING CODE
   
Chapter 15.14 - ENERGY CODE
   
Chapter 15.16 - MECHANICAL CODE
   
Chapter 15.18 - FUEL GAS CODE
   
Chapter 15.20 - PLUMBING CODE
   
Chapter 15.24 - RESERVED
Chapter 15.04
BUILDING CODES
15.04.010   Purpose.
15.04.020   Codes adopted.
15.04.030   Copies on file.
15.04.040   Building official designated.
15.04.050   Violation a civil infraction.
15.04.060   Administrative appeal process.
15.04.070   Board of appeals.
15.04.080   Code committee.
15.04.010   Purpose.
   The Pima County building code has the following purposes:
   A.   Regulate the site preparation and construction, alteration, moving,
demolition, repair, use and occupancy of buildings, structures and building
service equipment within the jurisdiction;
   B.   Provide for the issuance of permits and collection of fees;
   C.   Provide for a building codes advisory board of appeals and code
committees; and
   D.   Provide for penalties for the violation of building codes.
(Ord. 2006-91 § 13 (part), 2006; Ord. 2003-70 § 2 (part), 2003; Ord. 1987-33
(part), 1987; Ord. 1983-73 (part), 1983)
15.04.020   Codes adopted.
   A.   The Pima County building code, codified in this chapter, adopts by
reference the 2024 International Building Code, published by the International
Code Council, Inc., Country Club Hills, IL, in 2023, as amended by the local
amendments attached to and incorporated into Ordinance 2025-15 as Exhibit A
together with the following national and international codes:
      1.   The 2024 International Property Maintenance Code, as amended by
Exhibit H attached to Ordinance 2025-15;
      2.   The 2024 International Fuel Gas Code as amended by Exhibit F
attached to Ordinance 2025-15 (See
Chapter 15.18);
      3.    The 2024 International Plumbing Code, as amended by Exhibit E
attached to Ordinance 2025-15 (See
Chapter 15.20);
      4.   The 2024 International Mechanical Code, as amended by Exhibit D
attached to Ordinance 2025- 15(See
Chapter 15.16);
      5.   The 2023 National Electrical Code (NFPA 70), as amended by Exhibit C
to Ordinance 2025-15(See
Chapter 15.08);
      6.   The 2018 International Energy Conservation Code, as amended by
Exhibit G attached to Ordinance 2018-30 (See
Chapter 15.14);
      7.    The 2024 International Residential Code, as amended by Exhibit B
attached to Ordinance 2025- 15
      8.   The following provisions of the 1998 American National Standard
Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities Code, published by the
International Code Council, February 1998, as amended by the local amendments
attached to and incorporated into Ordinance 2002-2 as Exhibit A, as amended by
Ordinances 2002-66 and 2002-72: Chapter 1; Chapter 2; Chapter 3, Sections
301.1, 303.1, 303.2, 303.3, 308.1, 308.2.1, 308.3.1 and 309.3 only; Chapter 4,
Sections 401.1, 402.1, 402.2, 403.5, 404.1, 404.2.5, and 404.2.7 only; Chapter
6, Sections 604.5, 607.4, 609.4 and Section 610 only; Chapter 10, Sections
1001.01, 1003.1,1003.2, 1003.3, 1003.4, 1003.5, 1003.9 and 1003.11.2 only.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated in Exhibit A to Ordinance 2002-2 as
amended by Ordinances 2002-66 and 2002-72, adoption of a particular section of
the said Code shall include adoption of all subsections thereof;
      9.   The 2024 International Wildland-Urban Interface Code, as amended by
Exhibit I attached to Ordinance 2025-15. The 2018 International Wildland-Urban
Interface Code applies only to areas designated Rural Forest Village under the
Pima County Comprehensive Plan and areas encircled thereby;
      10.   The 2024 International Existing Building Code, as amended by
Exhibit J attached to Ordinance 2025-15;
      11.   The 2024 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, as amended by
Exhibit K attached to Ordinance 2025-15;
   B.   The Pima County building code incorporates the following local
ordinances and codes into the building code by reference:
      1.   The International Building Code Appendix F: Noise level reduction
design and construction standards, Attached as Exhibit A to Ordinance 2008-119.
      2.   The 2012 City of Tucson/Pima County Outdoor Lighting Code, attached
as Exhibit A to Ordinance 2012-14 (See
Chapter 15.12).
(Ord. 2025-15 § 11 (part), 2025; Ord. 2018-39 § 2, 2018; Ord. 2018-30 § 12
(part), 2018: Ord. 2012-34 § 11 (part), 2012: Ord. 2008-119 §
15.04.030   Copies on file.
   Three copies of the Pima County building code are kept on file by the clerk
of the board of supervisors and available for public inspection during regular
working hours at Development Services, 201 N. Stone Avenue.
(Ord. 2012-34 § 11 (part), 2012: Ord. 1990-108 § 2, 1990: Ord. 1987-33 (part),
1987; Ord. 1983-73 (part), 1983; A.R.S. Section 11-864)
15.04.040   Building official designated.
   The building official is the authority charged with the administration and
enforcement of the Pima County building code, or his duly authorized
representative. The building official may appoint a chief plans examiner, a
chief building inspector, a chief electrical inspector, a chief mechanical
inspector, a chief plumbing inspector, and other related technical officers and
inspectors and other employees as shall be authorized from time to time.
(Ord. 1987-33 (part), 1987; Ord. 1983-73 (part), 1983)
15.04.050   Violation a civil infraction.
   It is a civil infraction for any person, firm or corporation to violate any
of the provisions of the Pima County building code. Civil infractions may be
enforced through the hearing officer procedure provided by A.R.S. Section 11-
815 and Sections
18.95.030,
18.95.040 and
18.101.060 of this code. Penalties for civil infractions shall not exceed the
maximum penalty set forth in A.R.S. Section 11-815. Refer to Sections
18.95.030,
18.95.040 (Enforcement, Permits and Fees) and Section
18.101.060 (Administrators).
(Ord. 2012-34 § 11 (part), 2012: Ord. 2002-53 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1987-33 (part),
1987; Ord. 1986-128, 1986: Ord. 1983-73 (part), 1983; A.R.S. Sections 1-808(c)
and 11-866)
15.04.060   Administrative appeal process.
   Whenever a violation of a building code is determined, whether during
construction or at the plan review stage, and the applicant wishes to appeal
the decision of the staff, because of code interpretation, unreasonable
hardship or other acceptable reasons, the applicant may appeal to the building
official in accordance with the procedures listed in Exhibit A, section
104.2.4. of Ordinance 2025-15. If an appeal is denied by the building official,
the applicant shall comply or appeal to the board of appeals of the county as
in Section
15.04.070.
(Ord. 2025-15 § 11 (part), 2025; Ord. 2018-30 § 12 (part), 2018: Ord. 2012-34 §
11 (part), 2012: Ord. 2006-91 § 13 (part), 2006; Ord. 1987-33 (part), 1987;
Ord. 1983-73 (part), 1983)
15.04.070   Board of appeals.
   A.   An advisory board shall be appointed by the county board of supervisors
in accordance with the provisions of A.R.S. Section 11-862 and shall be known
as the Pima County Building Codes Board of Appeals.
   B.   The Pima County Building Codes Board of Appeals shall determine the
suitability of alternate materials and methods of construction; provide
reasonable interpretations of the provisions of the building codes; and hear
and decide appeals from any decision of the building official.
   C.   An applicant may present his case to the Pima County building codes
board of appeals as per the rules adopted by the board on file with development
services department.
   Decisions and findings of the board of appeals are final and made in writing
to the building official and the applicant.
(Ord. 2006-91 § 13 (part), 2006; Ord. 1987-33 (part), 1987; Ord. 1983-73
(part), 1983; A.R.S. Section 11-862)
15.04.080   Code committee.
   Recommendation of legislation to the board of supervisors, shall be in part
accomplished through the building code committee and the outdoor lighting code
committee pursuant to Resolution 2011-195.
(Ord. 2012-34 § 11 (part), 2012: Ord. 2006-91 § 13 (part), 2006)
Chapter 15.08
ELECTRICAL CODE
15.08.010   Adopted.
15.08.020   Copies on file.
15.08.010   Adopted.
    The 2023 National Electrical Code (NFPA 70), published by the National Fire
Protection Association, One Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA, 2022 is adopted by
reference as the electrical code of Pima County as amended by Exhibit C
attached to Ordinance 2025-15. The purpose of the code is the practical
safeguarding of persons and property from the hazards arising from the use of
electricity.
(Ord. 2025-15 § 11 (part), 2025; Ord. 2018-30 § 13, 2018: Ord. 2012-34 § 11
(part), 2012: Ord. 2006-91 § 13 (part), 2006; Ord. 2005-12 § 7 (part), 2005;
Ord. 2003-71 § 7, 2003; Ord. 2001-75 § 11, 2001; Ord. 1996-82 §§ 1, 2, 1996;
Ord. 1993-177 § 2, 1993: Ord. 1984-201 (part), 1984; Ord. 1983-73 (part), 1983)
15.08.020   Copies on file.
   Three copies of the electrical code are kept on file by the clerk of the
board of supervisors and available for public inspection during regular working
hours at Development Services, 201 N. Stone Avenue.
(Ord. 2012-34 § 11 (part), 2012: Ord. 1983-73 (part), 1983; A.R.S. Section 11-
864)
Chapter 15.12
OUTDOOR LIGHTING CODE
15.12.010   Adopted.
15.12.020   Copies on file.
15.12.010   Adopted.
   Under authority of both A.R.S. § 11-861 and A.R.S. § 11-251(35), the 2012
City of Tucson/Pima County Outdoor Lighting Code, adopted by the city of
Tucson, is adopted and incorporated by reference as the outdoor lighting code
for Pima County, as set forth in Exhibit A, attached to Ordinance 2012-14.
(Ord. 2012-14, § 2, 2012; Ord. 2006-91 § 13 (part), 2006; Ord. 2004-98 § 2,
2004; Ord. 2001-138 § 2, 2001; Ord. 2000-63 § 3, 2000; Ord. 1995-98 § 5 (part),
1996; Ord. 1993-81 § 2 (part), 1993)
15.12.020   Copies on file.
   Three copies of the outdoor lighting code are kept on file by the clerk of
the board of supervisors and available for public inspection during regular
working hours at Development Services, 201 N. Stone Avenue.
(Ord. 2012-34 § 11 (part), 2012: Ord. 1993-81 § 2 (part), 1993)
Chapter 15.14
ENERGY CODE
15.14.010   Adopted.
15.14.020   Copies on file.
15.14.010   Adopted.
   The 2018 International Energy Conservation Code, published by the
International Code Council, Inc., Country Club Hills, IL, 2017 is adopted by
reference as the energy code of Pima County as amended by Exhibit G attached to
Ordinance 2018-30. The purpose of the code is to regulate the design and
construction of buildings and sites for effective use of energy.
(Ord. 2018-30 § 11, 2018: Ord. 2012-34 § 11 (part), 2012: Ord. 2006-91 § 13
(part), 2006)
15.14.020   Copies on file.
   Three copies of the energy conservation code are kept on file by the clerk
of the board of supervisors and available for public inspection during regular
working hours at Development Services, 201 N. Stone Avenue.
(Ord. 2012-34 § 11 (part), 2012: Ord. 2006-91 § 13 (part), 2006)
Chapter 15.16
MECHANICAL CODE
15.16.010   Adopted.
15.16.020   Purpose.
15.16.030   Copies on file.
15.16.010   Adopted.
   The 2024 International Mechanical Code, published by the International Code
Council, Inc., Country Club Hills, IL, 2023 is adopted by reference as the
mechanical code of Pima County as amended by Exhibit D attached to Ordinance
2025-15.
(Ord. 2025-15 § 11 (part), 2025; Ord. 2018-30 § 15, 2018: Ord. 2012-34 § 11
(part), 2012: Ord. 2006-91 § 13 (part), 2006; Ord. 2001-75 § 12, 2001; Ord.
1995-98 § 2 (part), 1996; Ord. 1992-32 § 2 (part), 1992; Ord. 1989-78 § 6,
1989: Ord. 1987-33 (part), 1987; Ord. 1983-130 (part), 1983; Ord. 1983-73
(part), 1983)
15.16.020   Purpose.
   The purpose of the code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or
limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the
design, construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation
and maintenance or use of heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems,
incinerators and other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances within the
jurisdiction.
(Ord. 1987-33 (part), 1987; Ord. 1983-130 (part), 1983; Ord. 1983-73 (part),
1983)
15.16.030   Copies on file.
   Three copies of the mechanical code are kept on file by the clerk of the
board of supervisors and available for public inspection during regular working
hours at Development Services, 201 N. Stone Avenue.
(Ord. 2012-34 § 11 (part), 2012: Ord. 1990-108 § 3, 1990: Ord. 1987-33 (part),
1987; Ord. 1983-73 (part), 1983; A.R.S. Section 11-864)
Chapter 15.18
FUEL GAS CODE
15.18.010   Adopted.
15.18.020   Copies on file.
15.18.010   Adopted.
   The 2024 International Fuel Gas Code, published by the International Code
Council, Inc., Country Club Hills, IL, 2023 is adopted by reference as the fuel
gas code of Pima County as amended by Exhibit F attached to Ordinance 2025-15.
The purpose of the code is to provide minimum requirements and standards for
the protection of the public health, safety and welfare as they apply to the
erection, installation, alteration, addition, repair, relocation, replacement,
maintenance or use of fuel gas systems.
(Ord. 2025-15 § 11 (part), 2025; Ord. 2018-30 § 16, 2018: Ord. 2012-34 § 11
(part), 2012: Ord. 2006-91 § 13 (part), 2006)
15.18.020   Copies on file.
   Three copies of the fuel gas code are kept on file by the clerk of the board
of supervisors and available for public inspection during regular working hours
at Development Services, 201 N. Stone Avenue.
(Ord. 2012-34 § 11 (part), 2012: Ord. 2006-91 § 13 (part), 2006)
Chapter 15.20
PLUMBING CODE
15.20.010   Adopted.
15.20.020   Copies on file.
15.20.010   Adopted.
   The 2024 International Plumbing Code, published by the International Code
Council, Inc., Country Club Hills, IL, 2023 is adopted by reference as the
plumbing code of Pima County as amended by Exhibit E attached to Ordinance
2025-15. The purpose of the code is to provide minimum requirements and
standards for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare as they
apply to the erection, installation, alteration, addition, repair, relocation,
replacement, maintenance or use of plumbing systems.
(Ord. 2025-15 § 11 (part), 2025; Ord. 2012-34 § 11 (part), 2012: Ord. 2007-106
§ 3, 2007; Ord. 1996-82 § 3 (part), 1996; Ord. 1995-98 § 3 (part), 1996; Ord.
1992-32 § 2 (part), 1992; Ord. 1989-78 § 7, 1989: Ord. 1987-33 (part), 1987;
Ord. 1983-130 (part), 1983; Ord. 1983-73 (part), 1983)
15.20.020   Copies on file.
   Three copies of the plumbing code are kept on file by the clerk of the board
of supervisors and available for public inspection during regular working hours
at Development Services, 201 N. Stone Avenue.
(Ord. 2012-34 § 11 (part), 2012: Ord. 1987-33 (part), 1987; Ord. 1983-73
(part), 1983; A.R.S. Section 11-864)
Chapter 15.24
RESERVED
Title 16 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Chapters: 
   
Chapter 16.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
Chapter 16.08 - DEFINITIONS
   
Chapter 16.12 - EXEMPTIONS AND NONCONFORMING USES
   
Chapter 16.16 - FLOODPLAIN MAPS AND BOUNDARIES
   
Chapter 16.20 - USE PERMITS—GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
Chapter 16.24 - FLOODWAY REQUIREMENTS
   
Chapter 16.26 - FLOODWAY FRINGE AREA REQUIREMENTS
   
Chapter 16.28 - EROSION HAZARD AREAS AND BUILDING SETBACKS
   
Chapter 16.30 - WATERCOURSE AND RIPARIAN HABITAT PROTECTION AND MITIGATION
REQUIREMENTS
   
Chapter 16.34 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS AND SUBDIVISIONS
   
Chapter 16.36 - SUBDIVISIONS AND DEVELOPMENT
   
Chapter 16.38 - MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS
   
Chapter 16.42 - SEDIMENT AND EROSION CONTROL
   
Chapter 16.44 - VEHICULAR ACCESS
   
Chapter 16.48 - RUNOFF DETENTION SYSTEMS
   
Chapter 16.52 - SAND, GRAVEL AND OTHER EXCAVATION OPERATIONS
   
Chapter 16.54 - ADMINISTRATION, COMPLIANCE
   
Chapter 16.56 - APPEALS AND VARIANCES
   
Chapter 16.60 - AMENDMENTS
   
Chapter 16.64 - VIOLATION—PENALTY
Chapter 16.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections: 
16.04.010   Short title.
16.04.020   Authority
16.04.030   Contents and purpose of provisions.
16.04.040   Application and enforcement.
16.04.050   Performance standards.
16.04.060   Interpretation of provisions—Conflict resolution.
16.04.070   Cooperative agreements and consultants.
16.04.080   Units of measure.
16.04.090   Warning and disclaimer of liability.
16.04.100   Severability.
16.04.010   Short title.
   The ordinance codified in this title may be referred to as the "Floodplain
Management Ordinance."
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-
2 Art. 1, 1988)
16.04.020   Authority
   A.   The state of Arizona has delegated the responsibility to each county
flood control district to adopt floodplain regulations designed to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry as provided under
the Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 48, Chapter 21, Article 1, Sections 48-3601
through 3628. More specifically, A.R.S. 48-3609 directs county flood control
districts to adopt floodplain regulations that:
      1.   Regulate all development of land, construction of residential,
commercial or industrial structures or uses of any kind which may divert,
retard or obstruct flood water and threaten public health or safety or the
general welfare; and
      2.   Establish minimum flood protection elevations and flood damage
prevention requirements for uses, structures and facilities which are
vulnerable to flood damage; and
      3.   Delineate or by rule require developers of land to delineate
floodplains consistent with the criteria developed by the director of water
resources; and
      4.   Comply with state and local land use plans and ordinances, if any.
   B.   In conformance with A.R.S. 48-3609, this ordinance provides for
protection of the public health safety and welfare by regulation of flood and
erosion hazard areas to control flood hazards and prevent repetitive loss from
flood damage, and to carry out the requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program.
      1.   The flood hazard areas of Pima County are subject to periodic
inundation which may result in loss of life and property, create health and
safety hazards, disrupt commerce and governmental services, require
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impair
the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and
general welfare.
      2.   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights,
flow velocities, and cause flood and erosion damage. Uses that are inadequately
flood-proofed, elevated, or otherwise protected from flood damage, also
contribute to the flood loss.
(Ord. No. 2025-FC3 § 1, 2025; Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 §
2 (part), 2005)
16.04.030   Contents and purpose of provisions.
   A.   This title is one aspect of land and resource management planning in
Pima County for watercourses, flood waters, drainage, and floodplains as well
as those associated floodplain features relating to erosion, sedimentation, and
riparian habitat. Floodplain management must be seen in perspective, not only
as flood hazard minimization but also as one element of an integrated program
of natural resource management and flood and erosion hazard reduction.
   B.   The Pima County Flood Control District recognizes that it is both
necessary and desirable to maintain a balanced and cooperative relationship
between human communities and the land and resources that sustain them.
Maintaining the stability of the environment is essential.
   C.   It is the intent of the Pima County Flood Control District that:
      1.   The highest and best use of regulatory floodplains within the county
is for maintenance of natural hydrologic and hydraulic stream flow processes,
with consideration for groundwater recharge, aesthetics, natural open space,
recreation areas, and flora, fauna, and other wildlife habitat resources;
      2.   Any human habitation or structural developments, which limit natural
processes within floodprone or erosion hazard areas, be discouraged, and shall
be limited to the extent allowable by law;
      3.   Lands within the regulatory floodplain including riparian habitat
and erosion hazard areas are managed by the Pima County Flood Control District
to preserve or enhance natural values and expressed resource management goals;
      4.   Regulatory controls for floodplain management emphasize overall
watershed management, and prevention of unwise human occupation or encroachment
into regulatory floodplain and erosion hazard areas; and
      5.   Natural floodplain areas, streams, washes, arroyos, rivers, and
drainage courses should be preserved in their natural riverine condition,
whenever possible, and any land-use proposal, that utilizes this approach, will
be considered superior to all others.
   D.   The purpose of this title is to protect the public health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of Pima County, and protect the natural
character of our watercourses, water resources, and environment by adopting
regulations designed to:
      1.   Minimize flood and erosion damages;
      2.   Meet or exceed state and federal requirements relating to floodplain
management, thereby enabling Pima County residents to purchase low-cost flood
insurance; receive disaster relief, should the need arise; and seek residential
and commercial real-estate loans;
      3.   Establish minimum flood protection elevations and damage prevention
requirements for structures and other types of development that may be
vulnerable to flood and erosion damage;
      4.   Regulate encroachment and building development located within areas
subject to flooding, or erosion, or located within riparian habitat areas, and
assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered and/or relocated
portion of any watercourse is maintained;
      5.   Encourage the most effective expenditures of public money for flood
control projects;
      6.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and erosion, which are generally undertaken at the expense of the
general public;
      7.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water
and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges
located in regulatory floodplain and erosion hazard areas;
      8.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the protection of
regulatory floodplain and erosion hazard areas;
      9.   Inform the public where property lies within a regulatory
floodplain, riparian habitat area or erosion hazard area;
      10.   Ensure that those who occupy areas within regulatory floodplain and
erosion hazard areas assume the responsibility for their actions within those
areas;
      11.   Protect, preserve and enhance groundwater recharge; and
      12.   Encourage the preservation of natural washes, riparian habitat, as
well as preserve the riverine environment.
   E.   In order to accomplish protection of public health and safety and
reduction of flood losses, this ordinance includes methods and provisions for:
      1.   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
increased erosion, flood heights or velocities, or flood volumes;
      2.   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      3.   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
waters;
      4.   Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
      5.   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers that
will unnaturally divert flood waters may increase flood hazards in other areas.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 2 (B), (C), 1988)
16.04.040   Application and enforcement.
   A.   The ordinance codified in Title 16 of the Pima County Code shall apply
to those floodplains, erosion hazard areas, and riparian habitat areas defined
and regulated herein.
   B.   This title shall be applicable and enforceable in the incorporated, as
well as the unincorporated areas of Pima County, including public lands, but
excluding Indian and military reservations and those incorporated areas of
cities or towns which have elected to assume separate floodplain management
powers and duties pursuant to Section 48-3610 of the Arizona Revised Statutes.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988
FC-2 Art. 2 (A), (E), 1988)
16.04.050   Performance standards.
   The performance requirements as specified in this title are minimum
standards and address general floodplain management requirements. Specific
projects may warrant additional requirements that may be imposed by the Pima
County Flood Control District. The Pima County Flood Control District has the
authority to establish standards and/or policies, as necessary, to carry out
the provisions of this title. All drainage design standards, river and basin
management plans, riparian preservation and mitigation standards, environmental
protection, or other land-use plans approved by Pima County and the flood
control district are hereby incorporated into this title. All applicable
floodplain management, flood hazard and flood control regulations, rules and
standards promulgated by the state of Arizona and the federal government are
hereby incorporated into this title.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988
FC-2 Art. 2 (F), 1988)
16.04.060   Interpretation of provisions—Conflict resolution.
   A.   In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions
shall be:
      1.   Considered as minimum requirements;
      2.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
      3.   Deemed to neither limit nor repeal any other powers granted to Pima
County under any state statute.
   B.   Where this title conflicts with or overlaps with any other ordinance or
regulation, easement, covenant or deed restriction, whichever imposes the more
stringent restriction shall prevail.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 2 (D), 1988)
16.04.070   Cooperative agreements and consultants.
   Pima County may retain consultants and experts, and may enter into
cooperative agreements for the delineation of regulatory floodplains,
floodways, riparian habitat, and erosion hazard areas, or for other assistance
and guidance considered appropriate and necessary.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord.1999 FC-1 §§ 1 (part) 1999; Ord.1988 FC-
2 Art. 20 (A), 1988)
16.04.080   Units of measure.
   All units of measure contained in this title, whether expressed or implied,
are intended to be in the English system of units.
(Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 20 (C), 1988)
16.04.090   Warning and disclaimer of liability.
   The degree of flood protection required by this title is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes, and is based on engineering and scientific
methods of study. Larger floods may occur on occasion or the flood height may
be increased by manmade or natural causes, such as bridge openings restricted
by debris. This title does not imply that areas located outside of the
regulatory floodway, floodway fringe area, floodplain, riparian habitat, or
erosion hazard areas, or land-uses permitted within such areas, will be free
from flooding or flood damage. This title shall not create liability on the
part of Pima County, the Pima County Flood Control District or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that may result from reliance on this
title or any administrative decision based upon this title.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988
FC-2 Art. 3, 1988)
16.04.100   Severability.
   The ordinance codified in this title and the various parts thereof are
hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this title be declared
by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the title as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the
section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010)
Chapter 16.08
DEFINITIONS
16.08.010   Application of definitions and general usage.
16.08.020   Appeal
16.08.030   Arizona Department of Water Resources.
16.08.040   Balanced drainage basin.
16.08.050   Base flood.
16.08.060   Base flood elevation.
16.08.070   Basement.
16.08.080   Board.
16.08.090   Board of supervisors.
16.08.100   Chief engineer.
16.08.110   County engineer.
16.08.120   Critical drainage basin.
16.08.130   Cumulative substantial improvement.
16.08.140   Detention system.
16.08.150   Development.
16.08.160   District.
16.08.170   Drainage area.
16.08.180   Dwelling unit.
16.08.190   Encroachment.
16.08.200   Erosion.
16.08.210   Erosion hazard area.
16.08.220   Exemption.
16.08.230   Flood control district advisory committee.
16.08.240   Flood insurance study.
16.08.250   Flood or floodwaters.
16.08.260   Floodplain.
16.08.270   Floodplain administrator.
16.08.280   Floodplain management.
16.08.290   Floodplain management regulations.
16.08.300   Floodplain use permit.
16.08.310   Flood proofing.
16.08.320   Floodway area.
16.08.330   Floodway fringe area.
16.08.340   Geologic floodplain.
16.08.350   Habitat mitigation.
16.08.360   Hardship.
16.08.370   Highest adjacent grade.
16.08.380   Historic structure.
16.08.390   Hydroriparian.
16.08.400   Important riparian area.
16.08.410   Levee.
16.08.420   Lowest floor.
16.08.430   Manufactured home.
16.08.440   Manufactured home park or subdivision.
16.08.450   Market value.
16.08.460   Mean sea level.
16.08.470   Mesoriparian.
16.08.480   Mining reclamation plan.
16.08.490   New construction.
16.08.500   Nonconforming use.
16.08.510   Obstruction.
16.08.520   Person.
16.08.530   Pima County.
16.08.540   Reach.
16.08.550   Reasonable repair.
16.08.560   Regulatory flood elevation.
16.08.570   Regulatory floodplain or floodprone area.
16.08.580   Retention system.
16.08.590   Riparian habitat.
16.08.600   Setback.
16.08.610   Sheet flooding area.
16.08.620   Special flood hazard area.
16.08.630   Start of construction.
16.08.640   Structure.
16.08.650   Substantial damage.
16.08.660   Substantial improvement.
16.08.670   Technical review committee.
16.08.680   Variance.
16.08.690   Violation.
16.08.700   Watercourse.
16.08.710   Watershed.
16.08.720   Written finding by the chief engineer.
16.08.730   Xeroriparian.
16.08.010   Application of definitions and general usage.
   The following definitions and general usage shall apply to words and phrases
used in Title 16 of this code.
   A.   When parts of the Arizona Revised Statutes are adopted by reference or
referred to in this title, the abbreviation A.R.S. will be used.
   B.   When parts of the Arizona Administrative Code are adopted by reference
or referred to in this title, the abbreviation A.A.C. will be used.
   C.   References to the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations refer sequentially
to the title of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), part, section and
paragraph, e.g., 44 CFR 62.01(a), means Title 44, Code of Federal Regulations,
Part 62 Section .01, Paragraph (a)).
   D.   When parts of the National Federal Flood Insurance Program are adopted
or referenced, the following terms shall be used:
      1.   "NFIP" means National Flood Insurance Program.
      2.   "FEMA" means the Federal Emergency Management Agency under the U.S.
Department of Homeland Security.
      3.   "FIRM" means Flood Insurance Rate Map as adopted by FEMA that
delineates special flood hazards and risk premium zones.
      4.   "Community" is the term used by FEMA for all political bodies that
administer floodplain regulations whether those are towns, cities, counties,
districts, parishes, etc.
      5.   "Jurisdiction" is a term used by FEMA and ADWR that includes
communities, states, tribal nations and other federal land owners like the
Bureau of Land Management and the National Forest Service.
      6.   "Reasonably safe from flooding" is a term used to indicate that
conditions of the National Flood Insurance Program are met for the base flood.
   E.   "State standard" means a document defining standards for floodplain
management as adopted by the Arizona Department of Water Resources pursuant to
A.R.S. Section 48-3605(A). An abbreviation for a specific standard of SS3-96
means State Standard Number 3 as adopted in 1996.
   F.   All units of measure contained in this title, whether expressed or
implied, are intended to be in the English system of units. The following units
of measures and abbreviations will be used:
      1.   When referring to the volume of flow, "cubic feet per second" will
be abbreviated as cfs.
      2.   When referring to the velocity of the flow, "feet per second" will
be abbreviated as fps.
   G.   When referring to timeframes for action, and unless otherwise noted,
"days" shall mean business days.
(Ord. No. 2025-FC3 § 2 (part), 2025; Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005
FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 4
(part), 1988)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-FC5, § 1, adopted May 4, 2010, renumbered Section
16.08.010 to
16.08.020 and
16.08.020 to
16.08.010.
16.08.020   Appeal
"Appeal" means a written request for a technical review of the chief engineer's
written finding, as defined in Section
16.08.770, concerning the denial of a floodplain use permit, or a boundary
determination of a regulatory floodplain, floodway, erosion hazard area, or
riparian habitat. The appeal of a final decision and order of the chief
engineer regarding a floodplain violation shall be pursuant to Section
16.64.070.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010)
16.08.030   Arizona Department of Water Resources.
   "Arizona Department of Water Resources," known from this point forward as
ADWR, is the state agency assigned with oversight of flood control as provided
for in Title 48 Chapter 21 of the A.R.S.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005).
16.08.040   Balanced drainage basin.
   "Balanced drainage basin" means a drainage basin or watershed which contains
flood water channels, natural or manmade, and/or flood control structures that
are adequate to contain existing runoff from the base flood produced by the
basin or watershed, but in which additional runoff may not be safely contained
by said channels or structures. All drainage basins shall be considered to be
balanced basins unless a basin has been designated as a critical drainage
basin.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-
2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.050   Base flood.
   "Base flood" means a flood with a one-percent probability of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year. Commonly referred to as the one hundred-year
flood, this flood shall be determined from an analysis of floods on a
particular watercourse and other watercourses in the same general region in
accordance with the criteria established by the director of the ADWR, or the
flood control district board, which criterion is hereby incorporated by
reference and made a part of this title.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.060   Base flood elevation.
   "Base flood elevation" means the calculated water-surface elevation of the
base flood.
(Ord. 1999-FC-1 §§ 1 (part) 1999; Ord. 1988-FC2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.070   Basement.
   "Basement" means any area of a building having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.
(Ord. 2005-FC2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.08.080   Board.
   "Board" means the board of supervisors of Pima County sitting as the board
of directors for the flood control district, known from this point forward as
the board, as the governing body for codes, ordinances and other regulations
relating to floodplain management within Pima County, but excluding Indian and
military reservations and incorporated communities that elected to assume
separate floodplain management duties and powers, as set forth in the A.R.S.,
Title 48, Chapter 21 Districts.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988
FC-2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.090   Board of supervisors.
   "Board of supervisors," means the governing body of Pima County as defined
in Title 11, Chapter 2, of the A.R.S.
(Ord. 2005-FC2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.08.100   Chief engineer.
   "Chief engineer" means an official of Pima County or authorized
representative of the flood control district whose duties are as set forth in
A.R.S. Section 48-3603, and who is an Arizona registered civil engineer in the
state of Arizona. For the flood control district, the chief engineer is also
the director of the Pima County Flood Control District. The chief engineer, or
an authorized designee, is in charge of enforcement of this title, and is
responsible for administrating appeals and waivers to engineering standards
specified in this title.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.08.110   County engineer.
   "County engineer" means an official of Pima County whose duties are set
forth in A.R.S. Section 11-562 and 48-3603. The County engineer is also the
director of the Pima County Department of Transportation.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988
FC-2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.120   Critical drainage basin.
   "Critical drainage basin" means a drainage basin or watershed that contains
flood water channels, natural or manmade, and/or flood control structures that
cannot convey existing runoff during a base flood produced by the basin or
watershed, and which has a documented history of severe hazards.
(Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.130    Cumulative substantial improvement.
"Cumulative substantial improvement" means the total cost of all improvements,
modifications, additions, reconstruction, or repairs to a structure in order to
determine the applicability of the substantial improvement provisions of this
title. When the total cost of all improvements, modifications, additions,
reconstruction or repairs equals or exceeds the fifty percent substantial
improvement threshold, the structure must be brought into compliance. The
cumulative substantial improvement provision does not apply to tenant
improvements of commercial structures or to the subsequent remodeling of any
residential facility (e.g. kitchen or bathroom) that have been remodeled
previously and accounted for under this provision.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005-FC2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.08.140 Detention system.
"Detention system" means a type of flood control system that delays the
downstream progress of flood waters in a controlled manner, generally through
the combined use of a temporary storage area and a metered outlet device, which
causes a lengthening of the duration of flow and thereby reduces downstream
flood peaks.
(Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.150 Development.
"Development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, fencing, excavating or drilling or storage of
equipment or materials.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988
FC-2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.160 District.
"District" means the County Flood Control District, as established by Title 48,
Chapter 21 of the A.R.S., which is named in Pima County as the Pima County
Flood Control District and known from this point forward as the District.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.08.170 Drainage area.
"Drainage area" means the upstream contributing watershed area measured at a
single point of drainage concentration and is expressed in units of area. Other
terms for this are catchment area, watershed, and river basin.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-
2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.180 Dwelling unit.
"Dwelling unit" means a place of residence that may be located in a single or
multiple dwelling building or a manufactured home.
(Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.190 Encroachment.
"Encroachment" means the placement of uses, materials, fill, or structures into
the regulatory floodplain in a manner that impedes or adversely modifies the
flow conveyance capacity of the channel and/or regulatory floodplain of a
watercourse.
   A.   An equal degree of encroachment is the standard applied to the
evaluation of the effect of an encroachment within the regulatory floodplain
with respect to the degree in which flood water heights or flow velocities may
be changed as a result of the encroachment and assumes that all property owners
on both sides of the watercourse are provided with an equal right to encroach
to the same degree within that reach of the watercourse and modify the flow
capacity within the floodplain including increasing the flood height or flow
velocity.
   B.   Since the factors affecting hydraulic efficiency are usually not
uniform within a reach, this standard may not result in equally measured
distances between floodway limit lines and the regulatory floodplain boundaries
of a watercourse.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.200 Erosion.
"Erosion" means the physical process where flowing flood water removes sediment
and earthen material causing the banks and beds of stream channels to wear away
and degrade over time.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.08.210 Erosion hazard area.
"Erosion hazard area" means the lands adjoining a watercourse regulated by this
title that are deemed by the chief engineer to be subject to flood-related
erosion losses.
(Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.220 Exemption.
"Exemption" to this title means that a federal, state and/or local law has
identified a land use, construction activity, and/or other action as allowed
and immune to local regulations. Exempted uses shall not be affected or
prohibited by the provisions of this title including those exempted land uses
as provided for in A.R.S. Section 11-830 and 48-3609 as identified in Section
16.12 of this title.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.08.230 Flood control district advisory committee.
"Flood control district advisory committee" means the technical committee
established by resolution of the board, to act as an advisory committee to the
board on technical floodplain management and district issues.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-FC5, § 1, adopted May 4, 2010, repealed §
16.08.260, which pertained to the Federal Flood Insurance Program and therefor
renumbered Sections 16.08.270-16.08.530 to 16.08.260-16.08.520.
16.08.240 Flood insurance study.
"Flood insurance study" means an engineering study conducted through FEMA to
identify certain flood hazard areas in an engineering study. For Pima County,
the flood insurance study is a report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for
the Unincorporated Areas of Pima County, Arizona," dated February 15, 1983,
with accompanying FIRMs. This flood insurance study includes its accompanying
maps along with all subsequent amendments by the federal government to the
flood insurance study.
(Ord. No. 2025-FC3 § 2 (part), 2025; Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005-
FC2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.08.250 Flood or floodwaters.
"Flood" or "flood water" means a temporary rise in water level including
groundwater or overflow of water onto lands not normally covered by water.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-
2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.260 Floodplain.
"Floodplain" means any areas within a watercourse which have been or may be
covered partially or wholly by flood waters from the base flood including land
that have been, or may be, subject to flooding from storm water runoff,
overflow of flood waters from a watercourse, alluvial fans, sheet flood zones,
or other property subject to flooding. The floodplain includes the stream
channel, the floodway, and the floodway fringe area.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.08.270 Floodplain administrator.
"Floodplain administrator" means the chief engineer or authorized
representative of the district appointed by the chief engineer, who is also a
registered civil engineer in the state of Arizona, whose duty is to oversee
administration and enforcement of the floodplain management regulations
contained within this ordinance as required by the NFIP.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.08.280 Floodplain management.
"Floodplain management" means the operation of an integrated natural resource
management program, encompassing corrective and preventive measures for
reducing flood and erosion damage. Floodplain management includes, but is not
limited to, emergency preparedness planning, flood control works and floodplain
management regulations.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part) 999; Ord. 1988 FC-
2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.290 Floodplain management regulations.
"Floodplain management regulations" means the codes, ordinances and other
regulations relating to the use of land and construction within the regulatory
floodplain, including zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building
codes, housing codes, setback requirements, open area regulations and similar
methods of control affecting the use and development of these areas.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-
2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.300 Floodplain use permit.
"Floodplain use permit" means an official document that authorizes specific
activity within a regulatory floodplain, riparian habitat, or erosion hazard
area.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.310 Flood proofing.
"Flood proofing" means provisions, changes or adjustments primarily for the
purpose of reducing or eliminating flood damages to property and improvements
subject to flooding.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-
2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.320 Floodway area.
"Floodway area" means that portion of the floodplain which must be preserved in
order to maintain the flood carrying capacity of the base flood. Floodway areas
regulated by this title include:
   A.   Federal floodway areas as delineated by FEMA;
   B.   Administrative floodways for major watercourses with a base flood peak
discharge of two thousand cfs or more as determined through engineering
analyses using ADWR standards or other applicable engineering method.
      1.   Administrative floodway areas include the primary channel of the
watercourse and any adjacent land areas that are necessary to convey the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water-surface elevation more than
one-foot above the base flood elevation under normal flow conditions;
      2.   In addition, when geologic features confine the flow of a
watercourse the following additional areas shall be considered floodway areas:
         a.   Areas necessary to convey the base flood without increasing the
water surface elevation more than one-tenth of a foot above the base flood
elevation under normal flow conditions,
         b.   Areas of frequent inundation as defined by the four percent
annual chance (twenty-five-year) flood,
         c.   Areas with excessive flow depths and velocities (dv 2 ), as
defined in Section
16.26.050.G, and
         d.   Active flow paths and channels based on the presence of
unconsolidated alluvium related to fluvial processes and the potential for the
flow paths to meander over time.
      3.   A watercourse can be considered confined when the ratio of the
wetted top-widths of the floodplains associated with the base flood and the
twenty-five-year flood is one and one-quarter or less and the height of the
geologic features are at least one and one-half times the hydraulic depth of
the base flood. The watercourse shall be considered confined through all
reaches where this criteria is present both upstream and downstream of the
subject area.
   C.   The primary channel of all regulatory minor watercourses with a base
flood peak discharge of less than two thousand cfs.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1998 FC-1 Section 1, 1998; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 4
(part), 1988)
16.08.330 Floodway fringe area.
"Floodway fringe area" is a term used by FEMA to designate the floodplain area
lying outside the floodway, but within the regulatory floodplain. For the
purposes of this title, the floodway fringe area is also the regulatory
floodplain wherever a floodway has not been defined for a regulatory
watercourse.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.340 Geologic floodplain.
"Geologic floodplain" means those lands adjacent to a watercourse that have
been subject to fluvial processes during the Holocene epoch (i.e.,
approximately the past ten thousand years). The geologic floodplain may be
different from the regulatory floodplain.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-
2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.350 Habitat mitigation.
"Habitat mitigation" for purposes of
Chapter 16.30 of the Pima County Code, means providing a new riparian habitat
of similar quality to that which was removed as a result of physical
improvements or development to a piece of property located within floodplain,
an erosion hazard area, or riparian habitat regulated by this ordinance.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.08.360 Hardship.
Hardship means, for the purposes of approving variances of regulation under the
NFIP, the exceptional hardship which would result from a failure to grant the
requested variance. The Board requires that the variance be exceptional,
unusual and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial
hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations,
physical disabilities, personal preferences or the disapproval of one's
neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All
of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a
variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property
owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally
intended.
(Ord. No. 2025-FC3 § 2 (part), 2025; Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005
FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.08.370 Highest adjacent grade.
"Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005-FC2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.08.380 Historic structure.
"Historic structure" means a building:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior (Secretary) as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
   B.    Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary as contributing
to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district
preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic
district;
   C.    Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary;
or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either
by an approved state program as determined by the secretary; or directly by the
Secretary in states without approved programs.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.08.390 Hydroriparian.
"Hydroriparian" for purposes of this title, means riparian habitat designated
as hydroriparian on maps adopted by the board. These riparian habitats are
generally associated with perennial watercourses and/or springs. Plant
communities are dominated by obligate or preferential wetland plant species
such as willow and cottonwood.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.08.400 Important riparian area.
"Important riparian area," for purposes of this title, means riparian areas
designated as important riparian areas on maps adopted by the board for their
hydrologic, geomorphic, and biological values. These areas provide a critical
function for landscape linkage and connectivity with other habitats and provide
biological corridors. Important riparian areas include hydroriparian,
mesoriparian, and xeroriparian class A, B, C, and D habitat areas.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1994 FC-2 (part), 1994: Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 10 (B),
1988)
16.08.410 Levee.
"Levee" means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices for the purpose of
controlling, or diverting the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-
2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.420 Lowest floor.
"Lowest floor" means the floor of the lowest enclosed area of any structure.
This includes any part of the structure having a basement, a floor sub-grade
below ground level and crawl spaces under manufactured housing, which are
considered to be the lowest finished floor if they are not vented and
constructed of flood resistant materials to the regulatory flood elevation.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.430 Manufactured home.
"Manufactured home" means a structure transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. Manufactured
home construction, installment standards, and placement within floodplains are
regulated under A.R.S. in Title 41, Chapter 21, Article 2, Office of
Manufactured Housing. For floodplain management purposes, the term manufactured
home also includes mobile homes, park trailers, travel trailers, recreational
vehicles, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for more than one hundred
eighty consecutive days.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.440 Manufactured home park or subdivision.
"Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel or contiguous parcels of
land divided into four or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988FC-
2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.450 Market value.
"Market value" means the replacement cost of a structure less depreciation
since construction.
(Ord. No. 2025-FC3 § 2 (part), 2025; Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005-
FC2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.08.460 Mean sea level.
"Mean sea level," for purposes of the NFIP, means the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum to which base flood elevations are
referenced, as shown on a community's FIRM.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-
2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.470 Mesoriparian.
"Mesoriparian" for purposes of this title, means riparian habitat designated as
mesoriparian on maps adopted by the board. These riparian habitats generally
are associated with perennial or intermittent watercourses or shallow
groundwater. Plant communities may be dominated by species that are also found
in drier habitats (e.g., mesquite), but contain some preferential riparian
plant species such as ash or netleaf hackberry.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.08.480 Mining reclamation plan.
"Mining reclamation plan" means a plan for sand and gravel operations that
defines hydrologic and hydraulic constraints; outlines methods of extraction,
operation and site development; and provides procedures for final site
reclamation pursuant to the Arizona Aggregate Mined Land Reclamation Act in
Title 27 of the Arizona Revised Statutes (A.R.S. § 27-1201, et seq.).
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.08.490 New construction.
"New construction" means structures and any subsequent improvements to such
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of adoption of:
   A.   An initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, within
federally regulated flood hazard zones.
   B.   This title for floodplain management regulations including regulation
of erosion and riparian habitat as provided herein.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010)
16.08.500 Nonconforming use.
"Nonconforming use" means an existing legal use that does not comply with this
title and was either:
   A.   Constructed prior to December 16, 1974, which predates the requirement
for written authorization for development within a floodplain, or
   B.   Constructed on or after December 16, 1974, in compliance with the terms
and conditions of the written authorization in effect at the time of
construction.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010)
16.08.510 Obstruction.
"Obstruction" means any physical alteration within, to, along, across or
projecting into any watercourse that may impede, retard, or change the
direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting
debris carried by such water, or that is placed where a flow of water might
carry the same downstream. Examples include, but are not limited to, the
following: Any dam, wall, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection,
excavation, channel rectification, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire,
fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure or vegetation.
(Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.520 Person.
"Person" means any individual, the individual's agent, a firm, partnership,
association, or corporation or an agent of the aforementioned groups, this
state or its political subdivision thereof.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988
FC-2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.530 Pima County.
"Pima County" means the political subdivision established by Title 11, Chapter
1 of the A.R.S. and from this point forward is referred to as the county.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.08.540 Reach.
"Reach" is a hydraulic engineering term used to describe longitudinal segments
of a stream or watercourse. In an urban area, an example of a reach would be
the segment of a watercourse located between two consecutive bridge crossings.
(Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.550 Reasonable repair.
"Reasonable repair" means those activities necessary in order to facilitate
continuation or improvement of an existing legal use. Reasonable repair is
considered to occur when the first alteration commences for any wall, ceiling,
floor or other structural part of the building whether or not that alteration
affects the exterior dimensions of the structure.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.08.560 Regulatory flood elevation.
"Regulatory flood elevation" means the elevation that is 1 foot above the
calculated water-surface elevation of the base flood.
(Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.570 Regulatory floodplain or floodprone area.
"Regulatory floodplain or floodprone area" means that portion of the geologic
floodplain associated with a watercourse, including its channel, or any other
floodplain or floodprone area that would be inundated by the base flood,
including all base floods where the base flood peak discharge is one hundred
cfs or greater, those areas that are subject to sheet flooding except when the
maximum potential contributing watershed area is less than twenty acres, those
areas identified on subdivision plats or development plans, those areas
designated by FEMA, including areas designated as Shaded Zone X as well as
those areas that the chief engineer, using the best available data, has
determined is subject to a flood hazard during the base flood.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.580 Retention system.
"Retention system" means a type of flood control system that stops the
downstream progress of flood waters by employing methods of total containment.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988
FC2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.590 Riparian habitat.
"Riparian habitat," for purposes of this title, means riparian habitat
designated as riparian on maps adopted by the board. These habitats are
generally characterized by vegetation that is different in plant species
composition or an increase in the size and/or density of vegetation as compared
to upland areas occurring in association with any regulatory floodplain and
stream channel where waters flow at least periodically in a channel or as
dispersed flow, or other features associated with a floodplain such as a
spring, cienega, lake, watercourse, river, stream, creek, wash, arroyo, or
other surface body of water.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.08.600 Setback.
"Setback" means the minimum horizontal distance between a structure and a
watercourse. On each side of a watercourse, the setback is measured from the
top edge of the channel bank, the top edge of the closest channel or braid when
multiple channels or braids exist, or the edge of the regulatory floodway,
whichever is most representative of the erosion hazard.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.610 Sheet flooding area.
"Sheet flooding area" means the area which may be subject to flooding with
depths of one foot or less during the base flood even though a clearly defined
channel does not exist and the path of the flooding is often unpredictable and
indeterminate. Sheet flooding areas include:
   A.   FEMA designated Shaded Zone X when the designation refers to areas
subject to a depth of flow of one-foot or less during the base flood; and
   B.   Areas that the chief engineer, using the best available data, has
determined are subject to sheet flooding during the base flood.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.620 Special flood hazard area.
"Special flood hazard area" means an area designated by FEMA as having a
special flood hazard, and that is land subject to a one percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year, and from this point forward abbreviated
as SFHA. An SFHA may be designated as a zone A, AO, AH, AE, A 1-30, A99.
   A.   Zone A, no base flood elevation has been determined;
   B.   Zone AE, the base flood elevation has been determined;
   C.   Zone AH, flood depths of one to three feet in areas that are usually
areas of ponding with the base flood elevations determined;
   D.   Zone AO, flood depths of one to three feet in areas usually subject to
sheet flow with the average depths determined.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.08.630 Start of construction.
"Start of construction" means the date the building permit was issued, for
purposes of determining exemptions to Title 16 under Section
16.12.010, provided the actual commencement of physical construction activities
occurs within one hundred eighty calendar days of the permit date. This applies
to building permits for a new building or the substantial improvement of an
existing building, including the actual commencement of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement. The
actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation
including those improvements intended for the placement of a manufactured home.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.08.640 Structure.
"Structure" means any walled and roofed building that is principally above
ground, where walled is considered two or more outside rigid walls and roofed
is a fully secured roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a
manufactured home. The terms "structure" and "building" are used
interchangeably in the NFIP regulations and this title.
(Ord. No. 2025-FC3 § 2 (part), 2025; Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005
FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 4
(part), 1988)
16.08.650 Substantial damage.
"Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred. This term also applies to structures which have incurred
repetitive loss or damage where the cumulative total of the loss or damage
equals or exceeds fifty percent of the structure's market value regardless of
the actual repair work performed.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.08.660 Substantial improvement.
   "Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50
percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction"
of the improvement as determined by:
   A.   The latest assessment rolls of the county assessor before the
improvement or repair is started;
   B.   The market value as determined by a report prepared by an Arizona
state-certified appraiser.
(Ord. No. 2025-FC3 § 2 (part), 2025; Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005
FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.08.670 Technical review committee.
"Technical review committee" means the flood control district advisory
committee that, when requested by the board, provides review of technical
matters concerning interpretation and enforcement of this title.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.08.680 Variance.
"Variance" means to have the board grant relief from the requirements of this
title that would allow construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this title including:
   A.   Variances of adopted special flood hazard areas as designated by FEMA.
Such variances shall conform to the variance requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program as provided for within 44 CFR 66 and A.R.S. 48-3609 and as
provided for in Chapter 16.56 of this title.
   B.   Variances to adopted district regulations as provided by this title.
Such variances shall conform to the variance requirements provided in Chapter
16.56 of this title.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.690 Violation.
"Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the district's floodplain management regulations. A structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or
other evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
(Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.700 Watercourse.
"Watercourse" means any lake, river, stream, creek, wash, arroyo, or other body
of water or channel having banks and a bed through which waters flow at least
periodically. The watercourse includes the streambed, channel banks, floodway
and floodway fringe areas, and areas subject to sheet flooding.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005); Ord. 1999
FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.710 Watershed.
"Watershed" means the contributing drainage area located upstream of a specific
point along a watercourse.
(Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 4 (part), 1988)
16.08.720 Written finding by the chief engineer.
"Written finding by the chief engineer" means a written determination issued by
the chief engineer after consideration of technical facts and the provisions of
this title concerning the conditions or denial of a floodplain use permit or a
boundary determination of a regulatory floodplain, floodway, erosion hazard
area or riparian habitat.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010)
16.08.730 Xeroriparian.
"Xeroriparian" for purposes of this title, means riparian habitat designated as
xeroriparian on maps adopted by the board. These riparian habitats are
generally associated with an ephemeral water supply. These communities
typically contain plant species also found in upland habitats; however, these
plants are typically larger and/or occur at higher densities than adjacent
uplands.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
Chapter 16.12
EXEMPTIONS AND NONCONFORMING USES
Sections: 
16.12.010   Exemptions from Title 16 regulations.
16.12.020   Review of plans—Uses authorized without permit.
16.12.030   Use permit required when.
16.12.040   Liability for increasing flood hazards.
16.12.050   Improvements to nonconforming uses.
16.12.060   Discontinuance of nonconforming use.
16.12.010   Exemptions from Title 16 regulations.
   As specified in A.R.S. Section 48-3609(I), the provisions of this title
shall not affect or prohibit:
   A.   Existing legal uses of property or the right to continuation of such
legal uses. However, if nonconforming use of land, building or structure is
discontinued for twelve consecutive months; or is destroyed to the extent of
fifty percent or more of its value, as determined by a competent appraiser, any
further use shall comply with this title;
   B.   Reasonable repair or alteration of property for the purposes for which
the property was legally used on December 16, 1974, except that any alteration,
addition, or repair to a nonconforming building or structure which would result
in increasing its flood damage potential by fifty percent or more shall be
either flood-proofed or elevated to, at, or above the regulatory flood
elevation with written authorization required pursuant to A.R.S. Section 49-
3613 and Section
16.12.050 of this chapter;
   C.   Reasonable repair of structures constructed with the written
authorization required by A.R.S. Section 48-3613; and
   D.   Facilities constructed or installed pursuant to a certificate of
environmental compatibility issued pursuant to Title 40, Chapter 2, Article
6.2, of A.R.S. Section 40-360, et seq.
(Ord. No. 2025-FC3 § 3 (part), 2025; Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005
FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 5
(A), 1988)
16.12.020   Review of plans—Uses authorized without permit.
   As specified in A.R.S. Section 48-3613(B), before construction of the
following, plans are to be presented to the Board for review and comment;
however, the following shall not be prohibited and shall not require a
floodplain use permit or other written authorization from the Board. Prior to
construction, the following may be subject to conditions under the NFIP and the
Federal Clean Water Act, sections 401 and 404:
   A.   The construction of bridges, culverts, dikes and other structures
necessary for the construction of public highways, roads, and streets
intersecting or crossing a watercourse;
   B.   The construction of storage dams for watering livestock or wildlife;
structures on banks of a watercourse to prevent erosion of, or damage to,
adjoining land, provided that the structure will not divert, retard, or
obstruct the natural channel of the watercourse; or dams for the conservation
of flood waters as permitted by Title 45, Chapter 6, of A.R.S. Section 45-1201,
et seq.;
   C.   Construction of tailing dams and waste-disposal areas used in
connection with mining and metallurgical operations. This subsection does not
exempt those sand and gravel operations that will divert, retard or obstruct
the flow of waters in a watercourse from complying with and acquiring
authorization from the board pursuant to the regulations adopted by the board
under this title;
   D.   Other construction, if the board determines that written authorization
is unnecessary;
   E.   Construction by any district, county, city, town, or other political
subdivision exercising powers granted to it under Title 48, Chapter 21, Article
1 of A.R.S. Section 48-3601, et seq.;
   F.   The construction by a public agency or political subdivision of
streams, waterways, lakes, and other auxiliary facilities in conjunction with
development of public parks and recreation facilities;
   G.   The construction and erection of poles, towers, foundations, support
structures, guy wires, and other facilities related to power transmission,
constructed by any utility, whether a public service corporation or a political
subdivision.
(Ord. No. 2025-FC3 § 3 (part), 2025; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999
FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 5 (B), 1988)
16.12.030   Use permit required when.
   This chapter shall not exempt any person from obtaining a floodplain use
permit as set forth in this title for any use that diverts, retards or
obstructs the flow of water and creates a danger or hazard to life or property
in the affected area.
(Ord. 1999-FC-1 §§ 1 (part) 1999; Ord. 1988-FC2 Art. 5 (C), 1988)
16.12.040   Liability for increasing flood hazards.
   These exemptions do not preclude any person from liability if that person's
actions increase flood hazards to any other person or property.
(Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 5 (D), 1988)
16.12.050   Improvements to nonconforming uses.
   A.   Repairs, reconstruction, or improvements to existing nonconforming uses
may only be permitted provided that:
      1.   The cumulative cost of improvements, repairs, or reconstruction is
less than fifty percent of the value of the original structure as determined
by:
         a.   The latest assessment rolls of the county assessor before the
improvement or repair is started, or
         b.   The market value as determined by a report prepared by an Arizona
state-certified appraiser.
      2.   The improvements, repairs, or reconstruction conform to all other
provisions of this title; and the improvements do not:
         a.   Increase water surface elevations if located in floodway areas,
         b.   Encroach greater than the limits provided in Section
16.20.040.A if located in floodway fringe areas,
         c.   Encroach further into an erosion hazard area, or
         d.   Increase the flood damage risk to the structure by either:
         i.   Lowering the finished floor below that of the existing structure,
including conversion of non-habitable space into habitable space,
         ii.   Failing to maintain the height of the structure relative to
natural grade if on sloped terrain, or
         iii.   Failing to provide an equal level of erosion protection of the
existing structure.
   B.   Substantial repairs, reconstruction, or improvements that exceed fifty
percent of the value of the existing nonconforming use shall only be permitted
when the entire structure is brought into compliance with all of the provisions
of this Title, including those conditions listed in Section
16.12.050.A.
   C.   Any improvements, repairs, or reconstruction including substantial
improvements to existing historic structures are permitted provided the
improvement or the alteration would not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure.
   D.   No person shall repair or alter property in a piecemeal manner so as to
avoid the provisions of this section.
   E.   For the purpose of this chapter, improvement is considered to occur
when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part
of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimension of the structure.
   F.   This section does not apply to any project for improvement of a
structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety-
code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions.
(Ord. No. 2025-FC3 § 3 (part), 2025; Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005
FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.12.060   Discontinuance of nonconforming use.
   In the event that a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of 12
consecutive months, or the structure is deemed non-habitable by an authorized
building official, as defined under Title 15.04.040 of the County Code, any
further use thereof shall be in conformity with the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988
FC-2 Art. 5 (E), 1988)
Chapter 16.16
FLOODPLAIN MAPS AND BOUNDARIES
Sections: 
16.16.010   Boundaries shown on maps.
16.16.020   Studies and maps adopted by reference.
16.16.030   Areas subject to revision.
16.16.040   Engineering studies and map preparation.
16.16.050   Undelineated areas—Landowner responsibility.
16.16.060   Floodplains—Basic delineation of areas.
16.16.070   Floodplains—New delineations required when.
16.16.080   Boundary determination questions.
16.16.010   Boundaries shown on maps.
   The boundaries of the regulatory floodplains and the floodways for which
adequate hydrologic and hydraulic data are available for their delineation on
maps shall be shown on maps maintained by the Chief Engineer.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988
FC-2 Art. 6 (A) (part), 1988)
16.16.020   Studies and maps adopted by reference.
   A.   The federal government through the NFIP has identified certain flood
hazard areas in an engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for
the Unincorporated Areas of Pima County, Arizona," dated February 15, 1983,
with accompanying FIRMs and flood boundary and floodway maps. This flood
insurance study includes its accompanying maps along with all subsequent
amendments and revisions by the federal government to the flood insurance
study, including all new flood insurance studies and FIRMs adopted under the
NFIP for the unincorporated areas and incorporated cities within the County,
all of which are hereby incorporated by reference and declared to be a part of
this title.
   B.   The delineations of the regulatory floodplains and the floodways shown
on these maps shall be the regulatory floodplains and floodways governed by
this title for those watercourses studied. The flood insurance study and the
accompanying maps are on file in the offices of the District. Amendments and
revisions to the flood insurance study and its accompanying maps shall be
incorporated in the floodplain maps maintained by the Chief Engineer.
(Ord. No. 2025-FC3 § 4 (part), 2025; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999
FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 6 (A) (1), 1988)
16.16.030   Areas subject to revision.
   Due to the episodic nature of natural flood events and the resulting changes
to hydrologic and hydraulic conditions along the watercourses within the
county, base flood peak discharges, flow volumes, and associated regulatory
floodplain and erosion hazard areas are subject to continuous revision. At a
minimum, base flood values and base flood elevations will meet or exceed the
current values established by the NFIP and reflect historic flood information
and general, current, watershed conditions. When flood events occur that alter
floodplain and erosion hazard conditions, the Chief Engineer may recommend
modifications of floodplain management regulations for adoption by the Board
and by FEMA.
   The chief engineer will maintain current regulatory floodplain and erosion
hazard area maps for the Santa Cruz River, Rillito Creek, and other major
watercourses as necessary.
   A.   The regulatory floodplains and floodways for the Santa Cruz River,
Canada del Oro Wash, Tanque Verde Creek, Agua Caliente Wash, Pantano Wash, San
Pedro River, Rincon Creek, Cienega Creek, Lee Moore Wash, Brawley Wash, Black
Wash, Rillito Creek, and all other major watercourses, shall be based upon
FIRMs or, where such maps are not available, the best available technical data
and floodplain maps, as prepared by the District or by an Arizona registered
civil engineer, and approved by the Chief Engineer. As flood repair and flood
control improvements are constructed, the Chief Engineer will prepare revised
floodplain maps for the purpose of regulation.
   B.   All watersheds that generate flood peak discharges exceeding five
thousand cfs for the base flood discharge shall have their flood peak
discharges listed by the chief engineer. These discharges will be amended, if
necessary, as revised base flood discharge estimates become available.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988
FC-2 Art. 6 (A) (6), 1988)
16.16.040   Engineering studies and map preparation.
   Engineering studies showing the regulatory floodplain and erosion hazard
areas may be prepared under the direction of the chief engineer. Upon approval
by the chief engineer, these maps shall represent the regulatory floodplain and
erosion hazard areas governed by this title.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988
FC-2 Art. 6 (A) (6), 1988)
16.16.050   Undelineated areas—Landowner responsibility.
   In those areas where the regulatory floodplain and erosion hazard areas are
not delineated pursuant to Sections
16.16.020 and
16.16.030 of this chapter, and upon request for a county permit, the property
owner is responsible for:
   A.   Obtaining and providing accurate information on site conditions
including but not limited to topography, drainage features and floodplain
conditions as part of the permit process.
   B.   As part of the permit process, additional information and engineering
data may be required of the property owner.
   C.   The chief engineer may require the land owner to establish the
regulatory floodplain and floodway limits through a hydrologic and hydraulic
study prepared and sealed by an Arizona registered civil engineer.
   D.   For the regulatory flood in approximate A zones, as designated on
FIRMs, delineation and certification by an Arizona registered civil engineer of
the base flood elevation shall be required for all new subdivisions and other
proposed developments greater in size than fifty lots or five acres, whichever
is less, as required under Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations (44CFR
60.3(b)).
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 6 (A) (3), 1988)
16.16.060   Floodplains—Basic delineation of areas.
   In those areas where a hydrologic and hydraulic study has been prepared by
an Arizona registered civil engineer that delineates the regulatory
floodplains, floodway, and erosion hazard areas, and has been approved by the
chief engineer, then the delineation of those boundaries shown within the study
shall be the regulatory floodplain, floodway, and erosion hazard areas governed
by this title. The new delineations and reports shall be prepared in
conformance with the requirements of FEMA, the Director of Water Resources, and
this title.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 6 (A) (4), 1988)
16.16.070   Floodplains—New delineations required when.
   A.   Any person or agency responsible for the construction of any
improvement, public or private, which changes the configuration of the
delineated floodplain, flow conditions, or base flood elevations, shall provide
to the district, and all governing jurisdictions affected by the project, new
delineations of floodplain conditions within one hundred twenty calendar days
after completion of construction.
   B.   Where FEMA has adopted floodplain delineations, base flood elevations,
floodways and other regulatory data as contained in the NFIP flood insurance
study, the property owner or agency responsible for the construction of
improvements that may modify the floodplain information or flow conditions
shall provide to the district for review and approval:
      1.   A conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) prior to construction
unless waived by the chief engineer. The proposed floodplain delineations, or
modifications to existing delineations, shall be in accordance with the
criteria adopted by FEMA, the Director of ADWR and this title. The CLOMR shall
contain all reports and documentation as required by the NFIP including:
         a.   A hydraulic analysis and proposed delineation of all regulatory
floodplains and water surface elevations for the proposed improvement.
         b.   Improvement plans and specifications as necessary for
construction.
         c.   For subdivisions, the CLOMR must be approved by the district and
submitted to FEMA prior to recording of the final plat, or in the case of
development plans, prior to approval.
      2.   A letter of map revision (LOMR) including all required documents and
associated new technical data within one hundred twenty calendar days after
construction is complete. The LOMR information shall contain all reports and
documentation as required by the NFIP including:
         a.   A new delineation of all regulatory floodplains affected by the
improvements.
         b.   As-built plans.
         c.   All documents, plans, and reports shall be prepared in
conformance with the requirements of FEMA, the Director of ADWR, and this
title.
         d.   For privately constructed improvements for subdivisions or
development plans, the property owner shall provide to the district the LOMR
documents, with as-built plans of the drainage improvements, and the LOMR must
be approved by the district and submitted to FEMA prior to the release of
assurances for subdivisions or the release of the certificate of occupancy for
development plans.
      3.   All technical data, floodplain delineations, reports, maps, and
documents shall be prepared in accordance with criteria establish by the
Director of ADWR and in conformance with the requirements of the NFIP.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 6 (A) (5), 1988)
16.16.080   Boundary determination questions.
   A.   Where a question arises as to the location of any regulatory
floodplain, floodway or erosion hazard area, the question shall be decided by
the chief engineer, whose decision shall be final, except as provided for in
Chapter 16.54 of this title. Any person contesting the location of any boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present technical evidence prepared
by an Arizona registered civil engineer, if so desired.
   B.   Where presently platted or mapped regulatory floodplain and erosion
hazard areas differ from previously approved regulatory floodplain and erosion
hazard areas, the most recent information shall be used. However, at no time
shall the base floodplain limits and elevations be less than those adopted by
NFIP.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988
FC-2 Art. 6 (A) (7), (8), 1988)
Chapter 16.20
USE PERMITS—GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections: 
16.20.010   Floodplain use permit—Required when.
16.20.015   Floodplain use permit—Exemptions.
16.20.020   Permit—Information requirements.
16.20.030   Permit—Issuance conditions—Notices of development.
16.20.040   Permit—Specific conditions authorized.
16.20.050   Permit—Denial conditions.
16.20.060   Permit—Revocation.
16.20.070   Certification of elevation.
16.20.010   Floodplain use permit—Required when.
   A. A floodplain use permit shall be obtained for any new structure, new
manufactured home, replacement of an existing manufactured home or travel
trailer, a change of use of any portion of an existing structure, substantial
improvements or other improvements to a structure or manufactured home where
the value of material and labor exceeds seven thousand five hundred dollars, or
any other development upon any land located within:
      1.   FEMA designated special flood hazard areas;
      2.   All other regulatory floodplains as described in
Chapters 16.08,
16.24 and
16.26;
      3.   Riparian habitat areas as described in
Chapter 16.30;
      4.   Erosion hazard areas as described in
Chapter 16.28 of this title.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for such activities to take place without first
applying for and obtaining a floodplain use permit from the chief engineer and
thereafter complying with all conditions of the floodplain use permit and all
provisions of this title.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 §§ 1 (part) 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 7 (A) (1), 1988)
16.20.015   Floodplain use permit—Exemptions.
   A.   A floodplain use permit shall not be required for any structure that is
less than two hundred square feet provided that the improvements:
      1.   Do not obstruct, divert, or retard the flow of flood water;
      2.   Do not disturb or remove riparian habitat as regulated under this
title; and
      3.   Comply with all other provisions of this title including
requirements for flood venting and for anchoring to prevent lateral movement.
   B.   Exempt structures that are found to be constructed in violation of this
title may require a permit in order to bring the structure into compliance.
(Ord. No. 2025-FC3 § 4 (part), 2025; Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010)
16.20.020   Permit—Information requirements.
   A.   Upon receiving an application for a floodplain use permit, the chief
engineer may require, where applicable, the applicant to submit plans, drawn to
a standard engineering scale, providing the following information at a minimum:
      1.   The property location, dimensions, and elevation of the lot;
      2.   Existing or proposed structure(s), manufactured home(s), or
improvements;
      3.   Area to be graded, fill pads and elevations of same;
      4.   Any fill, storage of materials, walls, fences, or other development
that may obstruct, divert or retard flow;
      5.   Any flood proofing measures and specifications;
      6.   The relationship of all the above improvements and developments to
the location of the watercourse, regulatory floodplain, floodway, riparian
habitat, and erosion hazard area boundaries; and
      7.   The base flood elevation and proposed elevation of the lowest floor
and the method of elevation. All elevations must reference an established datum
or base elevation.
   B.   For a floodplain use permit associated with a subdivision plat or
development plan, the following must be provided with the permit application:
      1.   A copy of the approved grading plan; or
      2.   Lot and building sketch including:
         a.   The existing and finished grade of the area to be graded based on
spot elevations or two-foot contour interval maps. It is also a requirement
that the finished pad grade be surveyed and the results of the survey be sealed
by an Arizona registered land surveyor;
         b.   The extent of graded areas, shaded and labeled "graded area,"
and, a depiction of where structures are to be constructed;
         c.   The existing grade at the primary building corners, and the
proposed finished floor elevations;
         d.   The location of proposed erosion or drainage mitigation measures,
such as rock armoring a building pad or retaining walls to support steep-
sloping soils;
         e.   The exterior boundaries of the site; and
         f.   Where applicable, any structural measures for flood protection,
bank stabilization, erosion and drainage control measures.
   C.   Where special circumstances necessitate more detailed information, the
applicant shall furnish any or all of the following, as is deemed necessary by
the chief engineer, for the evaluation of the effects of the proposed use upon
flood flows, riparian habitat, erosion, and other factors necessary in order to
render a decision on the suitability of the proposed use:
      1.   One or more cross-sections showing the existing watercourse,
elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross-sectional
areas to be occupied by the proposed development, and high-water information
(if available);
      2.   Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground;
pertinent structures, fill, or storage elevations; size, location and spatial
arrangement of all proposed and existing structures and channel banks on the
site; location and elevation of streets, water supply, sanitary facilities;
photographs showing existing land-uses and upstream and downstream vegetation
types, and other pertinent information;
      3.   Profile showing the elevation and slope of the bottom of the channel
or flow line of the stream or watercourse;
      4.   Specifications for building construction and materials, flood
proofing, filling, erosion protection, excavating, channel improvements,
storage of materials, water supply, and sanitary and waste facilities;
      5.   An engineering study prepared by an Arizona registered civil
engineer outlining the effects the development will have on the flow of water
through the area being developed and the surrounding areas. This study will be
for the purpose of evaluating possible flood hazards and shall, where
necessary, include consideration of the effects of the development on flood
heights, water velocities, direction of flow, sedimentation and/or erosion,
volume of flows, channel shape and size, type of channel banks and other items
that may be pertinent, and the resultant effects on structures, land, banks,
etc., for the adjacent regulatory floodplain and the surrounding area;
      6.   Riparian habitat information as required under
Chapter 16.30 of this title; and
      7.   Any other information deemed necessary for review of public safety
and floodplain management requirements by the chief engineer.
   D.   The Chief Engineer shall review the proposed development to verify that
the applicant has requested permits from any other governmental agencies which
are required by federal or state law to review or approve the proposed
development.
(Ord. No. 2025-FC3 § 4 (part), 2025; Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005
FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 7
(C), 1988)
16.20.030   Permit—Issuance conditions—Notices of development.
   A.   It shall be the duty of the chief engineer, through the floodplain
administrator, to issue any floodplain use permit required by this chapter. The
chief engineer may request and shall receive the assistance and cooperation of
all departments, agencies, officials, and public employees of the county in the
enforcement of this title. No license, permit or other similar approval for any
development that would be in conflict with the provisions of this title shall
be issued by any department, official, or employee of the county; and any such
license, permit, or approval, if issued in conflict with the provisions of this
title, shall be null and void.
   B.   In accordance with A.R.S. Section 48-3610, the district shall advise
any city or town that has assumed, in writing, jurisdiction over the district's
regulatory floodplains, and provide a copy of any development plan or any
application that has been filed with the district for a floodplain use permit
or a variance to develop land in a regulatory floodplain, floodway, or erosion
hazard area within one mile of the boundary between the district's area of
jurisdiction and the jurisdiction of that city or town. The district shall also
advise any city or town in writing and provide a copy of any development plan
of any major development proposed within a regulatory floodplain, floodway, or
erosion hazard area within the County that could affect regulatory floodplains,
floodways, erosion hazard areas or watercourses within that city's or town's
area of jurisdiction. Written notice and a copy of the plan of development
shall be sent to any adjacent jurisdiction no later than three working days
after having been received by the district.
   C.   Whenever a watercourse, which is regulated by FEMA and ADWR, is to be
altered or relocated the chief engineer shall:
      1.   Notify adjacent communities and ADWR prior to such alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA;
and
      2.   Require as a condition of the floodplain use permit that the flood
carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse be
maintained.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 7 (B), 1988)
16.20.040   Permit—Specific conditions authorized.
   A.   Any floodplain use permit may be subject to conditions or restrictions
designed to reduce or mitigate the potential danger or hazard to life or
property resulting from development within the regulatory floodplain, floodway,
or erosion hazard areas. The applicant may be required to execute deed
restrictions running with the land or be required to post performance bonds,
assurances or such other security as may be appropriate and necessary to assure
that performance of the conditions or restrictions of the permit are satisfied
and to ensure that the requirements of this title and the NFIP have been
satisfied, including the following:
      1.   All other required state and federal permits have been, or will be,
obtained;
      2.   The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and
      3.   The proposed development does not adversely affect the flow carrying
capacity of the watercourse and floodplain by demonstrating that:
         a.   The individual development will not increase the flow depth by
more than one-tenth of one foot at any property line,
         b.   The individual development will not increase the flow velocity by
more than one fps or ten percent, whichever is less, as measured at any
property line, except when it can be demonstrated that the post-development
velocity is not an erosive velocity. The velocity subject to this standard may
be the overbank velocity, the channel velocity, or both, as appropriate based
on the type of development and its location within the floodplain.
         c.   Encroachments that exceed these limits may be approved by the
chief engineer on a case-by-case basis based on engineering analyses and a
determination that the encroachment will not cause any adverse impact to
adjacent properties, and
         d.   The cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
   B.   Examples of conditions that may be imposed include, but are not limited
to, the following:
      1.   Relocation of development and structures to areas subject to no or
less severe flooding or erosion hazards;
      2.   Elevation of structures and associated service facilities to the
regulatory flood elevation;
      3.   Erosion protection;
      4.   Use of flood resistant materials;
      5.   The delineation of maximum encroachment limits;
      6.   The submittal of "as-built" plans, prepared by an Arizona registered
civil engineer, that demonstrate that improvements were constructed in
conformance with this title;
      7.   Modification of waste disposal and water supply-facilities;
      8.   Limitations on periods of use and hours of operation;
      9.   Institution of operational controls;
      10.   Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes,
levees, or other protective measures;
      11.   Indemnification agreements whereby the applicant agrees to hold the
county, the district and the board, as well as their officers, employees, and
agents, harmless; and defend them from any and all claims for damages now and
in the future relating to the use of the property sought to be developed by
reason of flooding, flowage, erosion, or damage caused by water, whether
surface flow, flood, or rainfall;
      12.   Flood proofing measures for nonresidential structures, such as the
following, which shall be designed to be consistent with the regulatory flood
elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, durations, rate of rise,
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors associated with the base
flood. The chief engineer may require that the applicant submit a plan or
document, sealed by an Arizona registered civil engineer, structural engineer,
or architect, that the flood proofing measures are consistent with the
regulatory flood elevation and associated flood factors for the particular
area. Examples of flood proofing measures that may be required include, but are
not limited to:
         a.   Anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movement;
         b.   Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads, and shutters;
         c.   Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressures;
         d.   Use of paints, membranes or mortars to reduce seepage of water
through walls;
         e.   Addition of mass or weight to structures to resist flotation;
         f.   Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures;
         g.   Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems so as to
prevent the entrance of flood waters;
         h.   Pumping facilities to relieve subsurface external foundation wall
and basement floor pressures;
         i.   Construction designed to resist rupture or collapse caused by
water pressure or floating debris;
         j.   Cutoff valves on sewer lines, or the elimination of gravity flow
basement drains;
         k.   Elevation of structures or service facilities to the regulatory
flood elevation;
         l.   Bank protection, armor plating or other erosion control measures
on any proposed fill; and
         m.   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities designed and/or located to prevent
water entry or accumulation.
   C.   An applicant appealing any permitting conditions, interpretation or
administration of this title, permit denial or requesting a waiver to specific
permit conditions or to engineering standards shall first appeal in writing to
the chief engineer as provided in Section
16.56.010.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 7 (E), 1988)
16.20.050   Permit—Denial conditions.
   A.   No permit shall be issued for any development that is not in
conformance with this title, or any other provision of law relating to such
development. A floodplain use permit shall be denied if the proposed
development constitutes a danger or hazard to life or property.
   B.   In making such a determination, the chief engineer shall consider the
following factors:
      1.   The danger to life, person, or property due to flood heights,
velocities, or redirection of flow caused by the development;
      2.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands;
      3.   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems of any development
and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and
unsanitary conditions, if they should become flooded or eroded;
      4.   The susceptibility of the proposed development or its contents to
flood or erosion damage, and the effect of such damage on the individual
owners;
      5.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use on
the same property, which are in areas least likely to be subject to flooding or
erosion;
      6.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing regulatory
floodplain uses and with floodplain management programs anticipated in the
foreseeable future;
      7.   The relationship of the proposed use to any comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for the area;
      8.   The ability of conventional and emergency vehicles to access the
property in times of flooding;
      9.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters expected at the site under both existing and
proposed conditions;
      10.   Where disturbance to riparian habitat can be avoided, by the
availability of alternative locations for the proposed use on the same
property, as required under
Chapter 16.30 of this title; and
      11.   Such other factors that may be relevant to the purposes of this
title.
   C.   Any applicant aggrieved by the written finding of the chief engineer to
deny a permit may appeal that decision pursuant to
Chapter 16.56 of this title.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 7 (D), 1988)
16.20.060   Permit—Revocation.
   Failure to comply with any term or condition of a floodplain use permit or
provision of this title shall be grounds for revoking the floodplain use
permit.
   A.   When the chief engineer determines the permittee has not complied with
any term or condition of a floodplain use permit, the chief engineer may issue
a written stop work order provisionally revoking the floodplain use permit
pending a hearing. The written stop work order shall be delivered by registered
mail or personal delivery to the permittee citing the reasons for revocation.
   B.   The person holding the floodplain use permit may request a hearing
before the chief engineer where the merits of and reasons for revoking the
permit are heard within ten working days from the receipt of notice or personal
delivery.
   C.   If no request for a hearing is made within fifteen working days from
the receipt of notice or personal delivery, the permit shall be considered
revoked and the chief engineer shall issue a written finding to revoke the
permit.
   D.   If a hearing is held, after considering the issues and facts presented
during the hearing, the chief engineer shall issue a written finding to either
reinstate or revoke the permit.
   E.   The applicant may appeal the written finding of the chief engineer to
revoke a permit by requesting a hearing before the board in accordance with
Chapter 16.56 of this title.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 7 (G), 1988)
16.20.070   Certification of elevation.
   Certification of elevation shall be required to demonstrate compliance with
regulatory flood elevation requirements for structures, manufactured homes,
service facilities, or other improvements.
   A.   Prior to the pouring of the first slab for the finished floor, a
certification of elevation of the form representing the top of slab shall be
provided to the chief engineer.
   B.   Prior to final inspection, the applicant shall submit to the chief
engineer a certification of elevation on a form approved by the district
including but not limited to:
      1.   Elevation of the finished floor, and in the case of manufactured
housing, elevation of the lowest structural member;
      2.   Elevation of the highest and lowest finished and natural grades
adjacent to the structure;
      3.   Elevation of service facilities;
      4.   Flood venting information, if applicable; and
      5.   Other information as required on the certification of elevation and
to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of the floodplain use permit.
   C.   Certifications of elevation shall be prepared and sealed by an Arizona
registered land surveyor or Arizona registered civil engineer.
   D.   Such certifications of elevation shall be maintained by the floodplain
administrator, as required by the Arizona Secretary of State, in the Floodplain
Management Division of the District.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 7 (J), 1988)
Chapter 16.24
FLOODWAY REQUIREMENTS
Sections: 
16.24.010   Uses allowed in the floodway.
16.24.020   Prohibited uses in a floodway.
16.24.030   Flood control structures.
16.24.040   Public right-of-way.
16.24.050   Floodway appeals and variances.
16.24.010   Uses allowed in the floodway.
   Except as provided for in this chapter, no other use shall be allowed in any
floodway. The following open space uses shall be permitted within a floodway to
the extent that they are not prohibited by any provision of this title or any
other title, law, or regulation; and provided they do not require fill,
excavation, structures, or the storage of materials or equipment:
   A.   Agricultural uses including general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor
plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, sod farming, and wild crop
harvesting;
   B.   Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, airport landing
strips, parking areas;
   C.   Private and public recreational uses including golf courses, tennis
courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, parks, wildlife and
nature preserves, game farms, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet
ranges, hunting and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails; and
   D.   Accessory residential uses, including lawns, gardens, parking areas and
play areas.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988
FC-2 Art. 8 (A) 1988)
16.24.020   Prohibited uses in a floodway.
   No use shall be allowed which:
   A.   Acting alone or in combination with existing or future uses creates a
danger or hazard to life or property. In determining whether a use creates a
danger or hazard to life or property, the chief engineer may consider the
hazard of the proposed use and impacts to adjacent structures.
   B.   Diverts, retards, or obstructs the flow of regulatory flood waters;
   C.   Increases the base flood elevations, as certified by an Arizona
registered civil engineer;
   D.   Increases erosion potential upstream and/or downstream;
   E.   Places a waste disposal-system wholly or partially in a floodway; or
   F.   Requires the use of fill, excavation, structures or storage of
materials or equipment for a period greater than one hundred eighty calendar
days.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 8 (C), 1988)
16.24.030   Flood control structures.
   Flood control structures designed to protect life or property from the
dangers or hazards of flood waters are permitted provided all other provisions
of this title are met.
(Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 8 (D), 1988)
16.24.040   Public right-of-way.
   Any proposed development, disturbance, or grading within public right-of-way
that is located in the floodway shall require a floodplain use permit pursuant
to this title, except as exempted under
Chapter 16.12. All provisions of this title shall apply to such activities. No
uses shall be permitted that the chief engineer determines would adversely
affect the function of the public right-of-way, floodplain, or riparian
habitat.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.24.050   Floodway appeals and variances.
   A.   Appeals. Any applicant requesting an appeal of a written finding by the
Chief Engineer to deny a permit based on a floodway delineation may appeal to
the Board as provided in
Chapter 16.56 of this title.
   B.   Variances. The chief engineer shall schedule a hearing before the board
on the request for a variance as provided in
Chapter 16.56 of this title.
      1.   Variances within federally mapped floodways will be in accordance
with NFIP and Title 44, Part 60, Section 60 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
      2.   In accordance with A.R.S. Section 48-3610, whenever a development
plan or application has been filed with the district that requires a variance
to this title and is within one mile of the boundary between the district's
area of jurisdiction and the jurisdiction of a city or town, then the district
shall advise the jurisdiction in writing.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
Chapter 16.26
FLOODWAY FRINGE AREA REQUIREMENTS
Sections: 
16.26.010   Uses allowed.
16.26.020   Conditions applicable to all uses.
16.26.030   Elevation and flood proofing.
16.26.040   Fill and fill materials.
16.26.050   Structures—Construction restrictions.
16.26.055   Critical facilities.
16.26.060   Storage of materials and equipment.
16.26.070   Utilities and sanitary facilities.
16.26.080   Public right-of-way.
16.26.090   Floodway fringe appeals and variances.
16.26.010   Uses allowed.
   Any use, to the extent not prohibited by this title or any other title or
law, is allowed within the floodway fringe area.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-
2 Art. 9 (A), 1988)
16.26.020   Conditions applicable to all uses.
   A.   The following general conditions, as set out in Sections
16.26.030 through
16.26.070, shall apply to all uses within the floodway fringe area and, for
purposes of this chapter, other regulatory floodplain areas where a floodway
has not been defined or delineated including but not limited to A, AO, AE, AH,
A1-30 and Shaded X Zones as provided on adopted FIRMs, or those regulatory
floodplain areas defined by this title.
   B.   No development, storage of materials or equipment, or other uses shall
be permitted which, acting alone or in combination with existing or future
uses, create a danger or hazard to life or property.
   C.   No encroachment may increase the base flood level more than one-tenth
of a foot or increase flood velocities more than ten percent or one fps,
whichever is less, at any property line, except when it can be demonstrated
that the post-development velocity is not an erosive velocity. The velocity
subject to this standard may be the overbank velocity, the channel velocity, or
both, as appropriate based on the type of development and its location within
the floodplain.
   D.   Consideration of the effects of a proposed use or development shall be
based on the assumption that there will be an equal degree of encroachment
extending for a significant reach on both sides of the watercourse.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 9 (B) (part), 1988)
16.26.030   Elevation and flood proofing.
   A.   New construction and substantial improvement of any habitable
structure, either residential or nonresidential, shall have the lowest floor,
including the basement, or in the case of manufactured housing the lowest
structural member, elevated at or above the regulatory flood elevation, which
is one-foot above the base flood elevation. Certification of elevation shall be
required pursuant to Section
16.20.070.
   B.   New construction and substantial improvement of any habitable
structure, either residential or nonresidential, in a numbered AO zone (AO1,
AO2, AO3, etc.) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, or in the case
of manufactured housing the lowest structural member, elevated above highest
adjacent natural grade at least one-foot higher than the depth designated by
the numbered zone on the FIRM, or at least two feet above highest adjacent
natural grade if no depth number is specified. Certification of elevation shall
be required pursuant to Section
16.20.070.
   C.   In sheet flooding or ponding areas, such as zones AO and AH, require
drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide water away from structures.
   D.   Non-residential, non-habitable structures shall either be elevated in
conformance with subsections A. and B., or together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities:
      1.   Be flood proofed so that below the regulatory flood elevation the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
      2.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
      3.   Be certified by an Arizona registered engineer or architect that the
standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be
provided to the floodplain administrator on a form approved by the district.
   E.   All new construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed
areas below the regulatory flood elevation that are useable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or limited storage in an area other than a
basement and which are subject to flooding shall be constructed of flood
resistant materials to the regulatory flood elevation, have all service
facilities elevated at or above the regulatory flood elevation, and be designed
to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by an Arizona registered civil engineer or
architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
      1.   A minimum of two openings on different sides of each enclosed area
that have a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;
      2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one-foot above
grade; and
      3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
flood waters.
   F.   Manufactured homes shall meet the above standards and also the
standards in Section 16.34.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.26.040   Fill and fill materials.
   A.   Any fill proposed to be deposited in the floodway fringe area must be
shown to have some beneficial purpose, and the amount thereof shall not be
greater than is needed to achieve that purpose, as demonstrated by a plan
submitted by the owner showing the uses to which the filled land will be put
and the final dimensions of the proposed fill or other materials.
   B.   Such fill or other materials shall be protected against erosion by a
method approved by the district including riprap, vegetative cover, bulk-
heading, or other approved methods, unless a study, prepared by an Arizona
registered civil engineer, demonstrates that erosion protection is not
required.
   C.   If the permittee proposes to remove a structure or a portion of the
property from a FEMA floodplain through the LOMR-F process, the permittee shall
provide evidence the fill was adequately compacted by submitting the results of
compaction testing certified by an Arizona registered engineer.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 9 (B) (1), 1988)
16.26.050   Structures—Construction restrictions.
   A.   Structures, residential and nonresidential, shall be constructed so as
to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of flood waters. Wherever
possible, structures shall be constructed with the same alignment as the
direction of flood flow; and so far as practicable, shall be placed
approximately on the same alignment as those of adjoining structures.
   B.   All structures, residential and nonresidential, shall be firmly
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement which might
otherwise result in damage to other structures or restriction of bridge
openings and other narrow sections of the watercourse. Anchoring for
manufactured housing will be in conformance with state standards as established
by the Office of Manufactured Housing under A.R.S. Title 41, Chapter 16,
Article 2.
   C.   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be
constructed at or above the regulatory flood elevation for the particular area,
or, in the case of nonresidential structures, be adequately flood proofed.
   D.   Any structure designed or utilized for human habitation, whether
residential or nonresidential, that is used on a full-time or part-time basis
shall have the lowest floor elevated at or above the regulatory flood
elevation. Certification of elevation is required pursuant to Section
16.20.070.
   E.   Non-habitable, enclosed areas within the regulatory floodplain and
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed in accordance with
Section
16.26.030.E.
   F.   If fill is used to elevate any structure, the minimum elevation of the
fill shall be at or above the base flood elevation, shall extend at such
elevation for a distance of at least ten feet beyond the outside limit of the
structure, and shall be adequately protected from erosion pursuant to Section
16.26.040.B unless a study or analysis prepared by an Arizona registered civil
engineer demonstrates that a lesser distance or the absence of erosion
protection is acceptable.
   G.   Structures, residential or nonresidential, designed or utilized for
human habitation, whether on a full-time or part-time basis, and which will be
completely surrounded by floodwaters during the base flood shall only be
permitted when:
      1.   The product of the flow depth (d), in feet, times the square of the
flow velocity (v), in feet per second, of the flood waters of the base flood
does not exceed the numerical value of eighteen for a period in excess of
thirty minutes at any point adjacent to the structure and associated
improvements, including fill; and
      2.   The flood waters of the base flood do not exceed three feet in depth
at any point adjacent to the structure and associated improvements, including
fill;
      3.   For purposes of this section, depth and velocity shall be post
development values and shall be calculated as follows:
         a.   When flow distribution information is available, it shall be used
to provide the most representative values for flood depth and velocity;
         b.   When approximate information is available, average depths and
velocities may be used.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; 1998 FC-
1 Section 2, 1998; Ord.1988 FC-2 Art. 9 (B) (2), 1988)
16.26.055   Critical facilities.
   A.   Critical facility means any of the following:
      1.   A structure or facility that produces, uses or stores highly
volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, and/or water reactive materials;
      2.   Hospitals, emergency medical facilities, nursing homes and/or
housing facilities likely to have occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile
to avoid injury or death during a flood;
      3.   Essential emergency response facilities, such as police stations,
fire stations, emergency shelters and/or operation centers that are needed for
public safety and/or flood response activities before, during and after a
flood; and
      4.   Public and private utility facilities, such as, but not limited to
power, water and wastewater treatment, and/or communications, that are vital to
maintaining or restoring normal services to flooded areas before, during and
after a flood.
   B.   Applicability. The critical facility requirements shall only apply
along watercourses which have FEMA designated floodplains. Where the two-tenths
percent chance floodplain has not been established, the chief engineer may
require that this floodplain be delineated by the applicant.
   C.   Critical facilities shall be located outside of the two-tenths percent
annual chance (five hundred-year) floodplain, if possible. If a critical
facility must be located in a two-tenths percent annual chance (five hundred-
year) floodplain, it must be demonstrated that there is either a critical need
to locate it within the floodplain, or that there is not a suitable alternative
site, as justified by an Arizona registered civil engineer. Any critical
facility located within a two-tenths percent annual chance (five hundred-year)
floodplain shall be protected from that event. Protection includes, but is not
limited to, elevating the lowest floor and all utilities and mechanical
services to a minimum of one-foot above the base flood or to the two-tenths
percent annual chance (five hundred-year) floodplain water surface elevation,
whichever is greater, providing elevated access ramps, if appropriate,
adequately protecting the facility from both lateral and vertical erosion
associated with the two-tenths percent annual chance (five hundred-year)
floodplain, providing all weather access during the base flood and developing
an emergency response plan.
   D.   Existing critical facilities within the two-tenths percent annual
chance (five hundred-year) floodplain that propose substantial improvements
and/or repairs shall be protected from the two-tenths percent annual chance
(five hundred-year) flood event. Protection includes, but is not limited to,
elevating or flood proofing the lowest floor and all utilities and mechanical
services to a minimum of one-foot above the base flood or to the two-tenths
percent annual chance (five hundred-year) floodplain water surface elevation,
whichever is greater, providing elevated access ramps, if appropriate,
adequately protecting the facility from both lateral and vertical erosion
associated with the two-tenths percent annual chance (five hundred-year)
floodplain, providing all weather access to the base flood and developing an
emergency response plan.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010)
16.26.060   Storage of materials and equipment.
   A.   The storage and/or processing of materials that are buoyant, flammable,
explosive, hazardous, or that could be injurious to human, animal, or plant
life in times of flooding is prohibited.
   B.   Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if it is not
subject to major damage by floods and is firmly anchored to prevent flotation
or is readily removable from the area within the limited time available after
flood warning.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999-FC-
1 §§ 1 (part) 1999; Ord. 1988-FC2 Art. 9 (B) (3), 1988)
16.26.070   Utilities and sanitary facilities.
   A.   Water supply, water treatment, and sewage collection and disposal
systems built in a regulatory floodplain or erosion hazard area shall be
designed to prevent or minimize infiltration of flood waters into these systems
and to prevent the discharge of materials from these systems into flood waters.
   B.   On-site sanitary waste disposal systems shall be located or designed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   C.   Other utilities, such as gas pipelines, fuel pipelines, and non-potable
waterlines shall be designed and constructed to ensure they are not impaired
during the base flood, including the potential for long term scour.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 9 (B) (4), 1988)
16.26.080   Public right-of-way.
   Any proposed development, disturbance, or grading within public right-of-way
that is located in a floodway fringe shall require a floodplain use permit
pursuant to this title. All provisions of this title shall apply to such
activities. No uses shall be permitted which the chief engineer determines
would adversely affect the function of the public right-of-way, floodplain, or
riparian habitat.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.26.090   Floodway fringe appeals and variances.
   A.   Appeals. Any applicant requesting an appeal of a written finding of the
chief engineer regarding the conditions of or denial of a permit or to
delineate a floodplain may appeal to the board as provided for in
Chapter 16.56 of this title.
   B.   Variance. Any property owner requesting a variance shall request a
variance of the board through the chief engineer as provided for in
Chapter 16.56 of this title.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
Chapter 16.28
EROSION HAZARD AREAS AND BUILDING SETBACKS
Sections: 
16.28.010   Building setback requirements.
16.28.020   Setbacks near major watercourses.
16.28.030   Setbacks from minor washes.
16.28.040   Appeals and variances.
16.28.010   Building setback requirements.
   In erosion hazard areas where watercourses are subject to flow-related
erosion hazards, building setbacks are required from the primary channel or
channels as set forth in Sections
16.28.020 and
16.28.030.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988
FC-2 Art. 12 (part), 1988)
16.28.020   Setbacks near major watercourses.
   For major watercourses with base flood peak discharges of two thousand cfs
or greater, the following building setbacks shall be required where approved
bank protection is not provided:
   A.   Along the following major natural watercourses, where no unusual
conditions exist, a minimum (default) building setback shall be provided at the
time of the development, unless an alternative setback is determined by an
engineering analysis, prepared by an Arizona registered civil engineer, based
on ADWR standards or other applicable engineering methods, which establishes
acceptable safe limits for the development and is approved by the chief
engineer.
   B.   Along natural channels where no unusual conditions exist (such as a
pronounced channel curvature), the default building setback for erosion hazard
protection shall be:
      1.   A distance of five hundred feet along the Santa Cruz River, Rillito
Creek, Pantano Wash, Tanque Verde Creek, San Pedro River, and the Canada del
Oro Wash;
      2.   A distance of two hundred fifty feet along major watercourses with
base flood peak discharges greater than ten thousand cfs;
      3.   A distance of one hundred feet along all major watercourses with
base flood peak discharges of ten thousand cfs or less, but more than five
thousand cfs; and
      4.   A distance of seventy-five feet along all other major watercourses
with base flood peak discharges of five thousand cfs or less, but more than or
equal to two thousand cfs.
   C.   Along major natural watercourses where unusual conditions do exist that
may increase or decrease the required erosion hazard setback, building setbacks
shall be established on a case-by-case basis by the chief engineer using the
standard adopted by the ADWR or other applicable engineering methods which
establish safe limits for the development. Unusual conditions include but are
not limited to historical meandering of the watercourse, large excavation pits,
poorly defined or poorly consolidated banks, natural channel armoring,
proximity to stabilized structures such as bridges or rock outcrops, and
changes in the direction, amount and velocity of the flow of waters within the
watercourse.
   D.   When determining building setback requirements, the chief engineer
shall consider the danger to life and property due to existing flood heights or
velocities and historical channel meandering.
   E.   For constructed channels, structural bank protection to prevent erosion
is required for major watercourses with base flood peak discharges of more than
two thousand cfs unless a written waiver of the requirement is granted by the
chief engineer. A waiver of the requirement for structural bank protection may
be granted based on an acceptable engineering study, which has been prepared
and sealed by an Arizona registered civil engineer, demonstrating an
appropriate building setback for an earthen channel, based on soil and natural
flow conditions.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 12 (A), 1988).
16.28.030   Setbacks from minor washes.
   A.   For minor natural washes with a base flood peak discharge of less than
two thousand cfs, the following building setbacks shall be required:
      1.   A distance of fifty feet for watercourses with base flood peak
discharges of less than two thousand cfs, but more than five hundred cfs;
      2.   A distance of twenty-five feet for watercourses with base flood peak
discharges of five hundred cfs to one hundred cfs;
      3.   Alternative safe limits for erosion setbacks approved in writing by
the chief engineer based on an acceptable engineering study prepared and sealed
by an Arizona registered civil engineer. However, at no time shall a setback of
less than twenty-five feet from the top of channel bank be permitted in order
to provide for reasonable access and stability of nearby structure foundations,
except as allowed pursuant to subsection B of this section.
   B.   Along minor natural washes where unusual conditions exist, building
setbacks shall be established on a case-by-case basis by the chief engineer,
using ADWR standards or other applicable engineering methods or an acceptable
engineering study is prepared and sealed by an Arizona registered civil
engineer and approved by the chief engineer. When determining building setback
requirements, the chief engineer shall consider danger to life and property due
to existing flood heights or velocities and historical channel meandering.
Unusual conditions include but are not limited to historical meandering of the
watercourse, large excavation pits, poorly defined or poorly consolidated
banks, natural channel armoring, proximity to stabilized structures such as
bridges or rock outcrops, and changes in the direction, amount, and velocity of
flow of the waters in the watercourse.
   C.   For constructed channels, channel banks are required to be stabilized
to prevent erosion along minor watercourses with base flood peak discharges of
less than two thousand cfs, but greater than five hundred cfs. Stabilization is
required unless a waiver to the requirement is granted by the chief engineer
based on an engineering study prepared and sealed by an Arizona registered
civil engineer which demonstrates an appropriate building setback for an
earthen channel, based on soil and natural flow conditions. For constructed
channels with a base flood peak discharge of less than five hundred cfs,
channel stabilization may be required based on engineering analysis and
assessment of soil conditions and flow velocities.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999-FC-
1 §§ 1 (part) 1999; Ord. 1988-FC2 Art. 12 (B), 1988)
16.28.040   Appeals and variances.
   A.   Appeals. Any applicant disputing a written finding of the chief
engineer denying a permit or delineating an erosion hazard setback may appeal
to the board as provided in
Chapter 16.56 of this title.
   B.   Variances. Any property owner requesting a variance from the
requirements of this title shall submit a request for a variance to the board
through the chief engineer as provided in
Chapter 16.56 of this title.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
Chapter 16.30
WATERCOURSE AND RIPARIAN HABITAT PROTECTION AND MITIGATION REQUIREMENTS
Sections: 
16.30.010   Purpose.
16.30.020   Description.
16.30.030   Applicability.
16.30.040   Permits.
16.30.050   Mitigation.
16.30.060   Review process.
16.30.070   Appeals and variances.
16.30.080   Riparian classification maps.
16.30.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote stable flow and sediment transport
conditions, preserve natural floodplain functions, and provide watercourse
management by preserving and/or enhancing riparian vegetation and habitat along
watercourses and floodplains and to:
   A.   Promote benefits provided by riparian habitat resources, including but
not limited to, groundwater recharge, natural erosion control and protection of
surface-water quality.
   B.   Ensure the long-term stability of natural floodplains and survival of
the full spectrum of plants and animals that are indigenous to the county by:
      1.   Assuring riparian habitat acreage and existing or natural functional
values are not diminishing during development;
      2.   Promoting continuity of riparian habitat along watercourses;
      3.   Providing land-use guidance for avoiding, minimizing and mitigating
damage to important riparian areas; and
      4.   Providing ecological sound transmission between riparian habitat and
developed areas.
   C.   Promote an economic benefit to the county by providing aesthetic,
recreation and wildlife values of riparian habitat for the enjoyment of
residents and visitors.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1994
FC-2 (part), 1994: Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 10 (A), 1988)
16.30.020   Description.
   For purposes of this chapter, "a regulated riparian habitat" is defined by
the riparian classification maps adopted by the board. These habitats are
generally characterized by vegetation that is different in plant species
composition or an increase in the size and/or density of vegetation as compared
to upland areas and occur in association with regulatory floodplains through
which waters flow at least periodically, as well as any spring, cienega, lake,
watercourse, river, stream, creek, wash, arroyo, or other body of water. These
communities represent a continuum of plant species' response to available
moisture, and can be subdivided into hydroriparian, mesoriparian, and
xeroriparian classifications as well as identification as important riparian
areas providing ecological connectivity and biological corridors.
   A.   Hydroriparian. Riparian habitats generally associated with perennial
watercourses and/or springs. Plant communities are dominated by obligate or
preferential wetland plant species such as willow and cottonwood.
   B.   Mesoriparian. Riparian habitats generally associated with perennial or
intermittent watercourses or shallow groundwater. Plant communities may be
dominated by species that are also found in drier habitats (e.g., mesquite);
but contain some preferential riparian plant species such as ash or netleaf
hackberry.
   C.   Xeroriparian. Riparian habitats generally associated with an ephemeral
water supply. These communities typically contain plant species also found in
upland habitats; however, these plants are typically larger and/or occur at
higher densities than adjacent uplands. Xeroriparian habitat is further divided
into four subclasses for Class A, B, C, and D habitat as defined in the
mitigation standards approved by the Board as maintained by the floodplain
administrator. Mitigation in xeroriparian habitat is to be determined based at
least on total vegetative volume (TVV) as provided within the mitigation
standards as adopted by the board as well as replacement of other lost riparian
habitat functions necessary to sustain riparian habitat.
   D.   Important Riparian Areas. Important riparian areas occur along the
major river systems and provide critical watershed and water resources
management functions as well as providing a framework for landscape linkages
and biological corridors. Important riparian areas are valued for their higher
water availability, vegetation density, and biological productivity, compared
to adjacent uplands. Important riparian areas are essential for floodplain
management and every effort should be made to protect, restore, and enhance the
structure and functions of these areas including hydrological,
geomorphological, and biological functions.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1994
FC-2 (part), 1994: Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 10 (B), 1988)
16.30.030   Applicability.
   This chapter shall apply to all properties within unincorporated Pima County
that contain riparian habitat, as delineated on riparian habitat maps adopted
by the board. This chapter shall apply to the county, the district, and to all
parties acting on behalf of the district and county. This chapter shall apply
to individual building permits, including grading permits issued by the county,
and land development permits associated with subdivisions and development
plans. All requirements of this chapter shall apply to regulated hydroriparian,
mesoriparian, important riparian areas, and, xeroriparian Classes A, B, C, and
D habitat.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1998
FC-1 Section 3, 1998; Ord. 1994 FC-2 (part), 1994: Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 10 (C),
1988)
16.30.040   Permits.
   As part of the floodplain use permit process for property subject to
provisions of this chapter, the proposed development will be reviewed for
impacts to mapped riparian habitat whenever more than 1/3 of an acre of a
property's regulated riparian habitat is disturbed. In order to avoid such
alteration of the riparian habitat or to mitigate disturbance on the subject
property, an applicant may apply to the county for a modification of the
development standards under Section
18.07.080 of the County Zoning Code. Such modifications may include reduction
in building setbacks or approval to provide onsite mitigation and enhancement
in natural areas.
   A.   Submittals. Permit applications shall include:
      1.   Evidence that no reasonably practicable alternative exists to the
proposed impact on mapped habitat and evidence that the impact has been
minimized to the maximum extent practicable.
      2.   A map delineating riparian habitat boundaries and clearly
delineating areas of proposed disturbance to mapped riparian habitat;
      3.   A description of the vegetation that will be disturbed;
      4.   A habitat mitigation plan for disturbance to mapped riparian habitat
areas as provided in 16.30.050 when required by the district; and
      5.   Such additional supporting information as the district determines to
be necessary to carry out review under this chapter.
   B.   Permit Conditions. Conditions may be placed on the permit that, to the
extent reasonably practicable, require preservation of, or mitigate the impact
on, riparian habitat. If mitigation is required, compliance with an approved
habitat mitigation plan shall be made a condition of the permit.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1998
FC-1, Section 3, 1998; Ord. 1994 FC-2 (part), 1994; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 10 (D),
1988)
16.30.050   Mitigation.
   A.   Mitigation Plan. If an applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of
the district that alteration of regulated riparian habitat areas cannot
reasonably be avoided, a mitigation plan shall be submitted to the district for
approval when more than 1/3 of an acre of regulated riparian habitat is
disturbed.
   B.   The chief engineer shall provide a quarterly report to the board that
states the number of riparian habitat mitigation plans that the chief engineer
approved during the previous quarter. The quarterly report must include the
number of approved plans that used mitigation banking and the number of
approved plans that disturbed more than 5% of important riparian area on a
property.
   C.   Mitigation Plan Requirement. The mitigation plan shall delineate all
mitigation measures to be taken by the owner and shall include a schedule of
completion. The mitigation plan shall be consistent with any riparian habitat
mitigation standards adopted by the board, and shall be prepared in accordance
with best available scientific or management practices. Mitigation may be
incorporated into measures taken to satisfy other requirements of the district
and county. Where appropriate, the mitigation plan shall at a minimum provide
for:
      1.   Construction methods that identify and protect riparian habitat that
is to be left unaltered;
      2.   Selective clearing or other habitat manipulation;
      3.   Replacement of affected vegetation with appropriate plant species in
ratios that will result in simulation of the pre-alteration vegetation within 5
years;
      4.   Irrigation with passive water harvesting, where possible, or
installation and maintenance of irrigation methods until plantings are
established;
      5.   Periodic monitoring of mitigation features;
      6.   Maintenance and replacement of damaged plantings; and
      7.   Posting a performance bond or financial assurances.
   D.   Mitigation banking, or other alternative mitigation measures as
approved by the chief engineer. At the request of the property owner, and with
the approval of the chief engineer, the mitigation plan requirement under this
chapter may be waived by contributing funds to an account established and
administered by the district for the purposes of offsetting damage to riparian
habitat.
(Ord. 2023-FC2 § 1, 2023; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.30.060   Review process.
   The application and any proposed mitigation plan shall be evaluated by their
effectiveness in:
   A.   Avoiding the impact;
   B.   Minimizing the impact;
   C.   Rectifying the impact;
   D.   Reducing or eliminating the impact over time; and
   E.   Compensating for the impact.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999-FC-1 § 1 (part) 1999; Ord. 1994 FC-
2 (part), 1994: Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 10 (F), 1988)
16.30.070   Appeals and variances.
   A.   Appeals. Any applicant disputing a written finding of the chief
engineer may appeal to the board as provided in
Chapter 16.56 of this title.
   B.   Variance. Any property owner requesting a variance from the
requirements of this title shall submit a request for a variance to the board
through the chief engineer as provided in
Chapter 16.56 of this title.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1994 FC-2 (part), 1994: Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 10 (G),
1988)
16.30.080   Riparian classification maps.
   A.   Riparian classification maps shall be adopted by resolution of the
board and shall detail on a parcel level, the general location of riparian
habitat and important riparian areas subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
   B.   Where a question arises as to the location of any regulated riparian
habitat or important riparian area, the question shall be decided by the chief
engineer consistent with riparian habitat standards adopted by the board. The
chief engineer's decision shall be final, except as provided for in
Chapter 16.56 of this title. Any person contesting the location of any boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present technical evidence, if so
desired.
   C.   The riparian classification maps shall be kept on file and made
available to the public in the offices of the district.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1995 FC-1 §§ 1, 2, 1995)
Chapter 16.34
MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS AND SUBDIVISIONS
Sections: 
16.34.010   Permit requirements and exemptions.
16.34.020   Anchoring requirements.
16.34.030   Location and placement conditions.
16.34.040   Certification requirements.
16.34.010   Permit requirements and exemptions.
   A.   From the effective date of this ordinance codified in this title, it
shall be unlawful to place a manufactured home, install utility improvements to
place a manufactured home, or make substantial improvements to existing
manufactured homes within a regulatory floodplain, as described in
Chapters 16.08,
16.24 and
16.26 of this title, or within erosion hazard areas, as described in
Chapter 16.28 of this title, for more than one hundred eighty consecutive days
without first applying for and obtaining a floodplain use permit from the Chief
Engineer, and thereafter complying with state statutes and regulations for
manufactured homes.
   B.   In addition to the provisions of this chapter, manufactured homes,
recreational vehicles, and travel trailers shall comply with all applicable
provisions in
Chapters 16.20,
16.24,
16.26,
16.28, and
16.30 of this title.
   C.   Exemptions.
      1.   No such floodplain use permit shall be required for any repairs or
alterations to existing manufactured homes for which the value of the materials
and labor thereon does not exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars, except
for those improvements that obstruct the flow of flood waters. For the purpose
of determining the value of any such repairs or alterations, the normal retail
value of materials and the reasonable value of labor performed shall be used.
Although no floodplain use permit is required, all other provisions of this
title shall be observed in the performance of said repairs or alterations.
Repairs or alterations shall not be done in a piecemeal fashion for the purpose
of avoiding applying for a permit when the total cost of said work is in excess
of seven thousand five hundred dollars;
      2.   Temporary placement of a manufactured home, recreational vehicle or
travel trailer without a utility hook up for fewer than one hundred eighty
consecutive days; and
      3.   Recreational vehicles that are on site for fewer than one hundred
eighty consecutive days, or those that are fully licensed and ready for highway
use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
(Ord. No. 2025-FC3 § 5, 2025; Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 §
2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 10 (A),
1988)
16.34.020   Anchoring requirements.
   Anchoring for manufactured housing will be in conformance with state
standards as established by the Office of Manufactured Housing under A.R.S.
Title 41, Chapter 16, Article 2. All manufactured homes and additions to
manufactured homes located within a regulatory floodplain or SFHA shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by one of the
following methods:
   A.   Floatation. Elevate bottom of structural frame, and lowest point of all
service equipment, above RFE and therefore remove all hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads from the MH.
   B.   Collapse. Proportion the foundation footer area to resist vertical dead
and live loads of MH based on allowable soil bearing pressure, as required by
Office of Manufactured Housing under A.R.S. Title 41, Chapter 16, Article 2;
extend foundation footers to maximum anticipated scour depth below grade;
design all foundation elements to resist lateral hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads on the foundation.
   C.   Lateral Movement. Design soil anchors or individual foundation members
to transfer lateral wind loads on MH to the soil, as required by Office of
Manufactured Housing under A.R.S. Title 41, Chapter 16, Article 2. Lateral wind
loads are to be assumed to come from any direction.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 10 (B), 1988)
16.34.030   Location and placement conditions.
   A.   For manufactured homes located in a regulatory floodplain or erosion
hazard area on or before August 3, 1984, replacement of the manufactured home
will be allowed if:
      1.   The manufactured home to be replaced was not damaged by a flood to
more than fifty percent of its value before the flood; and
      2.   The replacement manufactured home is elevated so that the bottom of
the structural frame and the lowest point of any attached appliances or service
facilities are at or above the regulatory flood elevation.
   B.   For new manufactured homes, new manufactured home parks or
subdivisions, expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions,
and repairs, reconstruction, or improvements to existing manufactured homes
located within a regulatory floodplain or erosion hazard area, the following
standards shall apply:
      1.   An adequate surface for the pad or lot to meet the minimum drainage
standards and access for a hauler shall be provided;
      2.   All manufactured homes placed on pads or lots elevated on compacted
fill in accordance with Section
16.26.050.F; or elevated on a stem wall, on piers or on pilings, shall be
elevated so that the bottom of the structural frame and the lowest point of any
attached appliances(s) are at or above the regulatory flood elevation.
      3.   For manufactured homes placed on pilings, piers or stem walls:
         a.   The lots shall be large enough to permit steps,
         b.   The pilings, piers or stem walls shall be placed in stable soil
to a depth sufficient to address erosion concerns, and constructed to address
lateral flood forces using methods approved by the chief engineer, and
         c.   If pilings or piers are used, then their placement shall be no
more than ten feet apart.
   C.   Structures designed or utilized for human habitation, whether on a
full-time or part-time basis, and which will be completely surrounded by
floodwaters during the base flood shall only be permitted when:
      1.   The product of the flow depth (d), in feet, times the square of the
flow velocity (v), in feet per second, of the flood waters of the base flood
does not exceed the numerical value of eighteen for a period in excess of
thirty minutes at any point adjacent to the structure and associated
improvements, including fill, and
      2.   The flood waters of the base flood do not exceed three feet in depth
at any point adjacent to the structure and associated improvements, including
fill.
      3.   For purposes of this section, depth and velocity shall be post
development values and shall be calculated as follows:
         a.   When flow distribution information is available, it shall be used
to provide the most representative values for flood depth and velocity.
         b.   When approximate information is available, average depths and
velocities may be used.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1998 FC-1 Sec. 2, 1998; Ord. 1988)
16.34.040   Certification requirements.
   A.   Certification that the installation of a manufactured home meets all of
the requirements of this chapter is required including that the location,
orientation, and method of installation and elevation were constructed in
accordance with the conditions of the floodplain use permit. Such certification
shall be provided by the person installing the manufactured home, the owner,
the developer of the manufactured home park or subdivision, or any agency
regulating manufactured home placement, whichever is deemed appropriate by the
chief engineer.
   B.   Certification of elevations listed on the floodplain use permit shall
be prepared and sealed by an Arizona registered land surveyor or civil
engineer, and provided to the chief engineer prior to habitation of the
structure in accordance with Section
16.20.070.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 10 (D), 1988)
Chapter 16.36
SUBDIVISIONS AND DEVELOPMENT
Sections: 
16.36.010   Applicability.
16.36.020   Plan information.
16.36.030   Grading, storm water and drainage improvement.
16.36.040   Floodplain and floodway boundaries—Drainage areas.
16.36.050   Development plan—Advisories to other jurisdictions.
16.36.060   Street elevation requirements.
16.36.070   Building site location restrictions.
16.36.080   Setbacks from channels.
16.36.090   Rights-of-way for drainage.
16.36.100   Detention systems.
16.36.110   Cost recovery for drainage or flood control improvements.
16.36.120   Drainage channels.
16.36.130   Maintenance of drainage improvements.
16.36.140   Appeals and waivers of subdivisions and development floodplain
requirements.
16.36.010   Applicability.
   A. Land may not be parceled or subdivided in such a manner as to create lots
unsuitable for development because of flood or erosion hazards.
   B. All subdivision plats, development plans and associated building plans
and improvement plans are subject to the regulatory floodplain requirements in
Chapter 16.26 and the design requirements for regulatory floodplains as
specified under A.R.S. Section 48-3609 and this title.
(Ord. 2025-FC1 § 1 (part), 2025; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 11 (A), 1988)
16.36.020   Plan information.
   All tentative plats and development plans submitted to the county shall show
location, by survey or photographic methods, of streams, watercourses, canals,
irrigation laterals, private ditches, culverts, lakes and other water features,
including those areas subject to flooding or erosion, or that contain regulated
riparian habitat. The plats/plans shall also include the direction of any flow
and drainage area, as well as water-surface elevations and the limits of
inundation for the base flood, if such a flood has a peak flow rate equal to or
greater than 100 cfs, or is a FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area or Shaded Zone X.
(Ord. 2025-FC1 § 1 (part), 2025; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 11 (B) (1), 1988)
16.36.030   Grading, storm water and drainage improvement.
   A.   All tentative plats and development plans shall show proposed grading
and improvements for areas that are subject to flooding. The tentative plat and
development plan shall also show a description and location of all improvements
proposed to adequately convey drainage away from structures and alleviate
flooding or drainage problems within or outside the boundaries of the
subdivision or development.
   B.   All tentative plats and development plans shall be accompanied by
conceptual grading plans and conceptual drainage improvement plans, as needed,
to demonstrate:
      1.   The methods for drainage control for the development, including
sufficient lot grading information to demonstrate adequate finished pad
elevations, drainage slopes, and paths to guide water away from structures and
protect building foundations including all structures within the regulatory
floodplain;
      2.    That improvements are compatible with the existing upstream and
downstream drainage conditions and that any proposed grading or grade change
will not have an adverse impact on surrounding properties. For development that
is proposed in phases, the plans shall identify which infrastructure is needed
to mitigate the adverse impacts for each phase of development;
      3.   When development is proposed to encroach into a regulatory
floodplain or is completely surrounded by floodwaters, maximum encroachment
limits shall be shown;
      4.   The methods of erosion and sediment control during construction and
post construction; and
      5.   The methods of mitigating increased urban peak and volumetric storm
water runoff or discharge on downstream properties created as a result of the
development.
   C.   District review and approval are required prior to commencement of any
site improvements or grading associated with a subdivision development as a
whole or for individual lot(s) within the subdivision. A grading plan must be
submitted to the District for review and approval. Detailed improvement plans
for storm drains or channel improvements must also be submitted to the District
for review and approval. Where a grading plan or detailed drainage improvement
plans are not provided, the Chief Engineer may require additional information
and engineering plans prior to issuing a floodplain use permit. Certifications
of elevation shall be required pursuant to
16.20.070, until the LOMR is approved by FEMA.
   D.   Prior to the issuance of any building permits, except for model home
permits and any permits necessary to build the drainage infrastructure, as-
built plans shall be submitted to and approved by the District demonstrating
that drainage and grading improvements that are required to mitigate adverse
impacts to adjacent and downstream property due to the proposed development
have been constructed. Prior to the completion of all of the drainage and
grading improvements, the District may allow, at its discretion, the issuance
of building permits for a specific number of lots when provided with a rough
grading statement, sealed by an Arizona registered civil engineer, verifying
that the current state of infrastructure construction is adequate to mitigate
flood and erosion hazards to adjacent and downstream properties resulting from
that specific number of lots.
   E.   Prior to the final release of assurances for subdivisions, and prior to
the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for development plans, as-built
plans shall be submitted to and approved by the District demonstrating that
drainage and grading improvements that are required to mitigate flood and
erosion hazards that impact the development have been constructed. The as-built
and certification may be completed in phases at the discretion of the District.
   F.   All grading and construction shall comply with the federal Clean Water
Act including providing construction and post-construction controls for storm
water quality.
   G.   Public utilities located within the proposed development shall be
located and constructed so that the flood damage and erosion hazard potential
is minimized.
(Ord. 2025-FC1 § 1 (part), 2025; Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-
2 § 2 (part), 2005, Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 11 (B)
(2), (3), (4), 1988)
16.36.040   Floodplain and floodway boundaries—Drainage areas.
   A.   All final plats and development plans shall indicate the limits of the
regulatory floodplains, erosion hazard boundaries, maximum encroachment limits,
when applicable, and the limits of the federally established regulatory
floodplains and floodways (if applicable), and be delineated in a surveyable
manner and sealed by an Arizona registered land surveyor.
   B.   All final plats shall indicate both drainage areas and their respective
base flood peak discharges, with a note contained on the final plat that the
drainage areas and base flood peak discharges are provided by the owner for
information purposes only.
   C.   Where subdivision or development plan improvements modify or remove the
SFHA or Shaded Zone X that is designated on the federal FIRM, a hydraulic
analysis of the impact and the engineering plans for the modifications must be
approved by the district and a CLOMR submitted to FEMA prior to the recording
of the final plat, or final approval of the development plan. Floodplain use
permits for structures may be issued as long as their finished floor elevations
are at least equal to one-foot above the existing base flood elevation as shown
on the current FIRM, or on the CLOMR, whichever is more restrictive.
   D.   Where modification of a federally defined floodway is proposed,
approval of a LOMR by FEMA amending the floodway boundary is required prior to
issuance of building permits in the floodway area.
   E.   For subdivisions or for development plans for any improvement which
changes the configuration of the regulatory floodplain, including Shaded Zone
X, as delineated on the FIRM, the owner shall provide to the district a new
delineation of all regulatory floodplains affected by the improvement and as-
built plans of the drainage improvements. The new delineations and reports
shall be prepared in conformance with the requirements of FEMA for a LOMR, the
state Director of Water Resources, and this title.
   F.   Prior to the release of assurances for subdivisions or certificate of
occupancy for development plans, the LOMR must be approved by the district and
submitted to FEMA for review and approval.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 11 (B) (5), (6) 1988).
16.36.050   Development plan—Advisories to other jurisdictions.
   A.   In accordance with A.R.S. Section 48-3610, the district shall advise,
in writing, any city or town that has assumed jurisdiction over its regulatory
floodplains, and provide a copy of any development plan or any application that
has been filed with the county for a floodplain use permit or variance to
develop land in a regulatory floodplain or floodway, whenever development
within the county will occur within one mile of the boundary between the
district's area of jurisdiction and the jurisdiction of that city or town.
   B.   The district shall also advise any city or town in writing and provide
a copy of any development plan of any major development proposed within a
regulatory floodplain or floodway whenever development within the county could
affect floodprone areas or watercourses within that city's or town's area of
jurisdiction.
   C.   Written notice of a copy of the plan of development shall be sent to
any adjacent jurisdiction no later than 3 working days after having been
received by the district.
(Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 11 (B) (7), 1988)
16.36.060   Street elevation requirements.
   Streets required for paved permanent access shall be designed and
constructed so that the flow depths over them do not exceed 1 foot in depth
during the base flood. At least one paved permanent access shall be provided to
each lot over terrain that can be traversed by conventional motor vehicles in
times of flooding. In specific instances at drainage crossings where it can be
demonstrated that this requirement is either impractical, based upon low hazard
to life and property, or where construction of a drainage crossing may create
problems that override the corresponding benefits, this requirement may be
waived by the chief engineer. Fill may be used for streets in areas subject to
flooding, provided such fill does not unduly increase flood heights. The
developers may be required to provide profiles and elevations of streets for
areas subject to flooding.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988
FC-2 Art. 11 (C), 1988)
16.36.070   Building site location restrictions.
   A.   Land which contains areas within a regulatory floodplain or erosion
hazard area shall not be platted for residential occupancy or building sites
unless each lot contains a building site, either natural or manmade, which is
not subject to flooding or erosion by the base flood.
   B.   Lots shall be configured so that encroachment into the regulatory
floodplain and erosion hazard area is minimized. It is preferred that building
sites and other development be located outside of the regulatory floodplain and
erosion hazard area.
   C.   In regulatory floodplain areas where fill is to be used to raise the
elevation of the building site, the building shall be located not less than ten
feet landward from any edge of the fill, and protected from erosion in
accordance with Section
16.26.040, unless a study/analysis prepared and sealed by an Arizona registered
civil engineer demonstrates a lesser distance or the absence of erosion
protection is acceptable. No fill shall be placed in any regulatory floodplain
or floodway, nor shall any fill be placed where it diverts, retards or
obstructs the flow of water to such an extent that it creates a danger or
hazard to life or property.
   D.   Any dwelling unit built within a regulatory floodplain shall be
constructed so as to place the elevation of the lowest floor of the dwelling
unit at or above the regulatory flood elevation.
   E.   All building sites shall be graded and compacted to comply with FEMA
regulations for fill and to comply with foundation elevation requirements under
the international uniform building code, and shall be graded and compacted so
that the top of any exterior foundation shall extend above the elevation of the
street gutter at the point of discharge, or above the inlet of an approved
drainage device, a minimum of twelve inches plus two percent for a minimum of
twenty-five feet away from the foundation, but in no case should the finished
floor elevation of habitable structures be below the regulatory flood
elevation.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 11 (D), 1988)
16.36.080   Setbacks from channels.
   Along reaches of watercourses where hazards from eroding banks or channel
meandering are considered by the chief engineer to be severe, special
engineering studies, prepared and sealed by an Arizona registered civil
engineer shall be required of the property owner or developer; and requirements
for setbacks from banks of watercourses and/or other protection measures shall
be established in accordance with the approved studies. Also, see
Chapter 16.28 of this title.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 11 (E), 1988)
16.36.090   Rights-of-way for drainage.
   A.   Whenever a subdivision plat or development plan contains a watercourse
that is regulated by this title, all rights-of-way, easements, and floodplains
associated with the watercourse shall be clearly labeled and designated as
"drainageway," and/or floodplain.
   B.   If the watercourse is an improved major watercourse with a base flood
of ten thousand cfs or more, the drainageway right-of-way shall include the
channel, the channel improvements; and for county or district use, a fifty-foot
wide area measured outward from the front face of the top of the bank
protection on both sides of the channel.
   C.   If the watercourse is an improved, minor watercourse, the drainageway
shall include the channel, the channel improvements, and access easements and
ingress/egress points as necessary for maintenance access to assure the flood
carrying capacity of the improved watercourse be maintained.
   D.   If the watercourse is to remain natural, the drainageway shall be the
boundaries of the regulatory floodplain, the maximum encroachment limits, when
applicable, or the erosion hazard area, whichever is greater.
   E.   Along any major watercourses where the peak discharge of a base flood
is ten thousand cfs, or greater, the improved drainageway and/or floodway shall
be dedicated in fee simple, or as an easement, to the district.
   F.   Along any minor watercourses where the peak discharge of a base flood
is greater than two thousand cfs, constructed drainageways, channels, and
associated flood control structures, as required to flood proof and protect
property, shall be dedicated in fee simple, or as an easement, to the county;
or, if acceptable to the chief engineer a private maintenance easement will be
allowed in accordance with
Chapter 16.38.
   G.   Along other watercourses, the chief engineer shall determine whether it
is necessary for the county or the district to have control of the drainageway.
If the chief engineer determines that public control is necessary, the owner
shall dedicate the drainageway in fee simple or grant an easement.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord.1999 FC-
1 §§ 1 (part) 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 11 (F), 1988)
16.36.100   Detention systems.
   All development shall provide some method of peak or volumetric runoff
reduction, unless fees in lieu of detention are proposed pursuant to Section
16.48.040 and approved by the chief engineer. See
Chapter 16.48 of this title.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 11 (G), 1988)
16.36.110   Cost recovery for drainage or flood control improvements.
   The board may establish a cost-recovery system or fee system for the
improvement or installation of public flood control systems. The purpose of the
fee is to provide a method for offsite improvements necessary in order to
mitigate the effect of urbanization and to provide a systematic approach for
the construction of public flood control improvements. Whenever such a system
is adopted, it shall demonstrate that the fee will in some manner benefit the
property owned by the person or entity from which the fee is collected, and
that it will be applied equitably to all property in proportion to flood waters
generated by urban use of the property. The fees will also be restricted to
providing flood control improvements necessary for the allowed use of the
properties owned by the person or entity from which the fee is collected, and
the fees shall be reasonably related to the actual cost of providing flood
control improvements beneficial to the site or surrounding area. The fees will
be reviewed by the flood control district advisory committee, prior to action
by the board.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988
FC-2 Art. 11 (H), 1988)
16.36.120   Drainage channels.
   Channel design standards for constructed drainage channels and other flood
control structures shall be established by the chief engineer. The requirements
as specified in this title are minimum standards and address general floodplain
management requirements. Specific projects may warrant additional requirements
that may be imposed by the chief engineer. In unusual conditions and on a case-
by-case basis, permitting and construction of perimeter channels, flood walls,
levees or unlined constructed channels may be allowed with approval of the
engineering and construction specifications by the chief engineer.
   A.   Drainage channels shall be designed to provide containment of the
regulatory flood and to minimize erosion, but shall not be fully lined so that
the improved channel bottoms shall remain natural.
   B.   Perimeter channels that route flow around the outer edge of the
development are prohibited in all areas where there is an established natural
channel. Where used, perimeter channels shall be adequately armored against
erosion from flow intercepted by the channel, as well as from flow within the
channel.
   C.   Flood walls or levees for flood proofing shall only be allowed under
special circumstances with approval of the chief engineer, and shall be
designed to meet FEMA's levee design requirements when located within a
regulatory floodplain. Where approved for use, the levee or flood wall shall be
constructed with a minimum of three feet of freeboard above the base flood
elevation. Adjacent finished floor elevations shall be one-foot above the base
flood elevation until the levee construction has been approved by the district,
and a LOMR has been issued by FEMA, if necessary.
   D.   For regulatory flows greater than five hundred cfs, the construction of
earthen, unlined channels shall require written approval by the chief engineer
as well as an engineering analysis prepared and sealed by an Arizona registered
civil engineer.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1998 FC-1 Section 5, 1998)
16.36.130   Maintenance of drainage improvements.
   Appeals and waivers of subdivisions and development floodplain requirements.
   Any and all drainage improvements shall be designed with adequate access to
the drainage improvements to allow for maintenance of the intended design
conveyance and/or storage capacity, maintenance of erosion control, and
maintenance of flood control function. Such drainage improvements may include,
but are not limited to, channels, culverts, storm water detention/retention
basins, storm drains, streets, or other permanent conveyances or storage
facilities designed to meet the requirements of this title.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.36.140   Appeals and waivers of subdivisions and development floodplain
requirements.
   A.   Appeals. Any applicant requesting an appeal of a written finding by the
chief engineer may appeal to the board as provided in
Chapter 16.56 of this title.
   B.   Any property owner requesting a variance to this chapter shall request
a variance through the chief engineer. The chief engineer shall schedule a
hearing before the board on the request for a variance pursuant to
Chapter 16.56 of this title.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
Chapter 16.38
MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS
Section: 
16.38.010   Maintenance of private drainage improvements.
16.38.010   Maintenance of private drainage improvements.
   A.   When drainage improvements are associated with an approved development
plan, subdivision plat or approved engineering report, and are constructed to
provide flood protection to remove or reduce flood hazards, including those
identified by FEMA or for storm water quality control, and where those
improvements are privately owned, then it shall be the responsibility of the
property owner(s) to perform maintenance as necessary to ensure the integrity
of said drainage improvements and maintenance of the flood carrying capacity to
the designed discharge.
      1.   Covenants and restrictions shall be required for private drainage
improvements, prior to the construction of the improvements. The covenants and
restrictions must outline maintenance responsibilities of the property owners
and must be reviewed and approved by the chief engineer, prior to the
construction of the drainage improvements.
      2.   The failure to maintain private drainage improvements shall be
considered a violation of this title.
      3.   For purposes of this title, a private drainage improvement is
considered a structure.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
Chapter 16.42
SEDIMENT AND EROSION CONTROL
Sections: 
16.42.010   Application of chapter provisions.
16.42.020   Soil investigations.
16.42.030   Grading or alteration of watercourses.
16.42.040   Grading or alterations in sheet flooding areas.
16.42.010   Application of chapter provisions.
   A.   Within a regulatory floodplain or sheet flood zone, any activity that
may have an effect on the flow of storm water runoff, flood water, storm water
quality, or that may effect the erosion or the sediment carrying capacity of a
watercourse, is subject to this title and to the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Prior to receiving a floodplain use permit, both temporary and
permanent measures for sediment and erosion control must be clearly delineated
on plans or other written documents. The Grading Design Manual, prepared
pursuant to
Chapter 18.81 of the zoning code, and other design standards, as approved by
the chief engineer, shall be used to prepare these plans or documents.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.42.020   Soil investigations.
   The chief engineer may require appropriate soil investigation reports for
the purpose of determining the erosive properties of areas or lands to be
graded or disturbed, and which may create sediment deposition or erosion in any
floodplain or floodprone area regulated by this title.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.42.030   Grading or alteration of watercourses.
   A.   Any grading or the alteration of any watercourse regulated by this
title shall be performed in a controlled manner in order to minimize the loss
of soil through erosion from rainfall or storm water flow. Prior to granting a
floodplain use permit for work in any floodplain, methods to control erosion
and sedimentation during construction and post-construction must be
demonstrated to be appropriate to the satisfaction of the chief engineer.
   B.   Due to the rapidly changing hydraulic characteristics of watercourses
within the county, and the effects that sand and gravel mining and other
excavations have on these hydraulic characteristics, floodplain use permits for
grading and construction shall only be issued for a limited time period, not to
exceed one year, subject to annual renewal and upon review by the chief
engineer.
   C.   In addition to those conditions provided for elsewhere, floodplain use
permits for excavations may impose conditions regarding the area and location
in which excavations are allowed, the maximum amount of material to be
excavated, mining mitigation plans and other reasonable restraints on the
methods of operating including time restraints.
   D.   The chief engineer may require hydrologic, hydraulic, geomorphic, and
riparian habitat analyses that address both existing and future conditions, as
well as the impacts that could potentially occur during grading and
construction.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.42.040   Grading or alterations in sheet flooding areas.
   A.   Grading or any alteration that diverts, obstructs, or retards the flow
of flood waters is subject to the provision of this title and shall require
permits as specified within this title.
   B.   Slope protection and terracing to control surface drainage, erosion,
and debris on cut or fill slopes may be required in accordance with the
floodplain use permit and the adopted Grading Design Manual.
   C.   In accordance with the Grading Design Manual, erosion control shall be
implemented and maintained in order to prevent erosion of slopes and cleared,
brushed, grubbed, or graded areas.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
Chapter 16.44
VEHICULAR ACCESS
Sections: 
16.44.010   Purpose of provisions—Allocation of responsibility.
16.44.020   Areas of applicability.
16.44.030   Access requirements—Property owner duties.
16.44.040   Permit requirements.
16.44.010   Purpose of provisions—Allocation of responsibility.
   It is recognized that private vehicular access may become impassable to
ordinary and emergency vehicles during times of flooding. It is the intent of
this chapter to allocate the responsibility for private vehicular access,
whenever said access crosses a regulatory floodplain.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 13 (A), 1988)
16.44.020   Areas of applicability.
   This chapter shall apply in all situations where private vehicular access
crosses any regulatory floodplain located between the points where the private
access leaves a publicly maintained roadway and the end of the private access
at the property line.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-
2 Art. 13 (B), 1988)
16.44.030   Access requirements—Property owner duties.
   In all situations where private vehicular access crosses a regulatory
floodplain located between the points where the private access leaves a paved,
publicly maintained roadway and the end of the private access, the owner of the
property requiring the private vehicular access shall:
   A.   Construct the private vehicular access in such a manner that it is
permanent and is over terrain that can be traversed by conventional motor
vehicles during a base flood; or
   B.   Execute and record a covenant, running with the land and enforceable by
the County and the District, which contains the following:
      1.   An acknowledgment that the private vehicular access may be
impassable to conventional motor vehicles and emergency vehicles in times of
flooding,
      2.   A hold-harmless provision, holding the county and the district
harmless from and against all injuries and damages resulting from traversing or
attempting to traverse the private vehicular access during times of flooding,
and
      3.   A provision which either:
         a.   Requires the covenantor, successors and assigns to erect and
maintain a sign(s) in a location(s) and size(s) acceptable to the County and
the District stating "DO NOT ENTER WHEN FLOODED," or
         b.   Causes the covenantor or successors and assigns to assume
responsibility to notify users of the private vehicular access that it may be
impassable in times of flooding, and agree to indemnify and defend the county,
the district, their officers, employees, servants and agents, against all
claims for injuries to persons or damages to property due to the construction,
installation, location, operation, safeguarding, maintenance, repair, and
condition of the private vehicular access.
(Ord. No. 2025-FC3 § 6, 2025; Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 §
2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 13 (C),
1988)
16.44.040   Permit requirements.
   When the construction of a private vehicular access road is within a
regulatory floodplain or sheet flooding area and disturbs more than fourteen
thousand square feet, then a floodplain use permit and grading plan are
required to assure that flood waters are not diverted, retarded, or obstructed.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
Chapter 16.48
RUNOFF DETENTION SYSTEMS
Sections: 
16.48.010   Runoff reduction required when—Specifications adopted.
16.48.020   Balanced and critical basins—Development conditions.
16.48.030   Structural flood control measures.
16.48.040   Fee in lieu of detention requirements.
16.48.050   Maps of balanced and critical basins.
16.48.010   Runoff reduction required when—Specifications adopted.
   Any new development shall provide some method of peak or volumetric runoff
reduction, unless fees in lieu of detention are proposed pursuant to Section
16.48.040 and approved by the chief engineer. The amount of reduction is
stipulated within the Storm Water Detention/Retention Manual. The peak runoff
reduction should be provided through detention of storm water and storm water
harvesting for supplemental irrigation, where possible. The Storm Water
Detention/Retention Manual, approved for use by the board, or other applicable
engineering standards for storm water control and/or storm water harvesting
that is approved by the chief engineer shall be used for design. Any revisions
to the Storm Water Retention/Detention Manual will be reviewed by the flood
control district advisory committee, prior to adoption by the board as updated
design standards for detention/retention.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 14 (part), 1988)
16.48.020   Balanced and critical basins—Development conditions.
   A.   Balanced and critical drainage basins are watersheds that have been
identified by the chief engineer as unsuitable for increased development
because of the high probability of increased flooding with development and the
potential for flooding of existing improvements or property. Critical and
balanced basins may be developed further only upon the incorporation of
adequate detention systems or flood control facilities, as reviewed and
approved by the chief engineer. Drainage basins that have not previously been
identified as unsuitable for additional urban development, shall be considered
to be balanced basins, but upon study by the chief engineer, may be subject to
the critical basin provisions of this chapter. These detention systems or flood
control facilities shall be incorporated into any and all future basin-
development proposals, regardless of size or land-use density, unless fees in
lieu of detention are proposed pursuant to Section
16.48.040 and approved by the chief engineer.
   B.   Retention of storm water is not allowed without demonstrating that,
over the long-term, the ponded waters will not cause a nuisance or a vector
problem. In lieu of threshold retention, county requirements will be based upon
additional detention requirements based on the guidance provided in the Storm
Water Detention/Retention Manual.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 14 (A), 1988).
16.48.030   Structural flood control measures.
   A.   Structural flood control measures may be proposed in conjunction with,
or in place of, detention/retention systems if it can be clearly demonstrated
that such measures will not alter the water and sediment equilibrium and storm
water quality of the affected watercourse, and will mitigate environmental
impacts.
   B.   Appropriate structural flood control measures, such as channelization
to a logical conclusion downstream of the proposed development and/or
improvements to existing offsite flood control systems within the applicable
drainage or stream reach, shall be completed in accordance with plans reviewed
and approved by the chief engineer.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-
2 Art. 14 (B), 1988)
16.48.040   Fee in lieu of detention requirements.
   A fee may be collected by the county in lieu of a detention/retention system
when it can be clearly demonstrated that detention at the site does not provide
offsite flood relief due to the parcel size, location within the drainage
basin, or other factors. The fees collected will be used to construct public
flood control improvements that will mitigate the potential damage of flood
waters originating from the property contributing the fees. In balanced and
critical drainage basins, and where development is less than two units to the
acre, use of a fee system will be encouraged in lieu of a detention system in
order to preserve the natural drainage patterns. As appropriate, alternate
post-construction best management practices for storm water quality will be
required. The fee shall be equivalent to the cost of a detention system that
would otherwise be constructed for the development to mitigate increased storm
water runoff created by the proposed development.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 14 (C), 1988)
16.48.050   Maps of balanced and critical basins.
   The chief engineer shall prepare, and retain for public inspection and use,
an official map designating balanced and critical drainage basins within the
county.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988
FC-2 Art. 14 (D), 1988)
Chapter 16.52
SAND, GRAVEL AND OTHER EXCAVATION OPERATIONS
Section: 
16.52.010   Sand, gravel and other excavation operations.
16.52.010   Sand, gravel and other excavation operations.
   Sand and gravel excavations in a regulatory floodway, floodway fringe area,
floodplains and erosion hazard areas including proposed operations and existing
operations subject to permit renewal are subject to A.R.S. Section 11-830 and
A.R.S. Section 27-1201, et seq, and are subject to the following provisions to
the extent not inconsistent therewith A.R.S. Section 11-830 and A.R.S. Section
27-1201, et seq.:
   A.   Extraction of sand, gravel and other materials is allowed provided that
excavations are not located nor of such depth, or width, or length, or
combination of depth-width-length as to present a hazard to structures
including, but not limited to, roads, bridges, culverts, and utilities, the
banks of watercourses, other property, or adversely affect groundwater
recharge.
   B.   Within a floodway area, there shall be no stockpiling of materials or
tailings that may obstruct, divert, or retard the flow of flood waters except
as reviewed and approved by the chief engineer on an individual floodplain use
permit basis.
   C.   Excavations within a floodway area may be allowed only in those reaches
of watercourses which have, at a minimum, a balanced sediment system, i.e., the
sediment coming into the reach is equal to or greater than the sediment leaving
the reach and the long-term sediment balance for the entire river system
indicates that the stream channel will aggrade; or unless a reclamation plan is
prepared and sealed by an Arizona registered civil engineer, approved by the
chief engineer, and adopted by the board.
   D.   Due to the rapidly changing hydraulic characteristics of watercourses
within the county, and the effects excavations have on these characteristics,
floodplain use permits for excavations shall only be issued for a limited time
period, not to exceed one year, subject to annual renewal and review by the
chief engineer. Renewals will only be granted after receipt of a written
statement, by the property owner or owner's representative, confirming that the
sand and gravel excavations remain in compliance with the conditions of the
previous floodplain use permit, current floodplain conditions and all current
related floodplain management regulations.
   E.   In addition to those conditions provided for elsewhere, floodplain use
permits for excavations may impose sites specific conditions based on a
technical analysis of a flood hydraulic and sediment transport regarding the
area and location in which excavations are allowed, the maximum amount of
material to be excavated, and other reasonable restraints on the methods of
operating in relationship to floodplain conditions.
   F.   Any extraction of sand and gravel, or related materials within a
floodway area, floodway fringe area, floodplain, and associated flood erosion
hazard area shall be allowed after the effective date of the ordinance codified
in this title only if a mining reclamation plan is also provided for the
extraction operation. The mining reclamation plan shall show in sufficient
detail the actions that are proposed for the excavated areas so that all
adverse effects of extraction are mitigated. The plan shall also contain a
timetable for accomplishing reclamation as appropriate to the overall lateral
extent and depth of the excavation, floodplain and channel conditions, adjacent
land-uses, and associated flooding and erosion hazards.
   G.   The county may charge permit and inspection fees, as appropriate, to
recover costs associated with monitoring the sand and gravel extraction
operation, plus a reasonable estimate of administrative costs and expenses that
would be incurred by the county in doing so. Fees shall be adopted by
resolution of the board as provided within A.R.S. 48-3603.E. The chief engineer
may require a hydrologic, hydraulic, and geomorphic analyses that address the
existing conditions, as well as the impacts that would occur under the proposed
method of operation.
   H.   The board may grant appeals and variances as provided by
Chapter 16.56 of this title.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
Chapter 16.54
ADMINISTRATION, COMPLIANCE
Sections: 
16.54.010   Purpose and scope.
16.54.020   Administration.
16.54.030   Compliance.
16.54.010   Purpose and scope.
   A.   Purpose. This chapter provides for:
      1.   The orderly administration of regulations and provisions of this
title;
      2.   The process for applying the provisions of this title to individual
floodplain development or uses prior to the initiation of such development or
uses. The evaluation of any proposed development or uses shall be provided by
county staff for conformance with this title;
      3.   The administrative appeal process to the chief engineer to request a
technical interpretation or waiver from technical standards and guidance
manuals; and
      4.   A variance process to request relief from provisions of this title
from the board.
   B.   Scope.
      1.   The administration section describes the method by which permits,
appeals, variances and enforcement are processed to meet the provisions of this
title.
      2.   The compliance section describes the methods by which the provisions
of this title are met when a particular use of a property is intended.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.54.020   Administration.
   A.   The floodplain administrator, as designated by the chief engineer, is
authorized to:
      1.   Conduct the general day-to-day operation and process by which
permits are issued;
      2.   Investigate complaints of suspected violations in accordance with
Chapter 16.64; and
      3.   Enforce federal and state floodplain management administrative
requirements for compliance with the NFIP including record keeping and
reporting. Duties of the floodplain administrator may include, but are not
limited to:
         a.   Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied.
         b.   Obtain and maintain required records for public inspection and
make available the following as required in
Chapter 16.20:
         i.   The certified regulatory flood elevation required in
Chapter 16.20;
         ii.   The flood proofing certification required in
Chapter 16.20;
         iii.   The flood vent certification required in
Chapter 16.20;
         iv.   The floodway encroachment certification required in
Chapter 16.24;
         v.   The certifications of elevation required for additional
development standards, including subdivisions required in
Chapter 16.36;
         vi.   A record of all variance actions, including justification for
their issuance, and report such variances in the biennial report submitted to
FEMA; and
         vii.   All improvement calculations used to determine substantial
improvement.
         c.   Whenever a federally regulated watercourse is to be altered or
relocated, provide notification as required by this title.
   B.   The chief engineer is authorized to:
      1.   Interpret this title and associated technical flood and watercourse
documents including floodplain maps and riparian habitat maps identified within
this title;
      2.   Establish engineering standards and guidance manuals, as necessary
for activities regulated by this title;
      3.   Administer appeals requesting waivers or modifications to
engineering standards and guidance manuals and administrative interpretation as
provided within provisions of this title. Appeals to the chief engineer shall
follow the requirements of Section
16.56.010;
      4.   Make technical interpretations including base flood data and
elevations consistent with federal and state floodplain management
requirements;
      5.   Render final decisions and orders on violations of this ordinance as
required in
Chapter 16.64 herein.
   C.   The board is authorized to:
      1.   Adopt of rules and bylaws for enforcement of regulation of
floodplains, erosion hazards and riparian habitats;
      2.   Hear requests for variances from the regulations to the extent
permitted by A.R.S. Section 48-3609;
      3.   Hear requests for appeals of written findings of the chief engineer;
and
      4.   Exercise all powers and duties to carry out regulatory functions, as
required by A.R.S. Section 48-3603, including establishment of a fee schedule
for the review of applications for permits and variances from, or
interpretations of, the provision of this title.
   D.   The technical review committee may be requested by the chief engineer,
or the board, to provide technical review and recommendations on complex
technical issues for administration, compliance and enforcement of this title.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.54.030   Compliance.
   A.   Compliance Mechanisms. Title compliance is sought through:
      1.   A review procedure for floodplain use permits, subdivision plats,
development plans and other plans;
      2.   A permitting system that will deny the issuance of a permit if the
proposed activity conflicts with title requirements;
      3.   An enforcement system that will provide for compliance and
enforcement of the title; and
      4.   An organizational structure that identifies specific officers and
employees empowered to administer the above methods of compliance.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the chief engineer, floodplain administrator,
county engineer, zoning inspector and all other departments, officials and
public employees vested with the duty or authority to issue permits to
determine compliance with the provisions of this title and to issue no permit
in conflict with the provisions of this title.
   C.   Validity of Permit.
      1.   The issuance or granting of a floodplain use permit, a building
permit, or approval of plans or specifications under the authority of this
title shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an approval of,
any violation of any of the provisions of this title or the amendments thereto,
or of any other title or law;
      2.   No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel any of
the provisions of this title or any existing law shall be issued, and if
issued, then the permit shall not be valid and shall be revoked as provided in
Section
16.20.060 of this title;
      3.   Any permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this title
shall be null and void; and
      4.   A floodplain use permit shall be valid:
         a.   For one year after the date of issuance for permanent structures
and flood control improvements, or
         b.   Upon completion of permanent structures and flood control
improvements associated with the permit provided that all permit requirements
are met including certifications of elevation when required, or
         c.   For one year after the date of issuance for any excavation
activity or any other activity-based permits issued under this title. Such
activity-based permits shall be reviewed for compliance annually, and be re-
permitted, if appropriate, based on conditions current at the time of permit
renewal.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
Chapter 16.56
APPEALS AND VARIANCES
Sections: 
16.56.010   Appeals to the chief engineer.
16.56.020   Variances.
16.56.030   Authority to issue variances.
16.56.040   Issuance of variances—Required findings.
16.56.050   Hearing procedures for the board.
16.56.060   Covenants.
16.56.070   Notice to adjacent jurisdictions.
16.56.010   Appeals to the chief engineer.
   A.   Any applicant contesting permit conditions, a written notice of permit
denial by the floodplain administrator, or a boundary determination of a
regulatory floodplain, floodway, erosion hazard area, or riparian habitat shall
first request a formal review by the chief engineer on a form approved by the
district within thirty business days from receipt of the written notice.
   B.   Within ten business days of receipt of the written review request form,
the chief engineer may:
      1.   Meet with the applicant; or
      2.   Request, in writing, such additional information as is deemed
necessary in order to render a written finding.
   C.   The chief engineer shall issue a written finding not more than forty-
five business days following the receipt of all required information.
   D.   Any applicant aggrieved by the written finding of the chief engineer
may appeal to the board by submitting an appeal petition with the chief
engineer and the clerk of the board within thirty business days from receipt of
the written finding of the chief engineer.
      1.   The appeal petition shall be on a form approved by the district and
shall contain a detailed explanation of all matters in dispute;
      2.   When an appeal is scientific or technical in nature, technical
evidence shall be prepared and sealed by an Arizona registered civil engineer
or, for riparian habitat mitigation appeals, by an Arizona registered landscape
architect or other qualified professional; and
      3.   Hearing procedures shall be pursuant to Section
16.56.050.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.56.020   Variances.
   A.   Variances within adopted special flood hazard areas as designated by
FEMA shall conform to the variance requirements of the NFIP as provided within
44 CFR 60.6.
   B.   Variances for relief to regulations under this title for locally
regulated floodplains, erosion hazard zones and/or riparian habitat shall
conform to variance requirements of this title. See Section
16.56.040.
   C.   A property owner may request a variance hearing by filing a variance
request petition with the chief engineer and the clerk of the board on a form
approved by the district.
      1.   The petitioner shall state the section of the code from which the
variance is being sought and shall contain a detailed explanation of the
variance request.
      2.   The clerk of the board shall schedule a hearing before the board on
the request for a variance pursuant to Section
16.56.050.
   D.   In accordance with A.R.S. Section 48-3610, whenever a development plan
or application has been filed with the District that requires a variance under
44 CFR 60.6 and is within one mile of the boundary between the district's area
of jurisdiction and the jurisdiction of a city or town, then the district shall
advise, the jurisdiction in writing.
(Ord. No. 2025-FC3 § 7 (part), 2025; Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005
FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.56.030   Authority to issue variances.
   To the extent permitted by A.R.S. Section 48-3609, the board shall hear and
decide all requests for variances from the requirements of this title. A
variance is subject to conditions to ensure that the variance does not
constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations on
similar property in a regulatory floodplain or erosion hazard area.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988
FC-2 Art. 17 (A), 1988)
16.56.040   Issuance of variances—Required findings.
   Variances may only be issued if the board makes the following five
determinations:
   A.   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary to afford
relief, considering the flood hazards;
   B.   A determination of good and sufficient cause;
   C.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant;
   D.   A determination that the granting of the variance will not create a
danger or hazard to persons or property in a regulatory floodplain or erosion
hazard area in the area of jurisdiction or result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, the creation of a nuisance, the
victimization of or fraud on the public, or that the variance is not in
conflict with other local laws or titles; and
   E.   Special circumstances, such as size, shape, topography, location, or
surroundings of the property, would cause strict application of the regulations
to deprive the property of the privileges enjoyed by similar property in a
regulatory floodplain or erosion hazard area. A variance is subject to
conditions to ensure that the variance does not constitute a grant of special
privileges inconsistent with the limitations on similar property in the
regulatory floodplain.
   F.   Variances within special flood hazard areas as designated by FEMA shall
conform to the variance requirements of the NFIP as provided within 44 CFR
60.6.
(Ord. No. 2025-FC3 § 7 (part), 2025; Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005
FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999-FC-1 §§ 1 (part) 1999; Ord. 1988-FC2 Art. 17
(B), 1988)
16.56.050   Hearing procedures for the board.
   A.   Petitions. The following petition procedures apply to an appeal of a
written finding of the chief engineer, or to a variance request:
      1.   An appeal petition may require technical evidence that demonstrates
why the appeal should be granted, that contains a concise explanation of all
matters in dispute, and that includes any pertinent maps, drawings, data, or
other information in support of the appeal. If required, technical evidence
shall be prepared and sealed by an Arizona registered civil engineer or, for
riparian habitat mitigation appeals, by an Arizona registered landscape
architect or other qualified professional.
      2.   A variance request petition shall state the code section from which
the variance is sought, provide technical evidence, if necessary, that
demonstrates why the variance request should be granted and shall include any
pertinent maps, drawings, data, or other information as to why the variance
should be granted. If required, technical evidence shall be prepared and sealed
by an Arizona registered civil engineer or, for riparian habitat mitigation
appeals, by an Arizona registered landscape architect or other qualified
professional.
      3.   Incomplete petitions shall not be accepted.
         a.   The chief engineer shall notify the applicant within five working
days of receipt whether or not the application is deemed complete.
         b.   If the application is determined to be incomplete, the applicant
shall submit additional materials and information as may be determined to be
reasonably necessary by the chief engineer.
   B.   Report from the Chief Engineer. The chief engineer shall prepare a
final report and present the findings to the applicant and the board through
the clerk of the board within sixty business days of receipt of the petition.
The applicant shall have thirty business days to respond to the findings of the
chief engineer. If the response includes new technical information, the chief
engineer shall prepare a revised report, and present these findings to the
applicant and the board through the clerk of the board within thirty business
days of receipt of the new technical information.
   C.   Hearing. The clerk of the board will schedule a public hearing at the
next available board meeting after the response period. Once the hearing is
scheduled, no new technical information can be submitted. The board may meet
monthly, or at such times as it deems necessary for the transaction of
business, including the hearing of appeal and variance petitions.
      1.   A mailed notification of the hearing to property owners and
residents within a minimum distance of three hundred feet of the boundaries of
the property shall be provided in order to allow an opportunity to make
comments on the appeal or variance request petitions, and
      2.   The chief engineer may refer appeal or variance requests of a
technical nature to the technical review committee. The technical review
committee shall hold a hearing to make findings and recommendations to the
board within thirty days of receipt of the petition from the chief engineer.
      3.   The board shall render its decision within thirty business days of
the close of the hearing.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999-FC-
1 §§ 1 (part) 1999; Ord. 1988-FC2 Art. 16 (B), 1988)
16.56.060   Covenants.
   Upon granting of a variance, permit or waiver for the construction of a
dwelling unit or commercial or industrial structure, where the construction of
such unit or structure is otherwise contrary to the floodplain and erosion
hazard requirements of this title the board shall provide written notice to the
grantees of such a variance, permit, or waiver that, if the structure is a
dwelling unit or business as defined by A.R.S. Section 26-321, the land upon
which the structure is located is ineligible for acquisition under the county
floodprone land acquisition program, and notice that the structure increase
risks to life and property and will result in increased flood insurance premium
rates. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the board in the office of the
county recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the
chain of title of the affected parcel of land.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005)
16.56.070   Notice to adjacent jurisdictions.
   In accordance with A.R.S. Section 48-3610, whenever a variance to federal
and/or state floodplain requirements contained in this title and is within 1
mile of the boundary between the district's area of jurisdiction and the
jurisdiction of a city or town, then the district shall advise, in writing, the
city or town and provide a copy of any development plan or any application that
has been filed with the district for a floodplain use permit or variance. The
district shall also advise any city or town in writing and provide a copy of
any development plan of any major development proposed within a regulatory
floodplain, or floodway which could affect regulatory floodplains, floodway,
erosion hazard area, or watercourses within that city's or town's area of
jurisdiction. Written notice and a copy of the plan of development shall be
sent to any adjacent jurisdiction no later than 3 working days after having
been received by the District.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988
FC-2 Art. 17 (D), 1988)
Chapter 16.60
AMENDMENTS
Sections: 
16.60.010   Amendments require public hearing process.
16.60.020   Petition, study and determination procedures.
16.60.010   Amendments require public hearing process.
   This title may be amended only after a public hearing at which parties-in-
interest and other citizens have an opportunity to be heard.
(Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 18 (A), 1988)
16.60.020   Petition, study and determination procedures.
   The chief engineer or any affected person may petition for an amendment to
this title, and shall initiate such a proceeding by filing with the board a
proper and complete petition for such change on the form or forms provided by
the board.
   A.   Staff Report. Upon receipt of such petitions, the chief engineer, with
the assistance, advice and counsel of the flood control district advisory
committee shall make a study and report the findings to the board. The report
shall be made available to the applicant and other interested parties at least
thirty days before the date of any public hearing for the respective petition.
   B.   Board Action. Upon receipt of the chief engineer report and
recommendation, the board shall hold a public hearing thereon at which the
petitioner and other parties in interest have an opportunity to be heard. At
least thirty days prior to the hearing, a notice of the time and place of
hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the
area of jurisdiction of the Board; or, if no newspaper of general circulation
is regularly published within the area of jurisdiction, a newspaper of general
circulation regularly published nearest the area of jurisdiction.
   C.   A notice of any hearing, accompanied by a copy of each of the proposed
amendments, shall be furnished to the director of the ADWR at least thirty days
prior to the date of such hearing. A copy of any amendment adopted by the board
shall, within five days thereafter, be file with the director of the ADWR.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 A18 (B), 1988)
Chapter 16.64
VIOLATION—PENALTY
Sections: 
16.64.005   Definitions.
16.64.010   Unlawful activities designated—Penalty.
16.64.020   Abatement of violations—Procedures.
16.64.030   Structures deemed nuisances—Remedies.
16.64.040   Remedies for damages—Actions authorized.
16.64.050   Removal of violation authorized when.
16.64.060   Recovery of administrative and other costs.
16.64.070   Appeal of the final decision and order of chief engineer.
16.64.005   Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   A.   Board of Hearing Review. Board of hearing review means a board which
consists of one member from each board of directors' district and may be the
same member appointed to the flood control district advisory committee who is
responsible for reviewing final decisions and orders of the chief engineer for
violations of this title.
   B.   Final Decision and Order. Final decision and order means the
determination made by the chief engineer of a violation of this title after
considering the written findings and recommendations of the hearing officer.
   C.   Hearing Officer. Hearing officer means an individual who is appointed
by the board and is responsible for hearing and deciding all civil proceedings
established by ordinance, regulation, rule or provision established by the
board.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010)
16.64.010   Unlawful activities designated—Penalty.
   A.   It is unlawful for any person or entity to engage in development which
will divert, retard, or obstruct the flow of waters in a watercourse if it
creates a hazard to life or property without first securing written
authorization from the district. Where the watercourse is a delineated
floodplain, it is unlawful to excavate or build any structure affecting the
flow of waters without securing written authorization required by A.R.S. 48-
3613.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person or entity to grade or disturb more than
one-third acre of regulated hydroriparian and/or mesoriparian and/or
xeroriparian habitat and/or important riparian habitat, which are subject to
permits under provisions of this chapter without first securing the permit.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person or entity to neglect maintenance
responsibilities on private drainage improvements as outlined in
Chapter 16.38.
   D.   It is unlawful for any person to fail to obtain a permit required by
this title or to fail to comply with all the terms and conditions of a permit
issued pursuant to this title.
   E.   It is unlawful for any person to damage or interfere with a facility
that is owned, operated or otherwise under the jurisdiction of the flood
control district.
   F.   Any person or entity violating the provisions of this title or any
terms and conditions of a permit issued pursuant to this title and A.R.S. 48-
3615 shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor.
   G.   Any person or entity violating the provisions of this title or any
terms and conditions of a permit issued pursuant to this title may be subject
to a penalty in the amount not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars for an
individual, or ten thousand dollars for an enterprise. Each day of continued
violation constitutes a separate violation.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part) 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 19, 1988)
16.64.020   Abatement of violations—Procedures.
   A.   Pursuant to A.R.S. 48-3615.01, violators of this title are subject to
civil penalties or other legal action for failure to comply with any provision
of this title.
   B.   The floodplain administrator is authorized to investigate all
complaints of suspected violations of this title.
      1.   Inspection. The floodplain administrator may conduct inspections to
determine if violations exist.
         a.   During regular business hours, the district and its agents may
have reasonable access for inspection pursuant as provided by written
authorization issued pursuant to A.R.S. 48-3613, the terms or conditions of a
permit, or to investigate a concern of non-compliance if no written
authorization has been issued. In the case of an emergency, the district may
enter at any time.
         b.   If the district and its agents are denied access for inspection,
the chief engineer of the district may apply for an administrative search
warrant from a local court of general jurisdiction and shall be served by a
certified peace officer.
      2.   Notice of Violation. Upon finding a violation, the floodplain
administrator shall provide a written notice of violation to the property
owner:
         a.   Identifying the applicable statutes, regulations, ordinances, or
permit terms that have been violated.
         b.   Identifying the nature of the violation and any actions required
to achieve compliance required by this title, including any additional
information or engineering analyses required to show compliance.
         c.   Establishing that the notice is an order to cease and desist,
effective on the date served.
         d.   Providing a time schedule for corrective actions for compliance,
or to request a hearing.
         e.   Identifying the consequences for failure to take corrective
action, including the imposition of monetary penalties.
      3.   Upon request for a hearing, the floodplain administrator shall
present evidence of the violation to the hearing officer.
   C.   The board shall appoint a hearing officer, who may be an employee of
the district. The board shall adopt written rules of procedure for the hearing
and review of hearings. These rules of procedures shall be adopted in the same
manner as the ordinance.
   D.   The hearing officer shall hear evidence from the alleged violator and
from the district regarding the alleged violation and prepare and submit a
written finding of facts and summary of violations, including any
recommendations to abate or ameliorate the violation and any harm or damage
arising from the violation and the imposition of any civil penalties. The
written finding shall be submitted to the chief engineer and the owner or
alleged violator within thirty calendar days of the hearing.
   E.   The chief engineer is responsible for implementing procedures for an
administrative hearing, and ensuring that a hearing officer is made available,
if required.
      1.   Upon receipt of the hearing officer's written findings and
recommendation, the chief engineer shall render a final decision and order in
writing. The final order and decision may include:
         a.   A determination of violation;
         b.   Actions necessary to mitigate the violation and any damage
resulting from the violation; and
         c.   The imposition of a civil penalty pursuant to ARS 48-3615.01, if
appropriate.
      2.   Any party found in violation may request review of the final
decision and order of the chief engineer by the board of hearing review
pursuant to Section
16.64.070;
   F.   The board is responsible for adopting rules and procedures for hearings
and review of decisions prescribed by this chapter, adopting and enforcing a
civil penalty policy for violations of title, appointing hearing officers to
hear and determine actions, and establishing a board of hearing review.
   G.   The final decision of the board of hearing review is subject to
judicial review pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes Title 12, Chapter 7,
Article 6.
   H.   Establishment of civil penalties for violations of this title or
interference with the district's facilities does not preclude the district from
pursuing other remedies as provided by law.
   I.   If deemed appropriate by the board, the chief engineer shall submit to
the Administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration a declaration for
denial of insurance stating that the property is in violation of a cited state
or local law, regulation, or title, pursuant to Section 1316 of National Flood
Insurance Act 1968, and as amended.
   J.   The county and the district shall be entitled to recover all costs
including administrative, engineering, and legal costs, as well as actual
costs, pursuant to Section 16.20.100.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005).
16.64.030   Structures deemed nuisances—Remedies.
   To remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations or, if this is
not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways in which impacts
may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development
from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or
otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial
exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   A.   Every new structure, building, fill, excavation, or development located
or maintained within any regulatory floodplain, riparian habitat, or erosion
hazard area in violation of this title and without written authorization from
the board is a public nuisance per se and may be abated, prevented, or
restrained by action of the state or any political subdivision of the state.
   B.   As a further remedy, the county and the district may withhold the
issuance of building permits or floodplain use permits for any development or
improvement on the same parcel, or on a contiguous parcel of land under the
same ownership, where any improvement or development on the property is not in
compliance with this title or any other provision of law relating to that
development.
   C.   In order to ensure that subsequent property owners are informed of
existing violations on a property, the district may record written
notifications of violations with the office of the county recorder. This
notification shall run with the land. Upon mitigation of the violation, the
district will record an additional notification indicating that compliance has
been achieved. The district shall record this notice within thirty days of
verifying that compliance has been achieved.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-
1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988 FC-2 Art. 7 (A) (2), (4)1988)
16.64.040   Remedies for damages—Actions authorized.
   A.   In addition to other penalties or remedies otherwise provided by law,
the state of Arizona, any political subdivision thereof, or any person who may
be damaged as a result of the diversion, retardation or obstruction of water
within the regulatory floodplain, shall have the right to commence, maintain,
and prosecute any appropriate action or pursue any remedy to enjoin, abate, or
otherwise prevent any person from violating or continuing to violate any
provision of this title.
   B.   If any person is found to be in violation of any provision of this
title, the court may require the violator to comply with this title or remove
the obstruction and restore the floodplain to its original condition.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988
FC-2 Art. 7 (A) (3), 1988)
16.64.050   Removal of violation authorized when.
   Upon written notice, the chief engineer may cause any structure,
encroachment, obstruction diversion, hazard or work constructed without a
floodplain use permit, or which is in violation with the terms of a permit, to
be removed immediately at the expense of the person who caused the structure,
encroachment, or work; if said structure, encroachment, or work will cause an
immediate danger to life and/or property.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988
FC-2 Art. 7 (H), 1988)
16.64.060   Recovery of administrative and other costs.
   The county and the district shall be entitled to recover all costs,
administrative, engineering and legal, as well as actual costs to remove or
modify the structure, encroachment, and/or any other work in violation of this
title.
(Ord. 2005 FC-2 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1999 FC-1 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1988
FC-2 Art. 7 (I), 1988)
16.64.070   Appeal of the final decision and order of chief engineer.
   A.   The following hearing procedures apply to an appeal of a final decision
and order of the chief engineer to the board of hearing review:
      1.   The violator may appeal the final decision and order of the chief
engineer to the board of hearing review by providing a written request on forms
approved by the district to the chief engineer and the clerk of the board
within fifteen business days following receipt of the chief engineer's
decision.
      2.   The written request may require technical evidence that disputes the
findings of the chief engineer, and contains a concise explanation of all
matters in dispute including any pertinent maps, drawings, data, or other
information in support of the appeal petition. If required, the technical
evidence must be prepared and sealed by an Arizona registered civil engineer,
or for mitigation plans, by an Arizona registered landscape architect or other
qualified professional.
      3.   Incomplete petitions shall not be accepted.
         a.   The chief engineer shall notify the applicant within five working
days of receipt whether or not the application is complete.
         b.   If the application is determined to be incomplete, the applicant
shall submit additional materials and information as may be determined to be
reasonably necessary by the chief engineer.
      4.   The chief engineer shall prepare a final report and present the
findings to the applicant and the clerk of the board within fifteen days of
receipt of the petition. The applicant shall have thirty calendar days to
respond to the findings of the chief engineer. If the response includes new
technical evidence, the chief engineer shall prepare a revised report, and
present these findings to the applicant and the clerk of the board within
thirty days of receipt of the new technical information.
      5.   The board of hearing review meeting scheduled within thirty days
after the chief engineers final report. After the meeting has been scheduled,
no new technical information can be submitted. The board of hearing review
shall meet at such times as it considers necessary for the transaction of
appeals of any final decisions and orders of the chief engineer.
      6.   The board of hearing review's public hearing process shall include
the following:
         a.   A mailed notification to all parties who received the final
decision and order, as well as all other parties who attended the violation
hearing at which the chief engineer took action,
         b.   An opportunity for property owners and residents that are
impacted by the violation to make comments on the appeal, and
         c.   Review by the chief engineer of the appeal by the appellant, the
final staff report, and the circumstances and testimony presented at the
hearing when such hearings are held.
      7.   The board of hearing review shall render its decision within thirty
calendar days of the close of the hearing.
   B.   If a person alleged to be in violation continues the violation after
the chief engineer has issued a final decision and order or after the board of
hearing review has completed its review, the chief engineer may apply for a
temporary restraining order or preliminary or permanent injunction from the
superior court in accordance with the rules of civil procedure.
(Ord. 2010-FC5 § 1 (part), 2010)
Title 17 AIR QUALITY CONTROL
Chapters: 
   
Chapter 17.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
Chapter 17.08 - AMBIENT AIR QUALITY STANDARDS
   
Chapter 17.11 - GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR PERMITS
   
Chapter 17.12 - INDIVIDUAL PERMITS AND PERMIT REVISIONS FOR CLASS I PERMITS
   
Chapter 17.13 - INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL PERMITS AND PERMIT REVISIONS FOR CLASS
II AND CLASS III PERMITS
   
Chapter 17.14 - ACTIVITY PERMITS
   
Chapter 17.16 - EMISSION LIMITING STANDARDS
   
Chapter 17.20 - EMISSION SOURCE TESTING AND MONITORING
   
Chapter 17.24 - EMISSION SOURCE RECORDKEEPING AND REPORTING
   
Chapter 17.28 - VIOLATIONS AND CONDITIONAL ORDERS
   
Chapter 17.32 - EMERGENCY EPISODES AND PUBLIC AWARENESS
   
Chapter 17.36 - Reserved
   
Chapter 17.40 - TRAVEL REDUCTION ORDINANCE
   
Chapter 17.44 - VOLUNTARY NO-DRIVE DAY ORDINANCE
Chapter 17.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections: 
   
Article I. - Preamble
   
Article II. - Jurisdiction
   
Article III. - Incorporated Materials
   
Article IV. - Administration
   
Article V. - Advisory Council
   
Article VI. - Hearing Board
   
Article VII. - Legal Severability
   
Article VIII. - Interpretations
   
Article IX. - Definitions and Meanings
   
Article X. - Procedures for Amending
Article I. Preamble
17.04.010   Declaration of policy.
17.04.020   Purpose.
17.04.030   Authority.
17.04.010   Declaration of policy.
   A.   Whereas, the legislature of the state of Arizona has found that air
pollution exists in the state and in Pima County, and that such air pollution
is potentially and in some cases actually dangerous to the health of the
citizenry, often causes physical discomfort, injures property and property
values, discourages recreational and other uses of the state's resources, and
is aesthetically unappealing; and
   B.   Whereas, the state legislature has adopted and implemented a statewide
program to control present and future sources of air pollution to insure the
health, safety, and general welfare of all the citizens of the state, protect
property values, and protect plant and animal life; and
   C.   Whereas, the state legislature has adopted statutes which grant the
counties the right to control the emissions of air contaminants as provided
herein; and
   D.   Whereas, the board of supervisors of Pima County, Arizona has
determined that air pollution is frequently emitted into the atmosphere from
several types of sources in Pima County;
   E.   Now, therefore, in consideration of and for the benefit of the people
of the county, it is declared policy that every effort shall be made to
identify by source and amount the various types of contaminants in the
atmosphere; and
   F.   It is further declared policy that all contaminants emitted from each
source originating in Pima County shall be prevented or reduced, irrespective
of the proportion that each source contributes to the total air pollution; and
   G.   That this title shall apply to all types of air contaminant emissions
in Pima County, subject to the jurisdictional authority regarding types and
sizes of emissions sources defined by Arizona Revised Statutes and referenced
herein.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.020   Purpose.
   A.   The purpose of this title is to prevent and to reduce air pollution
originating in Pima County, so as to restore and preserve the quality of the
outdoor air in all areas of Pima County to which the general public has access.
   B.   This title is specifically intended to progressively reduce the levels
of air pollutants in areas which exceed one or more health-related or welfare-
related standard, and to prevent the levels of air pollutants from exceeding
analogous standards where the air is already clean. Therefore, the air quality
control officer shall periodically evaluate progress made toward these goals
and he shall within sixty days of such time as information becomes available to
him that the air quality in any area of the county which already exceeds a
health-related or welfare-related standard is further deteriorating, or within
sixty days of learning that any maximum allowable incremental increase in air
pollutants set forth herein to preserve the air quality of the county is being
exceeded, review the adequacy of this title and propose to the environmental
quality advisory council and board of supervisors appropriate revisions or
additions to correct any deficiencies. Furthermore, the control officer shall
prepare and make available to the general public an annual report describing
such progress.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.030   Authority.
   A.   This title is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Title 49,
Chapter 3, Article 1, Section 49-401, et seq., Arizona Revised Statutes,
abbreviated hereinafter as A.R.S. when referring to a specific statute.
   B.   The board of supervisors shall adopt such rules as it determines are
necessary and feasible to control the release into the atmosphere of air
contaminants originating within the territorial limits of the county in order
to control air pollution, which rules, except as provided in subsection D shall
contain standards at least equal to or more restrictive than those adopted by
the director. In fixing such standards, the board or region shall give
consideration but shall not be limited to:
      1.   The latest scientific knowledge useful in indicating the kind and
extent of all identifiable effects on health and welfare which may be expected
from the presence of an air pollution agent, or combination of agents in the
ambient air, in varying quantities.
      2.   Atmosphere conditions and the types of air pollution agent or agents
which, when present in the atmosphere, may interact with another agent or
agents to produce an adverse effect on public health and welfare.
      3.   Securing to the greatest degree practicable, the enjoyment of the
natural attractions of the state and the comfort and convenience of the
inhabitants.
   C.   No rule may be enacted or amended except after the board of supervisors
first holds a public hearing after twenty days notice of such hearing. The
proposed rule, or any proposed amendment of a rule, shall be made available to
the public at the time of notice of such hearing.
   D.   A county may adopt or amend a rule, emission standard, or standard of
performance that is as stringent or more stringent than a rule, emission
standard or standard of performance for similar sources adopted by the director
only if the county complies with the applicable provisions of A.R.S. 49-112.
   E.   All rules enacted pursuant to this section shall be made available to
the public at a reasonable charge upon request.
(Ord. 1994-83 § 1, 1994: Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
Article II. Jurisdiction
17.04.040   General applicability.
17.04.050   State and/or County.
17.04.060   Limitations.
17.04.040   General applicability.
   This title shall apply to all persons in Pima County, including citizens,
residents, transients, and all other persons except where specifically exempted
by the Arizona Revised Statutes.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.050   State and/or County.
   This title shall apply to all types, kinds, and sizes of air pollutant
emission sources in Pima County pursuant to ARS 49-402.
(Ord. 1998-27 § 1, 1998; Ord. 1995-87 § 1, 1995: Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part),
1993)
17.04.060   Limitations.
   A.   Nothing in this title shall be construed so as to:
      1.   Regulate or control air pollution existing solely within commercial
or industrial plants, works, or shops owned by or under the control of the
person causing the air pollution; or
      2.   Prevent normal agricultural soil-cultivation and crop-producing
practices which cause dust.
   B.   No rule adopted in this title shall preempt or nullify any applicable
requirement or emission standard in an applicable implementation plan unless
the control officer revises the applicable implementation plan in conformance
with the requirements of 40 CFR Part 51, subpart F, and the administrator
approves the revision.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
Article III. Incorporated Materials
17.04.070   Incorporated materials.
17.04.070   Incorporated materials.
   The following documents are incorporated herein by reference and are on file
with the control officer:
   A.   The Arizona Department of Environmental Quality's "Arizona Testing
Manual for Air Pollutant Emissions," amended as of March 1992 (and no future
editions).
   B.   The ASTM Test Methods referenced in this title as of the year specified
in the reference (and no future amendments). They are available from the
American Society for Testing and Materials, 100 Barr Harbor Dr., West
Conshohocken, PA, 19428-2959.
   C.   All parts of the CFR referenced in this Title are amended as of July 1,
2015, as applicable requirements and no future editions or amendments unless
specifically indicated otherwise.
   D.   The U.S. Government Printing Office's "Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, 1987" and no future editions.
(Ord. 2019-28 § 1 (part), 2019; Ord. 2016-42 § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 2008-55 § 1
(part), 2008: Ord. 2004-97 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1997-79 § 1, 1997; Ord. 1995-87 § 2,
1995; Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
Article IV. Administration
17.04.080   Air quality control district.
17.04.090   Executive head.
17.04.100   Governing body.
17.04.080   Air quality control district.
   The Pima County Air Pollution Control District, having been created by Pima
County Ordinance 1966-44, in accordance with A.R.S. 49-473.B and 49-474 and 49-
475 and operating within the Pima County Department of Environmental Quality,
is hereby continued and shall be known as the Pima County Air Quality Control
District.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.090   Executive head.
   The director of the Pima County Department of Environmental Quality shall be
the air pollution control officer and executive head of the Pima County Air
Quality Control District. He shall perform such duties and exercise such powers
as are prescribed by law, and shall be known hereafter as the air quality
control officer.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.100   Governing body.
   The Pima County board of supervisors shall be the governing body of the
district, and the air quality control officer shall administer this title.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
Article V. Advisory Council
17.04.110   Establishment.
17.04.120   Composition.
17.04.130   Terms—Nominations.
17.04.140   Function.
17.04.150   Officers—Procedures.
17.04.160   Meetings—Special studies—Hearings.
17.04.170   Compensation—Absences.
17.04.110   Establishment.
   The Pima County board of supervisors, pursuant to A.R.S. 49-477, shall
appoint an air pollution advisory council (to be known hereafter as the Pima
County environmental quality advisory council) to advise and consult with the
board of supervisors, the Pima County department of environmental quality
director in administrating this title and applicable statutes.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.120   Composition.
   A.   The advisory council shall consist of ten members who are knowledgeable
in the field of environmental protection including air pollution and its
control, water quality protection and solid waste/hazardous materials
management with one member from each of the following fields or range of
fields: general business or industry, including manufacturing, real estate,
tourism or development; mining industry or utilities, automotive industry or
small business; consumer protection or public or environmental interest;
environmental conservation or resource management; science or engineering;
health or education; transportation and land use planning; hydrology, water
resources or waste management; environmental planning or environmental law.
   B.   None of the members may hold a governmental position with any
incorporated city or town in Pima County or the Pima County government itself
while serving on the council.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.130   Terms—Nominations.
   A.   The advisory council members shall serve three-year, staggered terms,
and shall serve until reappointed or replaced.
   B.   Advisory council members shall be appointed by the board of supervisors
from lists of qualified candidates nominated by the board of supervisors,
various professional or community organizations representative of the indicated
fields, or other governmental entities within Pima County.
      1.   Each nomination shall include a statement of the qualifications of
the nominee.
      2.   The board of supervisors shall fill each vacancy within three months
of the effective date of the vacancy.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.140   Function.
   A.   The advisory council shall address itself to such issues as needed
legislation, review of Pima County department of environmental quality needs,
evaluation of the impacts of air quality planning, and degradation of clean
air, water quality protection, regulation of solid and hazardous waste and
other environmental issues.
   B.   The council may also recommend proposed changes and additions to this
title to the board of supervisors.
   C.   Adequate staff support shall be provided by the department of
environmental quality director to the council.
   D.   All recommendations of the council shall be submitted to the board of
supervisors for its consideration.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.150   Officers—Procedures.
   A.   The advisory council shall select a chairman, vice-chairman, and such
other officers as it deems necessary.
   B.   The council shall adopt procedural rules to govern the conduct of its
meetings.
   C.   Minutes of the meetings shall be taken and forwarded to the board of
supervisors.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.160   Meetings—Special studies—Hearings.
   A.   The advisory council shall hold meetings at least quarterly, and all
meetings shall be open to the public.
   B.   A representative selected by the council shall meet with the board of
supervisors at least semi-annually to call attention to existing or potential
needs related to the environmental quality in Pima County.
   C.   The council may recommend special studies of environmental problems and
may form subcommittees or task forces for this purpose.
   D.   If funding is needed for the foregoing, approval shall be obtained from
the board of supervisors.
   E.   The council shall hold public hearings as necessary to perform its
duties, including provisions for allowing members of the public to speak on the
subject matter under consideration.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.170   Compensation—Absences.
   A.   Advisory council members shall serve without compensation.
   B.   A council member's absence for three consecutive meetings shall be
considered a resignation unless a majority of the members of the council vote
to excuse such absence upon good cause at their next regularly scheduled
meeting.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
Article VI. Hearing Board
17.04.180   Establishment.
17.04.190   Composition.
17.04.200   Terms—Nominations.
17.04.210   Functions.
17.04.220   Officers—Procedures.
17.04.230   Meetings—Hearings.
17.04.240   Compensation—Absences.
17.04.250   Decisions of hearing board; subpoenas; effective date.
17.04.260   Judicial review.
17.04.180   Establishment.
   The board of supervisors, pursuant to A.R.S. 49-478, shall appoint an air
pollution hearing board (to be known hereafter as the air quality hearing
board) to serve in a quasi-judicial capacity regarding enforcement proceedings
and other legal matters required by Arizona Revised Statutes.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.190   Composition.
   A.   The hearing board shall consist of five members.
      1.   The five members shall be knowledgeable in the field of air
pollution control.
      2.   One member shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in this
state.
   B.   At least a majority of the hearing board members shall not individually
have a substantial interest in an emission source subject to permits or
enforcement orders issued pursuant to this title. Substantial interest means
any pecuniary or proprietary interest, either direct or indirect, other than a
remote interest.
(Ord. 2015-19 § 1, 2015: Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.200   Terms—Nominations.
   A.   Hearing board members shall serve three-year, staggered terms.
   B.   Hearing board members shall be appointed by the board of supervisors
from lists of qualified candidates nominated by the board of supervisors,
various professional or community organizations representative of the indicated
fields, or other governmental entities in Pima County.
      1.   Each nomination shall include a statement of the qualifications of
the nominee.
      2.   The board of supervisors shall fill each vacancy within three months
of the effective date of the vacancy.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.210   Functions.
   The hearing board shall perform such duties as prescribed by law,
specifically as described in the following sections of the Arizona Revised
Statutes:
      1.   A.R.S. 49-482: Permit Denial Appeals;
      2.   A.R.S. 49-490: Hearings on Orders of Abatement;
      3.   A.R.S. 49-496: Hearing Board Decisions and Procedures.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.220   Officers—Procedures.
   A.   The hearing board shall select a chairman, vice-chairman, and such
other officers as it deems necessary.
   B.   The hearing board shall adopt a manual of procedures governing its
operation, conditional upon approval of such manual by the board of
supervisors.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.230   Meetings—Hearings.
   A.   The hearing board shall hold meetings or hearings as required by law or
as requested by the board of supervisors or the control officer.
   B.   All hearings conducted by the hearing board shall be open to the
public, including provisions for allowing members of the public to speak on the
subject matter under consideration.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.240   Compensation—Absences.
   A.   The hearing Board members shall serve without compensation, but the
board of supervisors may authorize reimbursement of subsistence and travel from
and to their respective places of residence when on official business.
   B.   A member's absence for three consecutive meetings or hearings shall be
considered a resignation unless a majority of the members of the hearing board
vote to excuse such absence upon good cause at their next regularly scheduled
meeting.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.250   Decisions of hearing board; subpoenas; effective date.
   A.   All decisions of the hearing board, including the majority of opinion
and all concurring and dissenting opinions, shall be in writing and shall be of
public record.
   B.   A majority of the total membership of the hearing board shall concur in
a decision for it to have effect.
   C.   The chairman or, in his absence, the vice chairman may issue subpoenas
to compel attendance of any person at a hearing and require the production of
books, records and other documents material to a hearing. Obedience to
subpoenas may be enforced pursuant to A.R.S. 12-2212.
   D.   Decisions of the hearing board shall become effective not less than
thirty days after they are issued unless:
      1.   A rehearing is granted which shall have the effect of staying the
decision.
      2.   It is determined that an emergency exists which justifies an earlier
effective date.
   E.   The hearing board may revoke or modify an order of abatement or a
permit or permit revision only after first holding a hearing within thirty days
from the giving of notice of such hearing as provided in this title.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.260   Judicial review.
   A.   Judicial review of hearing board decisions shall be pursuant to the
provision of A.R.S. Title 12, Chapter 7, Article 6, Sections 12-901 et seq.,
except as provided in this section.
   B.   Within thirty days after service of notice of a final decision or order
of the board, or an order denying a rehearing timely applied for, any person
who was a party of record in the proceedings before the board, including the
control officer of department authorized or designated to enforce air pollution
regulations, may appeal therefrom to the superior court in the county in which
the hearing was conducted and the scope of such review shall be determined
pursuant to A.R.S. 12-910.
   C.   A notice of appeal, designating the ground therefore, and a demand in
writing for a certified transcript of the testimony and exhibits shall be filed
with the court and served on the board. After receipt of the demand,
accompanied by payment of a fee of the current prevailing rate for transcript,
and one dollar for certification thereof, the board shall make and certify the
transcript and file it with the clerk of the court to which the appeal has been
taken within thirty days, unless extended by agreement of the parties or order
of the court.
   D.   When an appeal is taken from an order or decision of the board, such
order or decision shall remain in effect pending final determination of the
matter, unless stayed by the court, on a hearing after notice to the board and
upon a finding by the court that there is probable cause for appeal and that
great or irreparable damage may result to the petitioner warranting a stay.
   E.   An appeal may be taken to the court of appeals from the order of the
superior court as in other civil cases. Proceedings under this section shall be
given precedence and brought to trial ahead of other litigation concerning
private interests and other matters that do not affect public health and
welfare.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
Article VII. Legal Severability
17.04.270   Severability clause.
17.04.270   Severability clause.
   Should any article, section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, item,
clause or phrase of this title be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any
reason, the remainder of this title shall not be affected thereby, with all
remaining portions of this title continuing in full force.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
Article VIII. Interpretations
17.04.280   Format.
17.04.290   Heading and special type.
17.04.300   Use of number and gender.
17.04.310   Copies.
17.04.320   Effective date.
17.04.330   Adoptions by reference.
17.04.280   Format.
   A.   This title is organized in outline format with divisions, subdivisions,
and numbering and lettering schemes having the meanings indicated below:
      1.   Chapter number (Arabic numerals 17.04 through 17.40, e.g., 17.04
being Chapter.04 of Title 17);
      2.   Article number (Roman numerals I through X, subdividing the
chapter);
      3.   Section number (three-part Arabic numerals further subdividing the
article, with the first two parts numerically identical to the corresponding
chapter number, e.g., 17.04.010 is Section .010 of
Chapter 17.04);
      4.   Subsection letter (single-uppercase letter in alphabetical order,
and called subsection, e.g., A);
      5.   Subdivision number (single-digit Arabic numeral, in numerical order,
and called subdivision, e.g., 1);
      6.   Paragraph letter (single lowercase letter, in alphabetical order,
e.g., a);
      7.   Item number (lowercase roman numerals in parentheses, e.g., (i));
      8.   Clauses or phrases (unnumbered, unlettered);
      9.   No two chapters, articles, or sections have the same number.
   B.   Tables are numbered corresponding to their counterpart section,
subsection or subdivision numbers.
   C.   Figures are numbered corresponding to their counterpart section,
subsection or subdivision numbers.
   D.   Test methods and equipment specifications are numbered corresponding to
their counterpart section numbers, or as specified within the corresponding
section.
   E.   Tables and figures are positioned at the end of each chapter in which
they are first referenced, respectively, in the order in which they are first
referenced.
   F.   Pages are numbered consecutively throughout each chapter.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.290   Heading and special type.
   A.   Chapter, article, section and subsection headings used in this title
are inserted for convenience only and shall not affect the interpretation of
the respective divisions or subdivisions. However, titles or numbers of a
chapter, article, section, subsection, subdivision, table, or figure shall be
used to identify any additional requirement when referenced herein.
   B.   When the word chapter, article, section, or other subdivision is
presented alone within a section, it refers to the particular chapter, article,
section, or other subdivision in which the word appears.
   C.   Brackets [ ] appearing after a heading or definition denote reasonable
similarity of the definition or heading with a corresponding definition or
acronym used in a requirement or regulation adopted by the U.S. Congress or the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. The acronym inside the brackets is
identical to the federal convention. All such devices are inserted for
convenience only and shall not affect the interpretation of any rule in this
title.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.300   Use of number and gender.
   As used in this title, words in the singular shall be deemed to import the
plural, and words in the masculine gender shall be deemed to import the
feminine, and vice versa, as the case may require.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.310   Copies.
   Copies of this title are available for sale to the public, at a charge not
to exceed the actual costs of preparation, reproduction, and publication, in
the office of the clerk of the board of supervisors.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.320   Effective date.
   This code shall become effective immediately upon its adoption, continuing
the predecessor Pima County air pollution control district rules and
regulations of 1971, as amended, and Pima County air pollution control district
ordinance 1972-38, as amended, in full force and effect without interruption.
The foregoing is published in this document known as the Pima County air
quality code, revised.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.330   Adoptions by reference.
   A.   When parts of the Arizona Revised Statutes are adopted by reference,
the abbreviation A.R.S. will be used.
   B.   When parts of the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations are adopted by
reference herein, the word "administrator" as used in parts 60 and 61, Chapter
I, Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations shall mean the control officer of the
Pima County air quality control district, except that the control officer shall
not be empowered to approve alternate or equivalent test methods or alternative
standards/work practices.
   C.   References to the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations refer sequentially
to Title, Code of Federal Regulations, Part, Section and Paragraph; e.g. 40 CFR
52.01(a) means Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 52, Section .01,
Paragraph (a).
   D.   Any adoptions by reference supersede other portions of this title which
may conflict with the adoption by reference.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
Article IX. Definitions and Meanings
17.04.340   Words, phrases, and terms.
17.04.350   Meanings of mathematical symbols.
17.04.360   Chemical symbols and abbreviations.
17.04.370   Scientific units.
17.04.380   Acronyms.
17.04.340   Words, phrases, and terms.
   Words, phrases, and terms used in this title shall have the following
meanings except where any narrative portion specifically indicates otherwise:
   A.   Definitions.
      1.   "Acid mist" means sulfuric acid mist as measured in the Arizona
Testing Manual and 40 CFR 60, Appendix A.
      2.   "Act" or "Clean Air Act" means the Clean Air Act of 1963 (P.L.
88206; 42 United States Code sections 7401 through 7671) as amended by the
Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 (P.L. 101549).
      3.   "Activity" or "activities" means any land stripping, earthmoving,
trenching, road construction, blasting (except blasting associated with an
individual source permit issued for mining), and demolition or renovation of
manmade facilities.
      4.   "Actual emissions" means the actual rate of emissions of an air
pollutant from an emissions unit, as determined in accordance with paragraphs a
through c.
         a.   In general, actual emissions as of a particular date shall equal
the average rate, in tons per year, at which the unit actually emitted the
pollutant during a two-year period that precedes the particular date and which
is representative of normal source operation. The control officer may allow the
use of a different time period upon a demonstration that it is more
representative of normal source operation. Actual emissions shall be calculated
using the unit's actual operating hours, production rates, and types of
materials processed, stored or combusted during the selected time period.
         b.   If there is inadequate information to determine actual historic
emissions (e.g., the source has only been operating for six months), the
control officer may presume that source-specific allowable emissions for the
unit are equivalent to the actual emissions of the unit.
         c.   For any emissions unit at a Class I source, other than an
electric utility steam generating unit in subsection (4)(e), that has not begun
normal operations on the particular date, actual emissions shall equal the
unit's potential to emit on that date.
         d.   For any emissions unit at a Class II source that has not begun
normal operations on the particular date, actual emissions shall be based on
applicable control requirements and projected conditions of operation.
         e.   For an electric utility steam generating unit (other than a new
unit or the replacement of an existing unit) actual emissions of the unit
following the physical or operational change shall equal the representative
actual annual emissions of the unit. If the source owner or operator maintains
and submits to the control officer, on an annual basis for a period of five
years from the date the unit resumes regular operations, information
demonstrating that the physical or operational change did not result in an
emissions increase. A longer period, not to exceed ten years, may be required
by the control officer if the control officer determines the longer period to
be more representative of normal source post-change operations.
      5.   "ADEQ" means the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality.
      6.   "ADHS" means the Arizona Department of Health Services.
      7.   "Administrator" means the administrator of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
      8.   "Adverse effects to human health" means those effects that result in
or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in
serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness, including adverse
effects that are known to be or may reasonably be anticipated to be caused by
substances that are acutely toxic, chronically toxic, carcinogenic, mutagenic,
teratogenic, neurotoxic or causative of reproductive dysfunction.
      9.   "Adverse environmental effect" means any significant and widespread
adverse effect which may reasonably be anticipated on wildlife, aquatic life,
or other natural resources, including adverse impacts on populations of
endangered or threatened species or significant degradation of environmental
quality over broad areas.
      10.   "Adverse impact on visibility" means visibility impairment that
interferes with the management, protection, preservation, or enjoyment of the
visitor's visual experience of a Class I area, as determined according to
Section
17.16.630.
      11.   "Affected facility" means, with reference to a stationary source,
any apparatus to which a standard is applicable.
      12.   "Affected source" means a source that includes one or more units
which are subject to emission reduction requirements or limitations under Title
IV of the Act (Acid Deposition Control).
      13.   "Affected state" means any state whose air quality may be affected
by a source applying for a permit, permit revision or permit renewal, and that
is contiguous to Arizona; or that is within fifty miles of the permitted
source.
      14.   "Affected unit" shall have the meaning given to it in the
regulations promulgated under Title IV of the Act (Acid Deposition Control).
      15.   "Afterburner" means an incinerator installed in the secondary
combustion chamber or stack for the purpose of incinerating smoke, fumes,
gases, unburned carbon, and other combustible material not consumed during
primary combustion.
      16.   "Air contaminant" means smoke, vapors, charred paper, dust, soot,
grime, carbon, fumes, gases, sulfuric acid mist aerosols, aerosol droplets,
odors, particulate matter, windborne matter, radioactive materials, or noxious
chemicals, or any other material in the outdoor atmosphere.
      17.   "Air curtain destructor" means an incineration device designed and
used to secure, by means of a fan-generated air curtain, controlled combustion
of only wood waste and slash materials in an earthen trench or refractory-lined
pit or bin.
      18.   "Air pollution" or "air pollutant" means the presence in the
outdoor atmosphere of one or more air contaminants or combination thereof in
sufficient quantities, which either alone or in connection with other
substances, by reason of their concentration and duration are or tend to be
injurious to human, plant, or animal life; or causes damage to property; or
unreasonably interferes with the enjoyment of life or property of a substantial
part of a community, or obscures visibility; or which in any way degrades the
quality of the ambient air below the standards established by the board of
supervisors.
      19.   "Air pollution control equipment" means equipment used to
eliminate, reduce or control the emission of air pollutants into the ambient
air.
      20.   "Air quality control region (AQCR)" means an area so designated by
the administrator pursuant to Section 107 of the Act (Air Quality Control
Regions) and includes the following regions in Arizona:
         a.   Maricopa Intrastate Air Quality Control Region which is comprised
of the county of Maricopa.
         b.   Pima Intrastate Air Quality Control Region which is comprised of
the county of Pima.
         c.   Northern Arizona Intrastate Air Quality Control Region which
encompasses the counties of Apache, Coconino, Navajo and Yavapai.
         d.   Mohave-Yuma Intrastate Air Quality Control Region which
encompasses the counties of La Paz, Mohave and Yuma.
         e.   Central Arizona Intrastate Air Quality Control Region which
encompasses the counties of Gila and Pinal.
         f.   Southeast Arizona Intrastate Air Quality Control Region which
encompasses the counties of Cochise, Graham, Greenlee and Santa Cruz.
      21.   "Allowable emissions" means the emission rate of a stationary
source calculated using both the maximum rated capacity of the source, unless
the source is subject to federally enforceable limits which restrict the
operating rate or hours of operation, and the most stringent of the following:
         a.   The applicable new source performance standards or national
emission standards for hazardous air pollutants, as contained in
Chapter 17.16,
Articles VI or
VII and in 40 CFR 60 and 61;
         b.   The applicable existing source performance standard, as approved
for the SIP and contained in
Chapter 17.16,
Article IV; or
         c.   The emissions rate specified in any federally promulgated rule or
federally enforceable permit conditions applicable to the state of Arizona.
      22.   "Alternative method" means any method of sampling and analyzing for
an air pollutant that is not a reference or equivalent method but which has
been demonstrated to produce results adequate for the control officer's
determination of compliance in accordance with Section
17.11.160(D).
      23.   "Ambient air" means that portion of the atmosphere external to
buildings to which the general public has access.
      24.   "Annual fee" means a fee paid yearly based on the average cost of
service including all reasonable direct and indirect costs required to
administer the program covering administrative and inspection activities.
      25.   "Applicable implementation plan" means those provisions of the
state implementation plan approved by the administrator or a federal
implementation plan promulgated in accordance with Title I of the Act (Air
Pollution Prevention and Control).
      26.   "Applicable requirement" means any of the following:
         a.   Any federal applicable requirement.
         b.   Any other requirement established pursuant to this title or
A.R.S. Title 49, Chapter 3.
      27.   "Approved" means approved "by the control officer". Any word
implying acceptance, reasoning, or judgment means "by the control officer".
      28.   "AQCD" means the Pima County Air Quality Control District,
operating within the Pima County Department of Environmental Quality (PDEQ).
      29.   "Architectural coating" means a coating used commercially or
industrially for residential, commercial or industrial buildings and their
appurtenances; structural steel; and other fabrications such as storage tanks,
bridges, beams and girders.
      30.   "Area source" means those sources that emit less than 10 tons
annually of a single hazardous air pollutant or less than 25 tons annually of a
combination of hazardous air pollutants.
      31.   "A.R.S." means Arizona Revised Statutes, with standard references
in this title by title and section, so that A.R.S. § 49-101 means Section 101
of Title 49 of the Arizona Revised Statutes.
      32.   "Arizona Testing Manual (ATM)" means the Arizona Testing Manual for
Air Pollutant Emissions.
      33.   "Asphalt concrete plant" means any facility used to manufacture
asphalt concrete by heating and drying aggregate and mixing with asphalt
cements. This is limited to facilities, including drum dryer plants that
introduce asphalt into the dryer, which employ two or more of the following
processes:
         a.   A dryer.
         b.   Systems for screening, handling, storing, and weighing hot
aggregate.
         c.   Systems for loading, transferring, and storing mineral filler.
         d.   Systems for mixing asphalt concrete.
         e.   The loading, transferring, and storage systems associated with
emission control systems.
      34.   "ASTM" means the American Society for Testing and Materials.
      35.   "Attainment area" means an area so designated by the administrator
acting pursuant to Section 107 of the Act (Air Quality Control Regions) as
having ambient air pollutant concentration equal to or less than national
primary or secondary ambient air quality standards for a particular pollutant
or pollutants.
      36.   "Begin actual construction" means, in general, initiation of
physical onsite construction activities on an emissions unit which are of a
permanent nature. Such activities include installation of building supports and
foundations, laying of underground pipework, and construction of permanent
storage structures. With respect to a change in method of operation this term
refers to those onsite activities, other than preparatory activities, which
mark the initiation of the change.
      37.   "Best available control technology (BACT)" means an emission
limitation, including a visible emissions standard, based on the maximum degree
of reduction for each regulated air pollutant which would be emitted from any
proposed major stationary source or major modification which the control
officer on a case-by-case basis, taking into account energy, environmental and
economic impact and other costs, determines to be achievable for such source or
modification through application of production processes or available methods,
systems, and techniques, including fuel cleaning or treatment or innovative
fuel combination techniques for control of such pollutant. In no event shall
application of best available control technology result in emissions of any
pollutant which would exceed the emissions allowed by any applicable standard
under 40 CFR parts 60 and 61. If the control officer determines that
technological or economic limitations on the application of measurement
methodology to a particular emissions unit would make the imposition of an
emissions standard infeasible, a design, equipment, work practice, operational
standard or combination thereof may be prescribed instead to satisfy the
requirement for the application of best available control technology. Such
standard shall, to the degree possible, set forth the emissions reduction
achievable by implementation of such design, equipment, work practice or
operation, and shall provide for compliance by means which achieve equivalent
results.
      38.   "Billable permit action" means the issuance or denial of a new
permit, permit revision, permit transfer, costs associated with public
participation under Section
17.12.190 or Section
17.13.210 or the renewal of a permit.
      39.   "Black liquor" means waste liquor from the brown stock washer and
spent cooking liquor that have been concentrated in the multiple-effect
evaporator system.
      40.   "BTU" means British thermal unit, which is the quantity of heat
required to raise the temperature of one pound of water one degree Fahrenheit.
      41.   "Building", "structure", "facility" or "installation" means all of
the pollutant-emitting activities which belong to the same industrial grouping,
are located on one or more contiguous or adjacent properties, and are under the
control of the same person or persons under common control except the
activities of any vessel. Pollutant-emitting activities shall be considered as
part of the same industrial grouping if they belong to the same major group
which has the same two-digit code, as described in the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, 1972, as amended by the 1987 supplement.
      42.   "Calcine" means the solid materials produced by a lime plant.
      43.   "Capacity factor" means the ratio of the average load on a machine
or equipment for the period of time considered to the capacity rating of the
machine or equipment.
      44.   "Categorical sources" means the following classes of sources:
         a.   Coal cleaning plants with thermal dryers;
         b.   Kraft pulp mills;
         c.   Portland cement plants;
         d.   Primary zinc smelters;
         e.   Iron and steel mills;
         f.   Primary aluminum ore reduction plants;
         g.   Primary copper smelters;
         h.   Municipal incinerators capable of charging more than fifty tons
of refuse per day;
         i.   Hydrofluoric, sulfuric, or nitric acid plants;
         j.   Petroleum refineries;
         k.   Lime plants;
         l.   Phosphate rock processing plants;
         m.   Coke oven batteries;
         n.   Sulfur recovery plants;
         o.   Carbon black plants using the furnace process;
         p.   Primary lead smelters;
         q.   Fuel conversion plants;
         r.   Sintering plants;
         s.   Secondary metal production plants;
         t.   Chemical process plants;
         u.   Fossil-fuel boilers, or combinations thereof, totaling more than
two hundred fifty million BTU per hour heat input;
         v.   Petroleum storage and transfer units with a total storage
capacity more than three hundred thousand barrels;
         w.   Taconite preprocessing plants;
         x.   Glass fiber processing plants;
         y.   Charcoal production plants;
         z.   Fossil fuel-fired steam electric plants and combined cycle gas
turbines of more than two hundred fifty million BTU per hour heat input.
      45.   "Cause" or "permit" (used as verbs) means to effect by action or
participation, or by command, authority, or force; or allow, make possible, or
consent to.
      46.   "CEM" means a continuous emissions monitoring system or continuous
monitoring system that is the total equipment required under the emission
monitoring provisions in this title, used to sample and, if applicable, to
condition, to analyze, and to provide, on a continuous basis, a permanent
record of emission or process parameters.
      47.   "CFR" means the Code of Federal Regulations, with standard
references in this title by title and part, so that "40 CFR 51" means "Title 40
of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 51."
      48.   "Charge" means the addition of metal bearing materials, scrap, or
fluxes to a furnace, converter or refining vessel.
      49.   "Coal" means all solid fossil fuels classified as anthracite,
bituminous, subbituminous, or lignite by ASTM D38891, (Classification of Coals
by Rank).
         a.   "Clean Coal Technology" means any technology, including
technologies applied at the precombustion, combustion, or post combustion
stage, at a new or existing facility that will achieve significant reductions
in air emissions of sulfur dioxide or oxides of nitrogen associated with the
utilization of coal in the generation of electricity, or process steam, that
was not in widespread use as of November 15, 1990.
         b.   "Clean coal technology demonstration project" means a project
using funds appropriated under the heading "Department of Energy-Clean Coal
Technology," up to a total amount of two billion five hundred million dollars
for commercial demonstration of clean coal technology or similar projects
funded through appropriations from the Environmental Protection Agency. The
federal contribution for a qualifying project shall be at least twenty percent
of the total cost of the demonstration project.
         c.   "Temporary clean coal technology demonstration project" means a
clean coal technology demonstration project operated for five years or less,
and that complies with the SIP and other requirements necessary to attain and
maintain the national ambient air quality standards during the project and
after the project is terminated.
      50.   "Combustion" means the burning of matter.
      51.   "Commence" means, as applied to construction of a source, or a
major modification as defined in this section, that the owner or operator has
all necessary preconstruction approvals or permits required and either has:
         a.   Begun, or caused to begin, a continuous program of actual onsite
construction of the source to be completed within a reasonable time; or
         b.   Entered into binding agreements or contractual obligations, which
cannot be canceled or modified without substantial loss to the owner or
operator, to undertake a program of actual construction of the source to be
completed within a reasonable time.
      52.   "Complete" means, in reference to an application for a permit or
permit revision, that the application contains all the information necessary
for processing the application. Designating an application complete for
purposes of permit processing does not preclude the control officer from
requesting or accepting any additional information.
      53.   "Concentrate" means enriched copper ore recovered from the froth
flotation process.
      54.   "Concentrate dryer" means any facility in which a copper sulfide
ore concentrate charge is heated in the presence of air to eliminate a portion
of the moisture from the charge, provided less than five percent of the sulfur
contained in the charge is eliminated in the facility.
      55.   "Concentrate roaster" means any facility in which a copper sulfide
ore concentrate is heated in the presence of air to eliminate five percent or
more of the sulfur contained in the charge.
      56.   "Condensate stripper system" means a column, and associated
condensers, used to strip, with air or steam, total reduced sulfur compounds
from condensate streams of various processes within a kraft pulp mill.
      57.   "Construction" means any physical change or change in the method of
operation, including fabrication, erection, installation, demolition, or
modification of an emissions unit, which would result in a change in actual
emissions.
      58.   "Continuous monitoring system" or "continuous emissions monitoring
(CEM) system" means the total equipment, required under the emission monitoring
provisions in this title, used to sample and, if applicable, to condition, to
analyze, and to provide a permanent record of emission or process parameters.
      59.   "Control" means air pollution control or control of air pollution
emissions.
      60.   "Control device" means the air pollution control equipment used to
remove air contaminants generated by a process source from the effluent gas
stream.
      61.   "Control officer" means the director of Pima County department of
environmental quality who shall serve as the executive head of the Pima County
air quality control district, or one of his authorized agents.
      62.   "Controlled atmosphere incinerator" means one or more refractory-
lined chambers in which complete combustion is promoted by recirculation of
gases by mechanical means.
      63.   "Conventional" or "criteria" air pollutant means any pollutant for
which the administrator has promulgated a primary or secondary national ambient
air quality standard.
      64.   "Converter" means any vessel to which copper matte is charged and
oxidized to copper.
      65.   "County" means Pima County, Arizona.
      66.   "Delivery vessels" means any vehicular mounted container(s) such as
railroad tank cars, tanker trucks, tank trailers or any other mobile container
used to transport gasoline, petroleum or petroleum distillates.
      67.   "Designated representative" shall have the meaning given to it in
Section 402(26) of the Act (Definitions) and the regulations promulgated
thereunder.
      68.   "Director" means the director of the Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality (ADEQ).
      69.   "Discharge" means the release or escape of an effluent from a
source into the atmosphere.
      70.   "Dispersion technique" means any technique that attempts to affect
the concentration of a pollutant in the ambient air by any of the following:
         a.   Using that portion of a stack that exceeds good engineering
practice stack height;
         b.   Varying the rate of emission of a pollutant according to
atmospheric conditions or ambient concentrations of that pollutant; or
         c.   Increasing final exhaust gas plume rise by manipulating source
process parameters, exhaust gas parameters, stack parameters, or combining
exhaust gases from several existing stacks into one stack; or other selective
handling of exhaust gas streams so as to increase the exhaust gas plume rise.
This shall not include any of the following:
            i.   The reheating of a gas stream, following use of a pollution
control system, for the purpose of returning the gas to the temperature at
which it was originally discharged from the facility generating the gas stream;
            ii.   The merging of exhaust gas streams under any of the following
conditions:
               (1)   The source owner or operator demonstrates that the
facility was originally designed and constructed with such merged gas streams;
               (2)   The merging is part of a change in operation at the
facility that includes the installation of pollution controls and is
accompanied by a net reduction in the allowable emissions of a pollutant,
applying only to the emission limitation for that pollutant; or
            iii.   Smoke management in agricultural or silvicultural prescribed
burning programs;
            iv.   Episodic restrictions on residential wood burning and open
burning;
            v.   Techniques that increase final exhaust gas plume rise if the
resulting allowable emissions of sulfur dioxide from the facility do not exceed
5,000 tons per year.
      71.   "Dust" or "dust emissions" means finely divided solid particulate
matter occurring naturally or created by mechanical processing, handling or
storage of materials in the solid state.
      72.   "Dust suppressant" means a chemical compound or mixture of chemical
compounds added with or without water to a dust source for purposes of
preventing air entrainment.
      73.   "Electric utility steam generating unit" means any steam electric
generating unit that is constructed for the purpose of supplying more than one-
third of its potential electric output capacity and more than twenty-five MW
electrical output to any utility power distribution system for sale. Any steam
supplied to a steam distribution system for the purpose of providing steam to a
steam-electric generator that would produce electrical energy for sale is also
considered in determining the electrical energy output capacity of the affected
facility.
      74.   "Effluent" means any air contaminant that is emitted and
subsequently escapes into the atmosphere.
      75.   "Emergency" means any situation arising from sudden and reasonably
unforeseeable events beyond the control of the source, including acts of God,
which situation requires immediate corrective action to restore normal
operation, and that causes the source to exceed a technology-based emission
limitation under the permit, due to unavoidable increases in emissions
attributable to the emergency. An emergency shall not include noncompliance to
the extent caused by improperly designed equipment, lack of preventive
maintenance, careless or improper operation, or operator error.
      76.   "Emission" means an air contaminant or gas stream, or the act of
discharging an air contaminant or a gas stream, visible or invisible.
      77.   "Emissions allowable under the permit" means a permit term or
condition determined at issuance to be required by an applicable requirement
that establishes an emissions limit (including a work practice standard) or an
emissions cap that the source has assumed to avoid an applicable requirement to
which the source would otherwise be subject.
      78.   "Emissions unit" means any part of a stationary source that emits
or would have the potential to emit any regulated air pollutant.
      79.   "Emission standard" or "emission limitation" means a requirement
established by the state, a local government, or the administrator which limits
the quantity, rate, or concentration of emissions of air pollutants on a
continuous basis, including any requirements which limit the level of opacity,
prescribe equipment, set fuel specifications, or prescribe operation or
maintenance procedures for a source to assure continuous emission reduction.
      80.   "Enforceable" means all limitations and conditions that are
enforceable by the administrator.
      81.   "Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)" means the United States
Environmental Protection Agency as established by 40 CFR 1.1, et seq.
      82.   "Equivalent method" means any method of sampling and analyzing for
an air pollutant that has been demonstrated pursuant to Section
17.11.160 (Test Methods and Procedures) to have a consistent and quantitatively
known relationship to the reference method, under specified conditions.
      83.   "Excess emissions" or "emissions in excess of an emission
limitation" means emissions of an air pollutant in excess of an emission
standard as measured by the compliance test method applicable to such emission
standard.
      84.   "Existing source" means either:
         a.   A source in operation prior to the effective date of this title,
or a source on which the construction or modification has commenced and for
which the control officer has granted a permit prior to the effective date of
this title; or
         b.   For NSPS purposes, "existing source" may also mean any source
which does not have an applicable new source performance standard under
Chapter 17.16,
Article VI.
      85.   "Federal applicable requirement" means any of the following as they
apply to emissions units covered by a Class I or Class II permit (including
requirements that have been promulgated or approved by EPA through rule making
at the time of issuance but have future-effective compliance dates):
         a.   Any standard or other requirement provided for in the applicable
implementation plan approved or promulgated by EPA through rule making under
Title I of the Act (Air Pollution Prevention and Control) that implements the
relevant requirements of the Act, including any revisions to that plan
promulgated in 40 CFR 52;
         b.   Any term or condition of any preconstruction permits issued
pursuant to regulations approved or promulgated through rule making under Title
I, including parts C or D, of the Act (Prevention of Significant Deterioration
of Air Quality and Plan Requirements for Nonattainment Areas);
         c.   Any standard or other requirement under Section 111 of the Act
(Standards of Performance for New Stationary Sources), including Section 111
(d);
         d.   Any standard or other requirement under Section 112 of the Act
(Hazardous Air Pollutants), including any requirement concerning accident
prevention under Section 112(r)(7) of the Act;
         e.   Any standard or other requirement of the acid rain program under
Title IV of the Act (Acid Deposition Control) or the regulations promulgated
thereunder and incorporated pursuant to Section
17.12.070;
         f.   Any requirements established pursuant to Section 504(b) or
Section 114(a)(3) of the Act (Inspections, Monitoring and Entry);
         g.   Any standard or other requirement governing solid waste
incineration, under Section 129 of the Act (Solid Waste Combustion);
         h.   Any standard or other requirement for consumer and commercial
products, under Section 183(e) of the Act (Federal Ozone Measures);
         i.   Any standard or other requirement for tank vessels, under Section
183(f) of the Act (Federal Ozone Measures);
         j.   Any standard or other requirement of the program to control air
pollution from outer continental shelf sources, under Section 328 of the Act
(Air Pollution from Outer Continental Shelf Activities);
         k.   Any standard or other requirement of the regulations promulgated
to protect stratospheric ozone under Title VI of the Act (Stratospheric Ozone
Production), unless the administrator has determined that such requirements
need not be contained in a Title V permit; and
         l.   Any national ambient air quality standard or increment or
visibility requirement under part C of Title I of the Act (Prevention of
Significant Deterioration of Air Quality), but only as it would apply to
temporary sources permitted pursuant to Section 504(e) of the Act (Permit
Requirements and Conditions).
      86.   "Federal land manager" means, with respect to any lands in the
United States, the Secretary of the department with authority over such lands.
      87.   "Federally enforceable" means:
         a.   The requirements of the New Source Performance Standards and
National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants contained in
Articles VI and
VII of
Chapter 17.16.
         b.   The requirements of such other state or county rules or
regulations approved by the administrator, including the requirements of
approved state and county operating and new source review permit programs that
have been approved by the administrator.
         c.   The requirements of any applicable implementation plan.
         d.   Emissions limitations, controls, and other requirements, and any
associated monitoring, recordkeeping and reporting requirements, which are
entered into voluntarily by a source pursuant to Section
17.11.190.
      88.   "Federally listed hazardous air pollutant" means any air pollutant
listed pursuant to Section 112(b) of the Act (Hazardous Air Pollutants) and
adopted pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-426.03, subsection A and not deleted pursuant
to that subsection.
      89.   "Final permit" means the version of a permit issued by the control
officer after completion of all review required by this title.
      90.   "Fixed capital cost" means the capital needed to provide all the
depreciable components.
      91.   "Floating roof" means a storage-vessel cover consisting of a
pontoon, single-deck, double-deck, or internal floating solid material which
rests upon the surface of and is supported by the liquid contents, and is
equipped with a seal to close the space between the edge of the solid material
and tank wall.
      92.   "Fossil fuel-fired steam generator" means a furnace or boiler used
in the process of burning fossil fuel for the primary purpose of producing
steam by heat transfer.
      93.   "Fuel" means any material that is burned for the purpose of
producing energy.
      94.   "Fuel burning equipment" means any machine, equipment, incinerator,
device or other article, except stationary rotating machinery, in which
combustion takes place.
      95.   "Fuel oil" means Number 2 through Number 6 fuel oils as specified
in ASTM D-396-90a (Specification for Fuel Oils), gas turbine fuel oils Numbers
2-GT through 4-GT as specified in ASTM D-2880-90a (Specification for Gas
Turbine Fuel Oils), or diesel fuel oils Numbers 2-D and 4-D as specified in
ASTM D-975-90a (Specification for Diesel Fuel Oils).
      96.   "Fugitive emissions" means those emissions that could not
reasonably pass through a stack, chimney, vent or other functionally equivalent
opening.
      97.   "Fume" means solid particulate matter resulting from the
condensation and subsequent solidification of vapors of melted solid materials.
      98.   "Fume incinerator" means a device similar to an afterburner
installed for the purpose of incinerating fumes, gases and other finely divided
combustible particulate matter not previously burned.
      99.   "General permit" means a permit issued by ADEQ pursuant to A.A.C.
Title 18, Chapter 2, Article 5 and administered, inspected and enforced by the
department pursuant to this title.
      100.   "Good engineering practice (GEP) stack height" means a stack
height meeting the requirements described in Section
17.11.150.
      101.   "Haul road" means a road constructed for the principle purpose of
hauling construction materials, or to provide access to one or more
construction sites, mining activities, or industrial operations.
      102.   "Hazardous air pollutant (HAP)" means any federally listed
hazardous air pollutant and any air pollutant that the director has designated
as a hazardous air pollutant pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-426.04, subsection A and
has not deleted pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-426.04, subsection C.
      103.   "Hazardous air pollutant reasonably available control technology
(HAPRACT)" means an emissions standard for hazardous air pollutants which the
director, acting pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-426.06, subsection C, or the control
officer, acting pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-480.04, subsection C, determines is
reasonably available for a source. In making the foregoing determination the
director or control officer shall take into consideration the estimated actual
air quality impact of the standard, the cost of complying with the standard,
the demonstrated reliability and widespread use of the technology required to
meet the standard, and any non-air quality health and environmental impacts and
energy requirements. For purposes of this definition, an emissions standard may
be expressed as a numeric emissions limitation or as a design, equipment, work
practice or operational standard.
      104.   "Hazardous waste" means a hazardous waste as defined in 40 CFR
261, or a waste or combination of wastes which because of its quantity,
concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may either:
         a.   Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or
an increase in serious, irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or
         b.   Pose a serious present or potential hazard to human health or the
environment if improperly disposed.
      105.   "Hazardous waste fuel" means hazardous wastes that are burned for
energy recovery in an industrial furnace or boiler that is not regulated as a
hazardous waste incinerator. Hazardous waste fuel includes fuel produced from
hazardous waste by processing, blending, or other treatment.
      106.   "Heat input" means the quantity of heat in terms of BTUs generated
by fuels fed into the fuel burning equipment under conditions of complete
combustion.
      107.   "Herein" when used anywhere in this title, refers to the complete
set of rules and regulations contained in this title.
      108.   "High sulfur oil" means fuel oil containing 0.90 percent or more
by weight of sulfur.
      109.   "High terrain" means any area having an elevation of nine hundred
feet or more above the base of the stack of a source.
      110.   "Incinerator" means any equipment, machine, device, contrivance or
other article, and all appurtenances thereof, used for the combustion of
refuse, salvage materials or any other combustible material except fossil
fuels, for the purpose of reducing the volume of material other than those used
for pollution control.
      111.   "Indian governing body" means the governing body of any tribe,
band, or group of Indians subject to the jurisdiction of the United States and
recognized by the United States as possessing power of self-government.
      112.   "Indian reservation" means any federally recognized reservation
established by treaty, agreement, executive order, or act of Congress.
      113.   "Innovative control technology" means any system of air pollution
control that has not been adequately demonstrated in practice, but would have a
substantial likelihood of achieving greater continuous emissions reduction than
any control system in current practice, or of achieving at least comparable
reductions at lower cost in terms of energy, economics, or non-air quality
environmental impacts.
      114.   "Insignificant activity" means an activity in an emissions unit
that is not otherwise subject to any applicable requirement and which belongs
to one of the following categories:
         a.   Landscaping, building maintenance, or janitorial activities.
         b.   Gasoline storage tanks with capacity of ten thousand gallons or
less.
         c.   Diesel and fuel oil storage tanks with capacity of forty thousand
gallons or less.
         d.   Batch mixers with rated capacity of five cubic feet or less.
         e.   Wet sand and gravel production facilities that obtain material
from subterranean and subaqueous beds, whose production rate is two hundred
tons/hour or less, and whose permanent in-plant roads are paved and cleaned to
control dust. This does not include activities in emissions units which are
used to crush or grind any nonmetallic minerals.
         f.   Hand-held or manually operated equipment used for buffing,
polishing, carving, cutting, drilling, machining, routing, sanding, sawing,
surface grinding, or turning of ceramic art work, precision parts, leather,
metals, plastics, fiberboard, masonry, carbon, glass or wood.
         g.   Powder coating operations.
         h.   Internal combustion (IC) engine-driven compressors, IC engine-
driven electrical generator sets, and IC engine-driven water pumps used only
for emergency replacement or standby service.
         i.   Lab equipment used exclusively for chemical and physical
analyses.
         j.   Any other activity which the control officer determines is not
necessary, because of its emissions due to size or production rate, to be
included in an application in order to determine all applicable requirements
and to calculate any fee under this title.
      115.   "Itemized bill" means a breakdown of the permit processing time
into the categories of pre-application activities (teleconferences, accelerated
processing meetings, permit regulatory discussions, etc.), completeness review,
substantive review, and public involvement activities, and within each
category, a further breakdown by employee name.
      116.   "Kraft pulp mill" means any stationary source which produces pulp
from wood by cooking or digesting wood chips in a water solution of sodium
hydroxide and sodium sulfide at high temperature and pressure. Regeneration of
the cooking chemicals through a recovery process is also considered part of the
kraft pulp mill.
      117.   "Land stripping" or "land stripping activity" means removal of all
or any portion of existing vegetation from parcels of land with equipment,
which plows or scrapes the ground surface.
      118.   "Lead" means elemental lead or alloys in which the predominant
component is lead.
      119.   "Lime hydrator" means a unit used to produce hydrated lime
product.
      120.   "Lime kiln" means a unit used to calcinate lime rock or kraft pulp
mill lime mud that consists primarily of calcium carbonate, into quicklime,
which is calcium oxide.
      121.   "Lime plant" includes any plant, which produces a lime product
from limestone by calcination. Hydration of the lime product is also considered
to be part of the source.
      122.   "Lime product" means any product produced by the calcination of
limestone.
      123.   "Loading facility" means any operation or facility (such as
petroleum storage tank farms, pipeline terminals, bulk plants or loading docks)
where petroleum or petroleum distillates are transferred or loaded into
delivery vessels or other storage facilities for further distribution.
      124.   "Low sulfur oil" means fuel oil containing less than 0.90 percent
by weight of sulfur.
      125.   "Low terrain" means any area other than high terrain.
      126.   "Lowest achievable emission rate (LAER)" means, for any source,
the more stringent rate of emissions based on one of the following:
         a.   The most stringent emissions limitation that is contained in the
SIP of any state for such class or category of stationary source, unless the
owner or operator of the proposed stationary source demonstrates that the
limitations are not achievable; or
         b.   The most stringent emissions limitation that is achieved in
practice by the class or category of stationary source. This limitation, when
applied to a modification, means the lowest achievable emissions rate for the
new or modified emissions units within the stationary source. In no event shall
the application of this term permit a proposed new or modified stationary
source to emit any pollutant in excess of the amount allowable under applicable
standards of performance in
Chapter 17.16,
Articles VI and
VII.
      127.   "Major modification" means any physical change or change in the
method of operation of a major source that would result in a significant net
emissions increase of any regulated air pollutant.
         a.   Any net emissions increase that is significant for volatile
organic compounds is considered significant for ozone.
         b.   Any net emissions increase that is significant for oxides of
nitrogen is considered significant for ozone for ozone nonattainment areas
classified as marginal, moderate, serious or severe.
         c.   For the purposes of this definition the following are not a
physical change or change in the method of operation:
            i.   Routine maintenance, repair and replacement;
            ii.   Use of an alternative fuel or raw material by reason of an
order under Sections 2(a) and (b) of the Energy Supply and Environmental
Coordination Act of 1974, 15 U.S.C. Section 792, or by reason of a natural gas
curtailment plan under the Federal Power Act, 16 U.S.C. Sections 792—825r;
            iii.   Use of an alternative fuel by reason of an order or rule
under Section 125 of the Act (Measures to Prevent Economic Disruption or
Unemployment);
            iv.   Use of an alternative fuel at a steam generating unit to the
extent that the fuel is generated from municipal solid waste;
            v.   Use of an alternative fuel or raw material by a stationary
source that either:
               (1)   The source was capable of accommodating before December
12, 1976, unless the change would be prohibited under any federally enforceable
permit condition established after December 12, 1976, under 40 CFR 52.21, or
under the permitting provisions of this title; or
               (2)   The source is approved to use under any permit issued
under 40 CFR 52.21, or under the permitting provisions of this title;
            vi.   An increase in the hours of operation or in the production
rate, unless the change would be prohibited under any federally enforceable
permit condition established after December 12, 1976, under 40 CFR 52.21, or
under the permitting provisions of this title;
            vii.   Any change in ownership at a stationary source;
            viii.   The addition, replacement, or use of a pollution control
project at an existing electric utility steam generating unit, unless the
director determines that the addition, replacement, or use renders the unit
less environmentally beneficial, or except:
               (1)   When the director has reason to believe that the pollution
control project would result in a significant net increase in representative
actual annual emissions of any criteria pollutant over levels used for that
source in the most recent Title I air quality impact analysis in the area, if
any, and
               (2)   The director determines that the increase will cause or
contribute to a violation of any national ambient air quality standard or PSD
increment, or visibility limitation;
            ix.   The installation, operation, cessation, or removal of a
temporary clean coal technology demonstration project, if the project complies
with:
               (1)   The SIP and
               (2)   Other requirements necessary to attain and maintain the
national ambient air quality standards during the project and after it is
terminated;
            x.   For electric utility steam generating units located in
attainment and unclassifiable areas only, the installation or operation of a
permanent clean coal technology demonstration project that constitutes
repowering, if the project does not result in an increase in the potential to
emit any regulated pollutant emitted by the unit. This exemption applies on a
pollutant-by-pollutant basis; and
            xi.   For electric utility steam generating units located in
attainment and unclassifiable areas only, the reactivation of a very clean
coal-fired electric utility steam generating unit.
      128.   "Major source" means:
         a.   A major source as defined in AAC R18-2-401, as amended on
September 22, 1999 (and no future amendments) and which is on file with the
office of the secretary of state.
         b.   A major source under Section 112 of the Act:
            i.   For pollutants other than radionuclides, any stationary source
that emits or has the potential to emit, in the aggregate, including fugitive
emissions, 10 tons per year (tpy) or more of any hazardous air pollutant which
has been listed pursuant to Section 112(b) of the Act, 25 tpy or more of any
combination of such hazardous air pollutants, or such lesser quantity as
described in Article 11 of AAC Chapter 2. Notwithstanding the preceding
sentence, emissions from any oil or gas exploration or production well (with
its associated equipment) and emissions from any pipeline compressor or pump
station shall not be aggregated with emissions from other similar units,
whether or not such units are in a contiguous area or under common control, to
determine whether such units or stations are major sources; or
            ii.   For radionuclides, "major source" shall have the meaning
specified by the administrator by rule.
         c.   A major stationary source, as defined in Section 302 of the Act,
that directly emits or has the potential to emit, 100 tpy or more of any air
pollutant, including any major source of fugitive emissions of such pollutant.
The fugitive emissions of a stationary source shall not be considered in
determining whether it is a major stationary source for the purposes of Section
302(j) of the Act, unless the source belongs to one of the following categories
of stationary source:
            i.   Coal cleaning plants (with thermal dryers);
            ii.   Kraft pulp mills;
            iii.   Portland cement plants;
            iv.   Primary zinc smelters;
            v.   Iron and steel mills;
            vi.   Primary aluminum ore reduction plants;
            vii.   Primary copper smelters;
            viii.   Municipal incinerators capable of charging more than fifty
tons of refuse per day;
            ix.   Hydrofluoric, sulfuric, or nitric acid plants;
            x.   Petroleum refineries;
            xi.   Lime plants;
            xii.   Phosphate rock processing plants;
            xiii.   Coke oven batteries;
            xiv.   Sulfur recovery plants;
            xv.   Carbon black plants (furnace process);
            xvi.   Primary lead smelters;
            xvii.   Fuel conversion plants;
            xviii.   Sintering plants;
            xix.   Secondary metal production plants;
            xx.   Chemical process plants;
            xxi.   Fossil-fuel boilers or combinations thereof totaling more
than two hundred fifty million British thermal units per hour heat input;
            xxii.   Petroleum storage and transfer units with a total storage
capacity more than three hundred thousand barrels;
            xxiii.   Taconite ore processing plants;
            xxiv.   Glass fiber processing plants;
            xxv.   Charcoal production plants;
            xxvi.   Fossil fuel-fired steam electric plants of more than two
hundred fifty million British thermal units per hour heat input.
            xxvii.   Any other stationary source category which as of August 7,
1980, is being regulated under Section 111 or 112 of the Act.
      129.   "Major source threshold" means the lowest applicable emissions
rate for a pollutant that would cause the source to be a major source at the
particular time and location, under Section
17.04.340(A)(128).
      130.   "Malfunction" means any sudden and unavoidable failure of air
pollution control equipment, process equipment or a process to operate in a
normal manner, but does not include failures that are caused by poor
maintenance, careless operations or any other upset condition or equipment
breakdown that could have been prevented by the exercise of reasonable care.
      131.   "Material permit condition" shall mean a condition that satisfies
all of the following:
         a.   The condition is in a permit or permit revision issued by the
control officer after the effective date of this section.
         b.   The condition is identified within the permit as a material
permit condition.
         c.   The condition is one of the following:
            i.   An enforceable emission standard imposed to avoid
classification as a major modification or major source or to avoid triggering
any other applicable requirement.
            ii.   A requirement to install, operate or maintain a maximum
achievable control technology or hazardous air pollutant reasonably available
control technology required pursuant to the requirements of A.R.S. § 49-426.06.
            iii.   A requirement for the installation or certification of a
monitoring device.
            iv.   A requirement for the installation of air pollution control
equipment.
            v.   A requirement for the operation of air pollution control
equipment.
            vi.   Any opacity standard required by Section 111 (Standards of
Performance for New Stationary Sources) or Title I, Part C or D (Air Pollution
Prevention and Control) of the Act.
         d.   Violation of the condition is not covered by subsections A
through F, or H through J of A.R.S. § 49-464 or subsections A through F, or H
through J of A.R.S. § 49-514.
      132.   "Matte" means a metallic sulfide made by smelting copper sulfide
ore concentrate or the roasted product of copper sulfide ores.
      133.   "Maximum achievable control technology (MACT)" means an emission
standard that requires the maximum degree of reduction in emissions of the
hazardous air pollutants subject to this title, including a prohibition on such
emissions where achievable, that the control officer, after considering the
cost of achieving such emission reduction and any nonair quality health and
environmental impacts and energy requirements, determines to be achievable by a
source to which such standard applies, through application of measures,
processes, methods, systems or techniques including measures which:
         a.   reduce the volume of, or eliminate emissions of, such pollutants
through process changes, substitution of materials or other modifications;
         b.   enclose systems or processes to eliminate emissions;
         c.   collect, capture or treat such pollutants when released from a
process, stack, storage or fugitive emissions point;
         d.   are design, equipment, work practice, or operational standards,
including requirements for operator training or certification; or
         e.   are a combination of the above.
      134.   "Minor source" means any stationary or portable source that is not
a major source.
      135.   "Minor source baseline area" means the air quality control region
in which the source is located.
      136.   "Miscellaneous metal parts and products" for purposes of
industrial coating include all of the following:
         a.   Large farm machinery, such as harvesting, fertilizing and
planting machines, tractors, and combines.
         b.   Small farm machinery, such as lawn and garden tractors, lawn
mowers, and rototillers.
         c.   Small appliances, such as fans, mixers, blenders, crock pots,
dehumidifiers, and vacuum cleaners.
         d.   Commercial machinery, such as office equipment, computers and
auxiliary equipment, typewriters, calculators, and vending machines.
         e.   Industrial machinery, such as pumps, compressors, conveyor
components, fans, blowers, and transformers.
         f.   Fabricated metal products, such as metal covered doors and
frames.
         g.   Any other industrial category which coats metal parts or products
under the code in the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1987" of
Major Group 33 (primary metal industries), Major Group 34 (fabricated metal
products), Major Group 35 (nonelectric machinery), Major Group 36 (electrical
machinery), Major Group 37 (transportation equipment), Major Group 38
(miscellaneous instruments), and Major Group 39 (miscellaneous manufacturing
industries), except all of the following:
            i.   Automobiles and light duty trucks.
            ii.   Metal cans.
            iii.   Flat metal sheets and strips in the form of rolls or coils.
            iv.   Magnet wire for use in electrical machinery.
            v.   Metal furniture.
            vi.   Large appliances.
            vii.   Exterior of airplanes.
            viii.   Automobile refinishing.
            ix.   Customized top coating of automobiles and trucks, if
production is less than 35 vehicles per day.
            x.   Exterior of marine vessels.
      137.   "Mobile source" means any combustion engine, device, machine or
equipment that operates during transport and that emits or generates air
contaminants whether in motion or at rest.
      138.   "Modification" or "modify" means a physical change in or change in
the method of operation of a source which increases the actual emissions of any
regulated air pollutant emitted by such source by more than any relevant de
minimis amount or which results in the emission of any regulated air pollutant
not previously emitted by more than such de minimis amount.
      139.   "Monitoring device" means the total equipment, required under the
applicable provisions of this title, used to measure and record, if applicable,
process parameters.
      140.   "Motor vehicle" means any self-propelled vehicle designed for
transporting persons or property on public highways.
      141.   "Multiple chamber incinerator" means three or more refractory-
lined combustion chambers in series, physically separated by refractory walls
and interconnected by gas passage ports or ducts.
      142.   "Multiple-effect evaporator system" means the multiple-effect
evaporators and associated condenser and hotwell used to concentrate the spent
cooking liquid that is separated from the pulp.
      143.   "NAAQS" means national ambient air quality standards.
      144.   "National ambient air quality standard" means the ambient air
pollutant concentration limits established by the administrator pursuant to 42
United States Code Section 7409.
      145.   "NAICS" means the five- or six-digit North American Industry
Classification System-United States, 1997, number for industries used by the
U.S. Department of Commerce.
      146.   "Necessary preconstruction approvals or permits" means those
permits or approvals required under the Act and those air quality control laws
and rules which are part of the SIP.
      147.   "NESHAP" means the National Emission Standard for Hazardous Air
Pollutants, according to 40 CFR 61.
      148.   "Net emissions increase" means:
         a.   The amount by which the sum of subparagraphs i and ii exceeds
zero:
            i.   Any increase in actual emissions from a particular physical
change or change in the method of operation at a stationary source; and
            ii.   Any other increases and decreases in actual emissions at the
source that are contemporaneous with the particular change and are otherwise
creditable.
         b.   An increase or decrease in actual emissions is contemporaneous
with the increase from the particular change only if it occurs between:
            i.   The date five years before construction on the particular
change commences; and
            ii.   The date that the increase from the particular change occurs.
         c.   An increase or decrease in actual emissions is creditable only if
the control officer has not relied on it in issuing an permit, which is in
effect when the increase in actual emissions from the particular change occurs.
In addition, in nonattainment areas, a decrease in actual emissions shall be
considered in determining net emissions increase due to modifications only if
the county has not relied on it in demonstrating attainment or reasonable
further progress.
         d.   An increase or decrease in actual emissions of sulfur dioxide,
nitrogen oxides, or particulate matter that occurs before the applicable
baseline date, as described in Section
17.08.150, is creditable only if it is required to be considered in calculating
the amount of maximum allowable increases remaining available.
         e.   An increase in actual emissions is creditable only to the extent
that the new level of actual emissions exceeds the old level.
         f.   A decrease in actual emissions is creditable only to the extent
that:
            i.   The old level of actual emissions or the old level of
allowable emissions, whichever is lower, exceeds the new level of actual
emissions;
            ii.   It is federally enforceable at and after the time that actual
construction on the particular change begins;
            iii.   It has approximately the same qualitative significance for
public health and welfare as that attributed to the increase from the
particular change; and
            iv.   The emissions unit was actually operated and emitted the
specific pollutant.
         g.   An increase that results from a physical change at a source
occurs when the emissions unit on which construction occurred becomes
operational and begins to emit a particular pollutant. Any replacement unit
that requires shakedown becomes operational only after a reasonable shakedown
period, not to exceed one hundred eighty days.
      149.   "Neutral sulfite semi-chemical pulping" means any operation in
which pulp is produced from wood by cooking or digesting wood chips in a
solution of sodium sulfite and sodium bicarbonate, followed by mechanical
defibrating or grinding.
      150.   "New source" means any source that is not an existing source.
      151.   "Nitric acid plant" means any facility producing nitric acid
thirty to seventy percent in strength by either the pressure or atmospheric
pressure process.
      152.   "Nitrogen oxides" means all oxides of nitrogen except nitrous
oxide, as measured by test methods set forth in the appendices to 40 CFR 60.
      153.   "Nonattainment area" means an area so designated by the
administrator acting pursuant to Section 107 of the Act (Air Quality Control
Regions) as exceeding national primary or secondary ambient air standards for a
particular pollutant or pollutants.
      154.   "Nonattainment area plan" means an air pollution control plan
developed in accordance with 42 United States Code Sections 7501 through 7515.
      155.   "Nonpoint source" means a source of air contaminants that lacks an
identifiable plume or emission point.
      156.   "NSPS" means new source performance standards.
      157.   "Opacity" means the degree to which emissions reduce the
transmission of light and obscure the view of an object in the background.
      158.   "Open outdoor fire" or "open burning" means combustion in the
outdoors of any material, during which the products of combustion are not
directed through a flue, chimney, duct, vent, stack, or other restrictive
device designed or installed for the principle purpose of discharging the
effluent to the atmosphere.
      159.   "Operation" means any physical or chemical action resulting in the
change in location, form, physical properties or chemical character of a
material.
      160.   "Owner or operator" means any person who owns, leases, operates,
controls, or supervises an affected facility or a stationary source of which an
affected facility is a part.
      161.   "Particulate matter" means any airborne finely divided solid or
liquid material with an aerodynamic diameter smaller than one hundred
micrometers.
      162.   "Particulate matter emissions" means all finely divided solid or
liquid materials other than uncombined water, emitted to the ambient air as
measured by applicable test methods and procedures described in Section
17.11.160 (Test Methods and Procedures).
      163.   "PDEQ" or "department" means the Pima County department of
environmental quality.
      164.   "Permitting authority" means the department or a county department
or agency that is charged with enforcing a permit program adopted pursuant to
A.R.S. § 49-480, subsection A.
      165.   "Permit processing time" means all time spent by PDEQ staff or
consultants on tasks specifically related to the processing of an application
for the issuance or renewal of a particular permit or permit revision,
including time spent processing an application that is denied.
      166.   "Person" includes any public or private corporation, company,
partnership, firm, trust, association or society of persons, the federal
government and any of its departments or agencies, the state and any of its
agencies, departments or political subdivisions, as well as a natural person.
      167.   "Petroleum liquids" means petroleum, condensate, and any finished
or intermediate products manufactured in a petroleum refinery but does not mean
Number 2 through Number 6 fuel oils as specified in ASTM D-396-90a
(Specification for Fuel Oils), gas turbine fuel oils Numbers 2-GT through 4-GT
as specified in ASTM D-2880-90a (Specification for Gas Turbine Fuel Oils), or
diesel fuel oils Numbers 2-D and 4-D as specified in ASTM D-975-90
(Specification for Diesel Fuel Oils).
      168.   "Planning agency" means the organization designated by the
Governor pursuant to 42 United States Code Section 7504 as having the authority
and responsibility of preparing nonattainment area plans.
      169.   "Plume" means visible effluent.
      170.   "PM 2.5 " means particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter
less than or equal to a nominal 2.5 micrometers as measured by a reference
method based on 40 CFR 50 Appendix L, or by an equivalent method designated in
accordance with 40 CFR 53.
      171.   "PM 10 " means particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter
less than or equal to a nominal ten micrometers as measured by a reference
method contained within 40 CFR 50 Appendix J or by an equivalent method
designated in accordance with 40 CFR 53.
      172.   "PM 10 emissions" means finely divided solid or liquid material,
with an aerodynamic diameter less than or equal to a nominal ten micrometers
emitted to the ambient air as measured by applicable test methods and
procedures described in Section
17.11.160.
      173.   "Pollution control project" means any activity or project
undertaken at an existing electric utility steam-generating unit to reduce
emissions from the unit. The activities or project are limited to:
   The installation of conventional or innovative pollution control technology,
including advance flue gas desulfurization, sorbent injection for sulfur
dioxide and nitrogen oxides controls, and electrostatic precipitators;
         a.   An activity or project to accommodate switching to a fuel less
polluting than the fuel used before the activity or project, including natural
gas or coal re-burning, or the co-firing of natural gas and other fuels for the
purpose of controlling emissions;
         b.   A permanent clean coal technology demonstration project conducted
under Title 11, Section 101 (d) of the Further Continuing Appropriations Act of
1985 (42 U.S.C. 5903 (d)), or subsequent appropriations, up to a total amount
of two billion five hundred million dollars for commercial demonstration of
clean coal technology, or similar projects funded through appropriations for
the Environmental Protection Agency; or
         c.   A permanent clean coal technology demonstration project that
constitutes a re-powering project.
      174.   "Portable source" means any building, structure, facility or
installation subject to regulation pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-426 that emits or
may emit any air pollutant and is capable of being operated at more than one
location.
      175.   "Potential to emit" or "potential emission rate" means the maximum
capacity of a stationary source to emit pollutant, excluding secondary
emissions, under its physical and operational design. Any physical or
operational limitation on the capacity of the source to emit a pollutant,
including air pollution control equipment and restrictions on hours of
operation or on the type or amount of material combusted, stored, or processed,
shall be treated as part of its design if the limitation or the effect it would
have on emissions is federally enforceable.
      176.   "Primary ambient air quality standards" means the ambient air
quality standards that define levels of air quality necessary, with an adequate
margin of safety, to protect the public health, as specified in
Chapter 17.08,
Article I.
      177.   "Primary standard attainment date" means the date defined within a
nonattainment area plan in accordance with 42 United States Code Sections 7401
through 7515 and after which date primary national ambient air quality
standards may not be violated.
      178.   "Private driveway" means a road constructed for the sole purpose
of gaining access to a one or two-family residence.
      179.   "Private residence" means a one or two-family dwelling unit.
      180.   "Process" means one or more operations, including equipment and
technology, used in the production of goods or services or the control of by-
products or waste.
      181.   "Process source" means the last operation or process that produces
an air contaminant resulting from either:
         a.   The separation of the air contaminants from the process material;
or
         b.   The conversion of constituents of the process materials into air
contaminants which is not an air pollution abatement operation.
      182.   "Process weight" means the total weight of all materials
introduced into a source, including fuels, where these contribute to pollution
generated by the process.
      183.   "Process weight rate" means a rate established pursuant to Section
17.16.130(F).
      184.   "Proposed permit" means the version of a permit for which the
control officer offers public participation or affected state review under the
provisions of Section
17.12.190 or Section
17.13.210.
      185.   "Proposed final permit" means the version of a Class I permit that
the department proposes to issue and forwards to the administrator for review
in compliance with subsection A of Section
17.12.060.
      186.   "Quantifiable" means, with respect to emissions, or the emissions
involved in equivalent emission limits and emission trades, capable of being
measured or otherwise determined in terms of quantity and assessed in terms of
character. Quantification may be based on emission factors, stack tests,
monitored values, operating rates and averaging times, materials used in a
process or production, modeling, or other reasonable measurement practices.
      187.   "RACT (reasonably available control technology)" means, for
facilities subject to an existing source performance standard, the emissions
limitation of the existing source performance standard.
      188.   "Reactivation of very clean coal-fired electric utility steam
generating unit:" means any physical change or change in the method of
operation associated with commencing commercial operations by a coal-fired
utility unit after a period of discontinued operation if the unit:
         a.   Has not been in operation for the two-year period before
enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990, and the emissions from the
unit continue to be carried in the control officer's emissions inventory at the
time of enactment;
         b.   Was equipped before shutdown with a continuous system of
emissions control that achieves a removal efficiency for sulfur dioxide of no
less than eighty-five percent and a removal efficiency for particulates of no
less than ninety-eight percent;
         c.   Is equipped with low-NOx burners before commencement of
operations following reactivation; and
         d.   Is otherwise in compliance with the Act.
      189.   "Reasonable further progress" means the schedule of emission
reductions defined within a nonattainment area plan as being necessary to come
into compliance with a national ambient air quality standard by the primary
standard attainment date.
      190.   "Reclaiming machinery" means any machine, equipment device or
other article used for picking up stored granular material and either
depositing this material on a conveyor or reintroducing this material into the
process.
      191.   "Reconstruction" of sources located in nonattainment areas shall
be presumed to have taken place where the fixed capital cost of the new
components exceeds fifty percent of the fixed capital cost of a comparable
entirely new stationary source, as determined in accordance with the provisions
of 40 CFR 60.15(f)(1)—(3).
      192.   "Recovery furnace" means the unit, including the direct contact
evaporator for a conventional furnace, used for burning black liquor to recover
chemicals consisting primarily of sodium carbonate and sodium sulfide.
      193.   "Reference method" means the methods of sampling and analyzing for
an air pollutant as described in the Arizona Testing Manual; 40 CFR 50,
Appendices A through K; 40 CFR 52, Appendices D and E; 40 CFR 60, Appendices A
through F; and 40 CFR 61, Appendices B and C.
      194.   "Regulated air pollutant" means any of the following:
         a.   Any conventional air pollutant as defined in A.R.S. § 49-401.01.
         b.   Nitrogen oxides and volatile organic compounds.
         c.   Any air contaminant that is subject to a standard contained in
Chapter 17.16,
Article VI.
         d.   Any Class I or II substance listed in Section 602 of the Act
(Listing of Class I and Class II Substances).
      195.   "Reid vapor pressure" means the absolute vapor pressure of
volatile crude oil and volatile non-viscous petroleum liquids, except liquified
petroleum gases, as determined by ASTM D-323-90 (Test Method for Vapor Pressure
of Petroleum Products) (Reid Method).
      196.   "Replicable" means, with respect to methods or procedures,
sufficiently unambiguous such that the same or equivalent results would be
obtained by the application of the method or procedure by different users.
      197.   "Re-powering" means:
         a.   Replacing an existing coal-fired boiler with one of the following
clean coal technologies:
            i.   Atmospheric or pressurized fluidized bed combustion;
            ii.   Integrated gasification combined cycle;
            iii.   Magnetohydrodynamics;
            iv.   Direct and indirect coal-fired turbines;
            v.   Integrated gasification fuel cells; or
            vi.   As determined by the administrator, in consultation with the
United States Secretary of Energy, a derivative of one or more of the above
technologies; and
            vii.   Any other technology capable of controlling multiple
combustion emissions simultaneously with improved boiler or generation
efficiency and with significantly greater waste reduction relative to the
performance of technology in widespread commercial use as of November 15, 1990.
         b.   Repowering also includes any oil, gas, or oil and gas-fired unit
that has been awarded clean cost technology demonstration funding as of January
1, 1991, by the United States Department of Energy.
         c.   The control officer shall give expedited consideration to permit
applications for any source that satisfies the requirements of this subsection
and is granted an extension under Section 409 of the Act.
      198.   "Representative actual annual emissions" means the average rate,
in tons per year, at which a source is projected to emit a pollutant for the
two-year period after a physical change or change in the method of operation of
a unit, (or a different consecutive two-year period within ten years after that
change, if the director determines that the different period is more
representative of source operations), considering the effect the change will
have on increasing or decreasing the hourly emissions rate and on projected
capacity utilization. In projecting future emissions the director shall:
         a.   Consider all relevant information, including historical
operational data, the company's representations, filings with Arizona or
federal regulatory authorities, and compliance plans under Title IV of the Act;
and
         b.   Exclude, in calculating any increase in emissions that results
from the particular physical change or change in the method of operation at an
electric utility steam generating unit, that portion of the unit's emissions
following the change that could have been accommodated during the
representative baseline period and is attributable to an increase in projected
capacity utilization at the unit unrelated to the particular change, including
any increased utilization due to the rate of electricity demand growth for the
utility system as a whole.
      199.   "Resource recovery project" means any facility at which solid
waste is processed for the purpose of extracting, converting to energy, or
otherwise separating and preparing solid waste for reuse. Only energy
conversion facilities that utilize solid waste that provides more than fifty
percent of the heat input shall be considered a resource recovery project under
this article.
      200.   "Responsible official" means one of the following:
         a.   For a corporation: A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice
president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any
other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the
corporation, or a duly authorized representative of such person if the
representative is responsible for the overall operation of one or more
manufacturing, production, or operating facilities applying for or subject to a
permit and either:
            i.   The facilities employ more than two hundred fifty persons or
have gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five million dollars
(in second quarter 1980 dollars); or
            ii.   The delegation of authority to such representatives is
approved in advance by the permitting authority;
         b.   For a partnership or sole proprietorship: A general partner or
the proprietor, respectively;
         c.   For a municipality, state, federal, or other public agency:
Either a principal executive officer or ranking elected official. For the
purposes of this article, a principal executive officer of a federal agency
includes the chief executive officer having responsibility for the overall
operations of a principal geographic unit of the agency (e.g., a Regional
Administrator of EPA); or
         d.   For affected sources:
            i.   The designated representative in so far as actions, standards,
requirements, or prohibitions under Title IV of the Act (Acid Deposition
Control) or the regulations promulgated thereunder are concerned; and
            ii.   The designated representative for any other purposes under 40
CFR Part 70.
      201.   "Reverberatory smelting furnace" means any vessel in which the
smelting of copper sulfide ore concentrates or calcines is performed and in
which the heat necessary for smelting is provided primarily by combustion of a
fossil fuel.
      202.   "Road" means a path, trail, driveway, freeway, street, or access
way which is constructed for principle use by vehicular traffic.
      203.   "Road construction" means the construction of a new roadway or the
conversion of an existing unpaved road to a paved road.
      204.   "Rotary lime kiln" means a unit with an included rotary drum which
is used to produce a lime product from limestone by calcination.
      205.   "Rules and regulations" means the complete set of Pima County air
quality control district rules and regulations contained in this title,
including any future revisions, additions, or amendments, specifically
referring to this title and future amendments as distinguished from any former
rules and regulations.
      206.   "Run" means the net period of time during which an emission sample
is collected, which may be, unless otherwise specified, either intermittent or
continuous within the limits of good engineering practice.
      207.   "Secondary ambient air quality standards" means the ambient air
quality standards which define levels of air quality necessary to protect the
public welfare from any known or anticipated adverse effects of a pollutant, as
specified in
Chapter 17.08,
Article I.
      208.   "Secondary emissions" means emissions that are specific, well
defined, quantifiable, occur as a result of the construction or operation of a
major source or major modification, but do not come from the major source or
major modification itself, and impact the same general area as the stationary
source or modification which causes the secondary emissions. Secondary
emissions include emissions from any off-site support facility that would not
otherwise be constructed or increase its emissions as a result of the
construction or operation of the major source or major modification. Secondary
emissions do not include any emissions that come directly from a mobile source,
such as emissions from the tailpipe of a motor vehicle, from a train, or from a
vessel.
      209.   "Service road" means a road constructed for the principle purpose
of providing maintenance or service of/to pipelines, power lines, farmland,
public utilities, right-of-way, or refuse collection.
      210.   "Shutdown" means the cessation of operation of any air pollution
control equipment or process equipment for any purpose, except routine phasing
out of process equipment.
      211.   "Significance levels" means the following ambient concentrations
for the enumerated pollutants:
 
          Averaging Time
Pollutant Annual   24 Hour  8 Hour     3 Hour    1 Hour
SO 2      1 ìg/m 35 ìg/m 3           25 ìg/m 3
NO 2      1 ìg/m 3
CO                          0.5 mg/m 3           2 mg/m 3
PM 10     1 ìg/m 35 ìg/m 3
 
   Except for the annual pollutant concentrations, exceedance of significance
levels shall be deemed to occur when the ambient concentrations of the above
pollutants is exceeded more than once per year at any one location. If the
concentrations occur at a specific location and at a time when Arizona ambient
air quality standards for the pollutant are not violated, then the significance
level does not apply.
      212.   "Significant" means:
         a.   In reference to a net emissions increase or the potential of a
source to emit any of the following pollutants, a rate of emissions that would
equal or exceed any of the following rates:
Pollutant Emissions Rate (tons per year)
Pollutant                                       Emissions Rate (tons per year)
Carbon monoxide                                 100 tpy
Nitrogen oxides                                 40 tpy
Sulfur dioxide                                  40 tpy
Particulate matter                              25 tpy
PM 10                                           15 tpy
VOC                                             40 tpy
Lead                                            0.6 tpy
Fluorides                                       3 tpy
Sulfuric acid mist                              7 tpy
Hydrogen sulfide (H 2 S)                        10 tpy
Total reduced sulfur (including H 2 S)          10 tpy
Reduced sulfur compounds (including H 2 S)      10 tpy
Municipal waste combustor organics (measured as
total tetra-through octa-chlorinated dibenzo-p- 3.5 ×10 -6 tpy
dioxins and dibenzofurans)
Municipal waste combustor metals (measured as   15 tpy
particulate matter)
Municipal waste combustor acid gases (measured  40 tpy
as sulfur dioxide and hydrogen chloride)
Municipal solid waste landfill emissions        50 tpy
(measured as nonmethane organic compounds)
 
         b.   In ozone nonattainment areas classified as serious or severe,
significant emissions of VOC shall be determined under Section
17.16.580.
         c.   In reference to a regulated air pollutant that is not listed in
subparagraph (a), and is not a Class I or II substance listed in Section 602 of
the Act, any emission rate.
         d.   Notwithstanding the emission amount listed in paragraph a, any
emissions rate or any net emissions increase associated with a major source or
major modification, which would be constructed within ten kilometers of a Class
I area and have an impact on the ambient air quality of such area equal to or
greater than one ìg/m 3 (twenty-four hour average).
      213.   "Slag" means the fused and vitrified matter separated during the
reduction of a metal from its ore.
      214.   "Smelt dissolving tank" means a vessel used for dissolving the
smelt collected from the kraft mill recovery furnace.
      215.   "Smelter feed" means all materials utilized in the operation of a
copper smelter including metals or concentrates, fuels and chemical reagents,
calculated as the aggregate sulfur content of all fuels and other feed
materials whose products of combustion and gaseous byproducts are emitted to
the atmosphere.
      216.   "Smelting" means processing techniques for the smelting of a
copper sulfide ore concentrate or calcine charge leading to the formation of
separate layers of molten slag, molten copper, or copper matte.
      217.   "Smelting furnace" means any vessel in which the smelting of
copper sulfide ore concentrates or calcines is performed and in which the heat
necessary for smelting is provided by an electric current, rapid oxidation of a
portion of the sulfur contained in the concentrate as it passes through an
oxidizing atmosphere, or the combustion of a fossil fuel.
      218.   "Smoke" means particulate matter resulting from incomplete
combustion.
      219.   "Solvent degreasing" means the removal of loosely held uncured
adhesives, uncured ink, uncured coatings and contaminants which include dirt,
soil and grease from parts, products, tools, machinery, equipment, and general
work areas using a solvent that contains two percent by weight or more of a
regulated air pollutant.
      220.   "Solvent degreasing unit" means any single container with a
capacity of two gallons or more used for solvent degreasing.
      221.   "Source" means any building, structure, facility or installation
that may cause or contribute to air pollution or the use of which may
eliminate, reduce or control the emission of air pollution.
      222.   "Stack" means any point in a source designed to emit solids,
liquids, or gases into the air, including a pipe or duct but not including
flares.
      223.   "Stack in existence" means that the owner or operator had either:
         a.   Begun, or caused to begin, a continuous program of physical
onsite construction of the stack; or
         b.   Entered into binding agreements or contractual obligations, which
could not be canceled or modified without substantial loss to the owner or
operator, to undertake a program of construction of the stack to be completed
in a reasonable time.
      224.   "Standard conditions" means a temperature of 293°K (68°F or 20°C)
and a pressure of 101.3 kilopascals (29.92 inches Hg or 1013.25 mb).
      225.   "Startup" means the setting into operation of any air pollution
control equipment or process equipment for any purpose except routine phasing
in of process equipment.
      226.   "State" means the state of Arizona unless the context indicates
otherwise.
      227.   "State implementation plan (SIP)" means the plan adopted by the
state of Arizona which provides for implementation, maintenance, and
enforcement of such primary and secondary ambient air quality standards as are
adopted by the administrator, pursuant to the Act.
      228.   "Stationary rotating machinery" means any gas engine, diesel
engine, gas turbine, or oil fired turbine operated from a stationary mounting
and used for the production of electric power or for the direct drive of other
equipment.
      229.   "Stationary source" means any building, structure, facility or
installation subject to regulation that emits or may emit any air pollutant.
      230.   "Submerged fill pipe" means a fill pipe or nozzle which extends
below the surface of liquid in the receiving vessel for at least ninety-five
percent of the volume filled, or a similar device which extends to within six
inches of the bottom of the receiving vessel.
      231.   "Sulfuric acid plant" means any facility producing sulfuric acid
by the contact process by burning elemental sulfur, alkylation acid, hydrogen
sulfide, or acid sludge, but does not include facilities where conversion to
sulfuric acid is utilized as a means of preventing emissions of sulfur dioxide
or other sulfur compounds to the atmosphere.
      232.   "Supplementary control system (SCS)" means a system by which
sulfur dioxide emissions are curtailed during periods when meteorological
conditions conducive to ground-level concentrations in excess of ambient air
quality standards for sulfur dioxide either exist or are anticipated.
      233.   "Synthetic minor" means a source with a permit that contains
voluntarily accepted emissions limitations, controls, or other requirements
(for example, a cap on production rates or house of operation, or limits on the
type of fuel) under Section
17.11.190 to reduce the potential to emit to a level below the major source
threshold.
      234.   "Temporary source" means a source which is portable, as defined in
A.R.S. § 49-401.01 and which is not an affected source.
      235.   "Total reduced sulfur (TRS)" means the sum of the sulfur
compounds, primarily hydrogen sulfide, methyl mercaptan, dimethyl sulfide, and
dimethyl disulfide, that are released during the kraft pulping operation and
other operations and measured by Method 16 in 40 CFR 60, Appendix A.
      236.   "Total suspended particulate (TSP)" means all particulate matter
as measured by the reference method described in 40 CFR 50, Appendix B, plus
any particulate matter from fugitive emissions quantified by methods approved
by the control officer.
      237.   "Trivial activities" means activities and emissions units, such as
the following, that may be omitted from a Class I or Class II permit
application. Certain of the following listed activities include qualifying
statements intended to exclude similar activities:
         a.   Combustion emissions from propulsion of mobile sources;
         b.   Air-conditioning units used for human comfort that do not have
applicable requirements under Title VI of the Act;
         c.   Ventilating units used for human comfort that do not exhaust air
pollutants into the ambient air from any manufacturing, industrial or
commercial process;
         d.   Non-commercial food preparation;
         e.   Janitorial services and consumer use of janitorial products;
         f.   Internal combustion engines used for landscaping purposes;
         g.   Laundry activities, except for dry-cleaning and steam boilers;
         h.   Bathroom and toilet vent emissions;
         i.   Emergency or backup electrical generators at residential
locations;
         j.   Tobacco smoking rooms and areas;
         k.   Blacksmith forges;
         l.   Plant maintenance and upkeep activities, including grounds-
keeping, general repairs, cleaning, painting, welding, plumbing, re-tarring
roofs, installing insulation, and paving parking lots, if these activities are
not conducted as part of a manufacturing process, are not related to the
source's primary business activity, and do not otherwise trigger a permit
revision. Cleaning and painting activities qualify as trivial activities if
they are not subject to VOC or hazardous air pollutant (HAP) control
requirements;
         m.   Repair or maintenance shop activities not related to the source's
primary business activity, not including emissions from surface coating, de-
greasing, or solvent metal cleaning activities, and not otherwise triggering a
permit revision;
         n.   Portable electrical generators that can be moved by hand from one
location to another. "Moved by hand" means capable of being moved without the
assistance of any motorized or non-motorized vehicle, conveyance, or device;
         o.   Hand-held equipment for buffing, polishing, cutting, drilling,
sawing, grinding, turning, or machining wood, metal, or plastic;
         p.   Brazing, soldering, and welding equipment, and cutting torches
related to manufacturing and construction activities that do not result in
emission of HAP metals. Brazing, soldering, and welding equipment, and cutting
torches related to manufacturing and construction activities that emit HAP
metals are insignificant activities based on size or production level
thresholds. Brazing, soldering, and welding equipment, and cutting torches
directly related to plant maintenance and upkeep and repair or maintenance shop
activities that emit HAP metals are treated as trivial and listed separately in
this definition;
         q.   Air compressors and pneumatically operated equipment, including
hand tools;
         r.   Batteries and battery charging stations, except at battery
manufacturing plants;
         s.   Storage tanks, vessels, and containers holding or storing liquid
substances that will not emit any VOC or HAP;
         t.   Storage tanks, reservoirs, and pumping and handling equipment of
any size containing soaps, vegetable oil, grease, animal fat, and nonvolatile
aqueous salt solutions, if appropriate lids and covers are used;
         u.   Equipment used to mix and package soaps, vegetable oil, grease,
animal fat, and nonvolatile aqueous salt solutions, if appropriate lids and
covers are used;
         v.   Drop hammers or hydraulic presses for forging or metalworking;
         w.   Equipment used exclusively to slaughter animals, not including
other equipment at slaughterhouses, such as rendering cookers, boilers, heating
plants, incinerators, and electrical power generating equipment;
         x.   Vents from continuous emissions monitors and other analyzers;
         y.   Natural gas pressure regulator vents, excluding venting at oil
and gas production facilities;
         z.   Hand-held applicator equipment for hot melt adhesives with no VOC
in the adhesive formulation;
         aa.   Equipment used for surface coating, painting, dipping, or
spraying operations, except those that will emit VOC or HAP;
         bb.   CO(2) lasers used only on metals and other materials that do not
emit HAP in the process;
         cc.   Electric or steam-heated drying ovens and autoclaves, but not
the emissions from the articles or substances being processed in the ovens or
autoclaves or the boilers delivering the steam;
         dd.   Salt baths using nonvolatile salts that do not result in
emissions of any regulated air pollutants;
         ee.   Laser trimmers using dust collection to prevent fugitive
emissions;
         ff.   Bench-scale laboratory equipment used for physical or chemical
analysis, but not laboratory fume hoods or vents;
         gg.   Routine calibration and maintenance of laboratory equipment or
other analytical instruments;
         hh.   Equipment used for quality control, quality assurance, or
inspection purposes, including sampling equipment used to withdraw materials
for analysis;
         ii.   Hydraulic and hydrostatic testing equipment;
         jj.   Environmental chambers not using HAP gases;
         kk.   Shock chambers;
         ll.   Humidity chambers;
         mm.   Solar simulators;
         nn.   Fugitive emissions related to movement of passenger vehicles, if
the emissions are not counted for applicability purposes under Section
17.04.340(A)(128)(c) and any required fugitive dust control plan or its
equivalent is submitted with the application;
         oo.   Process water filtration systems and demineralizers;
         pp.   Demineralized water tanks and demineralizer vents;
         qq.   Oxygen scavenging or de-aeration of water;
         rr.   Ozone generators;
         ss.   Fire suppression systems;
         tt.   Emergency road flares;
         uu.   Steam vents and safety relief valves;
         vv.   Reserved.
         ww.   Steam leaks; and
         xx.   Steam cleaning operations and steam sterilizers.
      238.   "Unclassified area" means an area which the administrator, because
of a lack of adequate data, is unable to classify as an attainment or
nonattainment area for a specific pollutant, and which, for purposes of this
title, is treated as an attainment area.
      239.   "Uncombined water" means condensed water containing analytical
trace amounts of other chemical elements or compounds.
      240.   "Unpaved road" means a road which is not covered with dust-
suppressing materials and maintained in such a manner that visible emissions of
dust from the road surface are permanently prevented other than during times of
normal cleaning and/or after flooding.
      241.   "Urban or suburban open area" means an unsubdivided tract of land
surrounding a substantial urban development of a residential, industrial, or
commercial nature and which, though near or within the limits of a city or
town, may be uncultivated, used for agriculture, or lie fallow.
      242.   "Used oil" means oil that has been refined from crude oil and that
has been contaminated by physical or chemical impurities as a result of use.
      243.   "Used oil fuel" means used oil that is to be burned for energy
recovery, including fuel which is produced from used oil by processing,
blending or other treatment.
      244.   "Vacant lot" means a subdivided residential or commercial lot
which contains no buildings or structures of a temporary or permanent nature.
      245.   "Vapor" means the gaseous form of a substance normally occurring
in a liquid or solid state.
      246.   "Vapor pressure" means the pressure exerted by the gaseous form of
a substance in equilibrium with its liquid or solid form.
      247.   "Vapor recovery/disposal system" means a system that consists of
one of the following:
         a.   A system that processes the displaced vapors and either recovers
or disposes of the vapors being processed so as to prevent an emission rate
greater than 0.29 pounds per one thousand gallons (thirty-five grams per one
thousand liters) into the atmosphere.
         b.   A vapor handling system that directs at least ninety-five percent
by weight of the displaced vapors to a vapor capture and/or recovery system.
         c.   Other equipment of an efficiency equal to or greater than
paragraph a or b of this subdivision and approved by the control officer.
      248.   "Visibility impairment" means any humanly perceptible change in
visibility (light extinction, visual range, contrast, and coloration) from that
which would have existed under natural conditions.
      249.   "Visible emissions" means any emissions which are visually
detectable without the aid of instruments and which contain particulate matter.
      250.   "Volatile organic compounds (VOC)" means any compound of carbon,
excluding carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, carbonic acid, metallic carbides or
carbonates, and ammonium carbonate, which participates in atmospheric
photochemical reactions. This includes any such organic compound other than the
following, which have been determined to have negligible photochemical
reactivity:
         a.   Methane;
         b.   Ethane;
         c.   Methylene chloride (dichloromethane);
         d.   1,1,1-trichloroethane (methyl chloroform);
         e.   1,1,2-trichloro-1,2,2-trifluoroethane (CFC-113);
         f.   Trichlorofluoromethane (CFC-11);
         g.   Dichlorodifluoromethane (CFC-12);
         h.   Chlorodifluoromethane (HCFC-22);
         i.   Trifluoromethane (HFC-23);
         j.   1,2-dichloro 1,1,2,2-tetrafluoroethane (CFC-114);
         k.   Chloropentafluoroethane (CFC-115);
         l.   1,1,1-trifluoro 2,2-dichloroethane (HCFC-123);
         m.   1,1,1,2-tetrafluoroethane (HFC-134a);
         n.   1,1-dichloro 1-fluoroethane (HCFC-141b);
         o.   1-chloro 1,1-difluoroethane (HCFC-142b);
         p.   2-chloro-1,1,1,2-tetrafluoroethane (HCFC-124);
         q.   Pentafluoroethane (HFC-125);
         r.   1,1,2,2-tetrafluoroethane (HFC-134);
         s.   1,1,1-trifluoroethane (HFC-143a);
         t.   1,1-difluoroethane (HFC-152a);
         u.   Parachlorobenzotrifluoride (PCBTF);
         v.   Cyclic, branched, or linear completely methylated siloxanes;
         w.   Acetone;
         x.   Perchloroethylene (tetrachloroethylene);
         y.   3,3-dichloro-1,1,1,2,2-pentafluoropropane (HCFC-225ca);
         z.   1,3-dichloro-1,1,2,2,3-pentafluoropropane (HCFC-225cb);
         aa.   1,1,1,2,3,4,4,5,5,5-decafluoropentane (HFC 43-10mee);
         bb.   Difluoromethane (HFC-32);
         cc.   Ethylfluoride (HFC-161);
         dd.   1,1,1,3,3,3-hexafluoropropane (HFC-236fa);
         ee.   1,1,2,2,3-pentafluoropropane (HFC-245ca);
         ff.   1,1,2,3,3-pentafluoropropane (HFC-245ea);
         gg.   1,1,1,2,3-pentafluoropropane (HFC-245eb);
         hh.   1,1,1,3,3-pentafluoropropane (HFC-245fa);
         ii.   1,1,1,2,3,3-hexafluoropropane (HFC-236ea);
         jj.   1,1,1,3,3-pentafluorobutane (HFC-365mfc);
         kk.   Chlorofluoromethane (HCFC-31);
         ll.   1 chloro-1-fluoroethane (HCFC-151a);
         mm.   1,2-dichloro-1,1,2-trifluoroethane (HCFC-123a);
         nn.   1,1,1,2,2,3,3,4,4-nonafluoro-4-methoxy-butane (C 4 F 9 OCH 3 or
HFE-7100);
         oo.   2-(difluoromethoxymethyl)-1,1,1,2,3,3,3-heptafluoropropane ((CF
3 ) 2 CFCF 2 OCH 3 );
         pp.   1-ethoxy-1,1,2,2,3,3,4,4,4-nonafluorobutane (C 4 F 9 OC 2 H 5 or
HFE-7200);
         qq.   2-(ethoxydifluoromethyl)-1,1,1,2,3,3,3-heptafluoropropane ((CF 3
) 2 CFCF 2 OC 2 H 5 );
         rr.   Methyl acetate;
         ss.   1,1,1,2,2,3,3-heptafluoro-3-methoxy-propane (n-C 3 F 7 OCH 3 ,
HFE-7000);
         tt.   3-ethoxy-1,1,1,2,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,6-dodecafluoro-2-
(trifluoromethyl) hexane (HFE-7500);
         uu.   1,1,1,2,3,3,3-hentafluoropropane (HFC-227ea);
         vv.   Methyl formate (HCOOCH 3 );
         ww.   (1) 1,1,1,2,2,3,4,5,5,5-decafluoro-3-methoxy-4-trifluoromethyl-
pentane (HFE-7300);
         xx.   Propylene carbonate;
         yy.   Dimethyl-carbonate;
   zz.    trans-1,3,3,3-tetrafluoropropene; (HCF2OCF2H or HFE-134);
   aaa.   HCF2OCF2H (HFE-134);
   bbb.   HCF2OCF2OCF2H (HFE-236cal2);
   ccc.   HCF2OCF2CF2OCF2H (HFE- 338pcc13);
   ddd.   HCF2OCF2OCF2CF2OCF2H (H-Galden 1040x or H-Galden ZT 130 (or 150 or
180));
   eee.   trans 1-chloro-3,3,3-trifluoro prop-1-ene;
   fff.   2,3,3,3-tetrafluoropropene (HFO-1234yf);
   ggg.   2-amino-2-methyl-1-propanol;
   hhh.   t-butyl acetate;
   iii.   1,1,2,2- Tetrafluoro -1-(2,2,2-trifluoroethoxy) ethane;
   jjj.    cis-1,1,1,4,4,4-hexafluorobut-2-ene (HFO-1336mzz-Z);
   kkk. Perfluorocarbon compounds that fall into these classes:
   i.   Cyclic, branched, or linear, completely fluorinated alkanes,
   ii.   Cyclic, branched, or linear, completely fluorinated ethers with no
unsaturations,
   iii.   Cyclic, branched, or linear, completely fluorinated tertiary amines
with no unsaturations, and
   iv.   Sulfur containing perfluorocarbons with no unsaturations and with
sulfur bonds only to carbon and fluorine;
   lll.   The following compound(s) are VOC for purposes of all recordkeeping,
emissions reporting, photochemical dispersion modeling and inventory
requirements which apply to VOC and shall be uniquely identified in emission
reports, but are not VOC for purposes of VOC emissions limitations or VOC
content requirements: t-butyl acetate.
   251.   "Wood waste burner" means an incinerator designed and used
exclusively for the burning of wood wastes consisting of wood slabs, scraps,
shavings, barks, sawdust or other wood material, including those that generate
steam as a byproduct.
(Ord. 2019-28 § 1 (part), 2019; Ord. 2017-20 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 2016-42 § 1
(part), 2016; Ord. 2008-55 § 1 (part), 2008; Ord. 2007-104 § 1, 2007; Ord.
2007-54 § 1, 2007; Ord. 2005-43 § 1 (part), 2005; Ord. 2001-121 § 1, 2001; Ord.
1998-27 § 2, 1998; Ord. 1997-79 § 2, 1997; Ord. 1996-50 § 1, 1996: Ord. 1995-87
§ 3, 1995: Ord. 1994-83 § 2, 1994: Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.350   Meanings of mathematical symbols.
   Mathematical symbols appearing in this title shall have the following
meanings:
Symbol Meaning
Symbol Meaning
<      less than
≤   less than or equal to
>      greater than
≥    greater than or equal to
M      the multiplier one thousand
MM     the multiplier one million
n 3    the number represented by n to the third power
 
   Exponents are shown in large type to avoid confusion with footnote
numbering. For example, ìg/m 3 indicates micrograms per cubic meter, and ìg/m 3
indicates micrograms per meter, reference footnote three.
(Ord. 1995-87 § 4, 1995: Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.360   Chemical symbols and abbreviations.
   Chemical symbols and abbreviations appearing in this title shall have the
following meanings:
Symbol or    Meaning
Abbreviation
Symbol or    Meaning
Abbreviation
Al           aluminum
Be           beryllium
CH 2 Cl 2    methylene chloride
CH 3 CCl 3   methyl chloroform
CH 4         methane
C 2 Cl 3 F 3 trichloro-trifluoroethane
C 2 H 6      ethane
CO           carbon monoxide
CO 2         carbon dioxide
Cu           copper
F            fluorine
Fe           iron
HC           hydrocarbon
Hg           mercury
HNO 3        nitric acid
H 2 S        hydrogen sulfide
H 2 SO 4     sulfuric acid
NO 2         nitrogen dioxide
NO X         oxides of nitrogen
O 2          oxygen
O 3          ozone
Pb           lead
P 2 O 5      phosphorous pentoxide
S            sulfur
SO 2         sulfur dioxide
SO 3         sulfur trioxide
SO X         oxides of sulfur
TRS          total reduced sulfur
TSP          total suspended particulate
VC           vinyl chloride
Zn           zinc
Äp          pressure drop between two points
 
(Ord. 1995-87 § 5, 1995: Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.370   Scientific units.
   Scientific units appearing in this title shall have the following meanings:
Unit Meaning
Unit  Meaning
dscf. a dry cubic foot of gas at standard conditions of 20°C (68°F) and 760mm of
      mercury (29.92 in. of Hg), excluding any water vapor therein.
g     gram; a unit of mass (453.6 g = one lb.)
gr    grain; a unit of mass equal to 0.002286 ounce (7000 gr = one lb.)
ppm   parts of pollutant per million parts of effluent, by volume (gases only)
ìg/m3micrograms pollutant per cubic meter of effluent or air
BTU   British thermal unit (heating value)
Mw-hr rating of power generating equipment; mega (million) watts times hours
 
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.380   Acronyms.
   The following acronyms used herein are those defined by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency:
 
Acronym Meaning
NESHAP  National Emissions Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants
NSPS    New Source Performance Standards
NAAQS   National Ambient Air Quality Standards
 
(Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
Article X. Procedures for Amending
17.04.390   Legal authority.
17.04.400   General procedures.
17.04.410   Public participation in rulemaking.
17.04.420   Applicable implementation plan; savings.
17.04.390   Legal authority.
   All amendments to this title shall be made pursuant to the requirements
contained in A.R.S. 49-479 and 49-112.
(Ord. 1995-87 § 6, 1995: Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.400   General procedures.
   A.   An amendment to this title shall be made in full accord with the
following requirements:
      1.   No rule or regulation shall be enacted or amended except after the
board of supervisors holds a public hearing on the proposed amendment. Members
of the public shall be allowed to speak at the hearing.
      2.   The board of supervisors' public hearing on any set of proposed
amendments shall be preceded by a public announcement of the hearing to include
the date, time, and place of such hearing. The announcement shall be published
at least twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the county, and shall
be posted in at least three conspicuous places in the county.
      3.   At least one copy of the proposed amendment shall be made available
for the general public's examination in the Air Quality Control District's
general offices located at 33 North Stone Avenue, Suite 700, Tucson, Arizona
85701 at the time of notice of such hearing.
      4.   Copies of the notice of the board of supervisors' public hearing
shall be mailed to the control officer of the Pinal County air quality control
district, the director of the Maricopa County Air Quality Department; the
director of the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality; the regional
administrator, Region IX, Environmental Protection Agency; the mayor of the
city of Tucson; the mayor of the city of South Tucson, the mayor of the town of
Marana; the mayor of the town of Oro Valley; and the executive director of the
Pima Association of Governments.
      5.   A record of each public hearing shall be prepared and made available
to any person upon request. The official records shall include the name of each
commentator and a written summary of his comments.
      6.   Any revision to this title may be forwarded to the Arizona
Department of Environmental Quality, along with a certification of the public
notice actions, record of hearings, and other requirements of the Title. The
control officer may include a request to the director of the Arizona Department
of Environmental Quality that such revision be submitted by the governor of the
state to the Regional Administrator, Region IX, Environmental Protection
Agency, as an official revision to Arizona's State Implementation Plan (SIP)
for air quality control.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord. 1995-87 § 7, 1995: Ord. 1993-128 § 1
(part), 1993)
17.04.410   Public participation in rulemaking.
   A.R.S. §§ 49-471.06 through 49-471.12 (as Added by Laws 2000, Ch. 194, § 3,
effective January 1, 2002) is hereby adopted in its entirety and is
incorporated herein by this reference.
   A.   The control officer shall encourage the public to provide input to the
rulemaking process.
   B.   Extensive publicity, including prominently displayed advertisements in
newspapers of wide circulation and notification by mail to interested public
and private organizations, shall be given to all public hearings conducted by
the air quality advisory council, the air quality hearing board, and the board
of supervisors concerning proposed amendments to this title.
   C.   The Control Officer shall consider public comment on methods to improve
this title, or to improve air quality in Pima County. For example, informal
comments received from interested citizens may be filed and referred to when
amending this document.
(Ord. 2005-43 § 1 (part), 2005; Ord. 1993-128 § 1 (part), 1993)
17.04.420   Applicable implementation plan; savings.
   No rule adopted in this title shall preempt or nullify any applicable
requirement or emission standard in an applicable implementation plan unless
the control officer revises the applicable implementation plan in conformance
with the requirements of 40 CFR Part 51, subpart F, A.R.S 49-404, and the
administrator approves the revision.
(Ord. 1995-87 § 8, 1995: Ord. 1994-83 § 3, 1994)
Chapter 17.08
AMBIENT AIR QUALITY STANDARDS
Sections: 
   
Article I. - Ambient Air Standards
   
Article II. - Ambient Air Quality Monitoring and Procedures
   
Article III. - Classification Requirements for Attainment Areas
   
Article IV. - Attainment/Nonattainment Area Designations
Article I. Ambient Air Standards
17.08.010   Applicability and standards.
17.08.020   Sulfur oxides (sulfur dioxide).
17.08.030   Particulate matter: (PM 10 and PM 2.5 ).
17.08.040   Carbon monoxide.
17.08.050   Ozone.
17.08.060   Nitrogen dioxide.
17.08.070   Lead.
17.08.010   Applicability and standards.
   This article applies to all areas, classes, sizes, and ages of sources,
including major sources and minor sources, existing as well as new sources, and
to fugitive air polluting activities as well as stack emissions.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 2 (part), 1993)
17.08.020   Sulfur oxides (sulfur dioxide).
   A.   The primary ambient air quality standard for sulfur oxides measured as
sulfur dioxide using the reference method described in 40 CFR 50, Appendix A or
A-1, or by an equivalent method, is:
      1.   Seventy-five parts per billion (ppb) — maximum one-hour
concentration. The one-hour primary standard is met at an ambient air quality
monitoring site when the three-year average of the annual 99th percentile of
the daily maximum one-hour average concentration is less than or equal to
seventy-five parts per billion, as determined according to 40 CFR 50, Appendix
T.
   B.   The secondary ambient air quality standard for sulfur oxides, measured
as sulfur dioxide is 0.5 parts per million (ppm) (1300ìg/m 3 )—maximum 3-hour
concentration not to be exceeded more than once per year.
(Ord. 2016-42 § 2 (part), 2016; Ord. 2005-93 § 1 (part), 2005; Ord. 1993-128 §
2 (part), 1993)
17.08.030   Particulate matter: (PM 10 and PM 2.5 ).
   A.   Particulate Matter (PM 10 )
      1.   The primary and secondary ambient air quality standards for
particulate matter PM 10 are one hundred fifty micrograms per cubic meter of PM
10 — twenty-four-hour average concentration.
      2.   For the purposes of determining attainment of the primary and
secondary standards, particulate matter (PM 10 ) shall be measured in the
ambient air as PM 10 by:
         a.   A reference method based on 40 CFR 50, Appendix J, and designated
in accordance with 40 CFR 53; or
         b.   An equivalent method designated in accordance with 40 CFR 53.
      3.   The primary and secondary twenty-four-hour ambient air quality
standards for PM 10 shall be considered attained when the expected number of
days per calendar year with a twenty-four-hour average concentration above one
hundred fifty micrograms per cubic meter, as determined in accordance with 40
CFR 50, Appendix K, is less than or equal to 1.
   B.   Particulate Matter (PM 2.5 )
      1.   The primary ambient air quality standards for particulate matter (PM
2.5 ) are:
         a.   Twelve micrograms per cubic meter of PM 2.5 — annual arithmetic
mean concentration.
         b.   Thirty-five micrograms per cubic meter of PM 2.5 — twenty-four-
hour average concentration.
      2.   The secondary ambient air quality standards for particulate matter
(PM 2.5 ) are:
         a.   Fifteen micrograms per cubic meter of PM 2.5 — annual arithmetic
mean concentration.
         b.   Thirty-five micrograms per cubic meter of PM 2.5 — twenty-four-
hour average concentration.
      3.   For purposes of determining attainment of the primary and secondary
standards, particulate matter (PM 2.5 ) shall be measured in the ambient air
by:
         a.   A reference method based on 40 CFR 50, Appendix L, and designated
in accordance with 40 CFR 53; or
         b.   An equivalent method designated in accordance with 40 CFR 53.
      4.   The primary annual ambient air quality standards for PM 2.5 is met
when the annual arithmetic mean concentration, as determined in accordance with
40 CFR 50, Appendix N, is less than or equal to twelve micrograms per cubic
meter.
      5.   The secondary annual ambient air quality standard for PM 2.5 is met
when the annual arithmetic mean concentration, as determined in accordance with
40 CFR 50, Appendix N, is less than or equal to fifteen micrograms per cubic
meter.
      6.   The primary and secondary twenty-four-hour ambient air quality
standards for PM 2.5 are met when the 98 th percentile twenty-four-hour
concentration, as determined in accordance with 40 CFR 50, Appendix N, is less
than or equal to thirty-five micrograms per cubic meter.
(Ord. 2016-42 § 2 (part), 2016; Ord. 2005-93 § 1 (part), 2005; Ord. 1993-128 §
2 (part), 1993)
17.08.040   Carbon monoxide.
   A.   The primary ambient air quality standards for carbon monoxide are:
      1.   Nine parts per million (ten milligrams per cubic meter) for an
eight-hour average concentration not to be exceeded more than once per year;
and
      2.   Thirty-five parts per million (forty milligrams per cubic meter) for
a one-hour average concentration not to be exceeded more than once per year.
   B.   The levels of carbon monoxide in the ambient air shall be measured by:
      1.   A reference method based on 40 CFR 50, Appendix C, and designated in
accordance with 40 CFR 53; or
      2.   An equivalent method designated in accordance with 40 CFR 53.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 2 (part), 1993)
17.08.050   Ozone.
   A.   Eight-hour averaged standard.
      1.   The eight-hour averagedprimary ambient air quality standard for
ozone is 0.070 parts per million (ppm), daily maximum eight-hour average.
      2.   The eight-hour averaged secondary ambient air quality standard for
ozone is 0.070 ppm, daily maximum eight-hour average.
      3.   Eight-hour averaged primary and secondary ambient air quality
standards for ozone are met at an ambient air quality monitoring site when the
three-year average of the annual fourth-highest daily maximum eight-hour ozone
concentration is less than or equal to 0.070 ppm, as determined in accordance
with 40 CFR 50, Appendix U.
   B.   The levels of ozone in the ambient air shall be measured by:
      1.   A reference method based on 40 CFR 53, Appendix D, and designated in
accordance with 40 CFR 53; or
      2.   An equivalent method designated in accordance with 40 CFR 53.
(Ord. 2016-42 § 2 (part), 2016: Ord. 2005-93 § 1 (part), 2005; Ord. 1993-128 §
2 (part), 1993)
17.08.060   Nitrogen dioxide.
   A.   The primary ambient air quality standards for nitrogen dioxide are:
      1.   Fifty-three ppb — annual arithmetic mean concentration.
      2.   One hundred ppb — one-hour average concentration.
   B.   The secondary ambient air quality standard for nitrogen dioxide is
0.053 ppm (one hundred micrograms per cubic meter), annual arithmetic mean
concentration.
   C.   The primary standards are attained when:
      1.   The annual arithmetic mean concentration in a calendar year is less
than or equal to fifty-three ppb, as determined in accordance with 40 CFR 50,
Appendix S.
      2.   The three-year average of the annual 98th percentile of the daily
maximum one-hour average concentration is less than or equal to one hundred
ppb, as determined in accordance with 40 CFR 50, Appendix S.
   D.   The secondary standard is attained when the annual arithmetic mean
concentration in a calendar year is less than or equal to 0.053 parts per
million, rounded to three decimal places (fractional parts equal to or greater
than 0.0005 must be rounded up). To demonstrate attainment, an annual mean
shall be based upon hourly data that are at least seventy-five percent complete
or upon data derived from manual methods that are at least seventy-five percent
complete for the scheduled sampling days in each calendar quarter.
   E.   The levels of nitrogen dioxide in the ambient air shall be measured by:
      1.   A reference method based on 40 CFR 50, Appendix F, and designated in
accordance with 40 CFR 53; or
      2.   An equivalent method designated in accordance with 40 CFR 53.
(Ord. 2016-42 § 2 (part), 2016; Ord. 1993-128 § 2 (part), 1993)
17.08.070   Lead.
   A.   The primary and secondary ambient air quality standards for lead and
its compounds are 0.15 micrograms per cubic meter, arithmetic mean
concentration over a threemonth period.
   B.   The levels of lead and its compounds in the ambient air shall be
measured as elemental lead by:
      1.   A reference method based on 40 CFR 50, Appendix G, and designated in
accordance with 40 CFR 53; or
      2.   An equivalent method designated in accordance with 40 CFR 53.
   C.   The national primary and secondary ambient air quality standards for
lead are met when the maximum arithmetic three-month mean concentration for a
three-year period, as determined in accordance with Appendix R of this part, is
less than or equal to 0.15 micrograms per cubic meter.
(Ord. 2016-42 § 2 (part), 2016; Ord. 1993-128 § 2 (part), 1993)
Article II. Ambient Air Quality Monitoring and Procedures
17.08.080   Ambient air quality monitoring methods and procedures.
17.08.090   Interpretation of ambient air quality standards and evaluation of
air quality data.
17.08.080   Ambient air quality monitoring methods and procedures.
   A.   Only those methods which have been either designated by the
administrator as reference or equivalent methods shall be used to monitor
ambient air.
   B.   Quality assurance, monitor siting, and sample probe installation
procedures shall be in accordance with procedures described in the Appendices
to 40 CFR 58.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 2 (part), 1993)
17.08.090   Interpretation of ambient air quality standards and evaluation of
air quality data.
   A.   Unless otherwise specified, interpretation of all ambient air quality
standards contained in this title shall be in accordance with 40 CFR 50.
   B.   The evaluation of air quality data in terms of procedure, methodology,
and concept is to be consistent with methods described in 40 CFR 50.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 2 (part), 1993)
Article III. Classification Requirements for Attainment Areas
17.08.100   Designation and classification of attainment areas.
17.08.100   Designation and classification of attainment areas.
   A.   All attainment and unclassified areas or parts thereof shall be
classified as either Class I, Class II or Class III.
   B.   All of the following areas which were in existence on August 7, 1977,
including any boundary changes to those areas which occurred subsequent to the
date of enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1977 and before March 12,
1993, shall be Class I areas irrespective of attainment status and shall not be
redesignated:
      1.   International parks.
      2.   National wilderness areas which exceed five thousand acres in size.
      3.   National memorial parks which exceed five thousand acres in size.
      4.   National parks which exceed six thousand acres in size.
   C.   The following areas shall be designated only as Class I or II:
      1.   An area which as of August 7, 1977, exceeds ten thousand acres in
size and is one of the following:
         a.   A national monument.
         b.   A national primitive area.
         c.   A national preserve.
         d.   A national recreational area.
         e.   A national wild and scenic river.
         f.   A national wildlife refuge.
         g.   A national lakeshore or seashore.
      2.   A national park or national wilderness area established after August
7, 1977, which exceeds ten thousand acres in size.
   D.   All other areas shall be Class II areas unless redesignated under
subsections E or F of this section.
   E.   The Governor or the Governor's designee may request that the
administrator redesignate areas of the state as Class I or Class II, provided
that the following requirements are fulfilled:
      1.   At least one public hearing is held in or near the area affected.
      2.   Other states, Indian governing bodies and federal land managers,
whose land may be affected by the proposed redesignation are notified at least
thirty days prior to the public hearing.
      3.   A discussion document of the reasons for the proposed redesignation
including a description and analysis of health, environmental, economic, social
and energy effects of the proposed redesignation is prepared by the Governor or
the Governor's designee. The discussion document shall be made available for
public inspection at least thirty days prior to the hearing and the notice
announcing the hearing shall contain appropriate notification of the
availability of such discussion document.
      4.   Prior to the issuance of notice respecting the redesignation of an
area which includes any federal lands, the Governor or the Governor's designee
has provided written notice to the appropriate federal land manager and
afforded the federal land manager adequate opportunity, not in excess of sixty
days, to confer with the state respecting the redesignation and to submit
written comments and recommendations. The Governor or the Governor's designee
shall publish a list of any inconsistency between such redesignation and such
recommendations, together with the reasons for making such redesignation
against the recommendation of the federal land manager, if any federal land
manager has submitted written comments and recommendations.
      5.   The redesignation is proposed after consultation with the elected
leadership of local governments in the area covered by the proposed
redesignation.
      6.   The redesignation is submitted to the administrator as a revision to
the SIP.
   F.   The Governor or the Governor's designee may request that the
administrator redesignate areas of the state as Class III if all of the
following criteria are met:
      1.   Such redesignation meets the requirements of subsection E of this
section.
      2.   Such redesignation has been approved after consultation with the
appropriate committee of the legislature if it is in session or with the
leadership of the legislature if it is not in session.
      3.   The general purpose units of local government representing a
majority of the residents of the area to be redesignated concur in the
redesignation.
      4.   Such redesignation shall not cause, or contribute to, concentration
of any air pollutant which exceeds any maximum allowable increase or maximum
allowable concentration permitted under the classification of any area.
      5.   For any new major source or a major modification of such source
which may be permitted to be constructed and operated only if the area in
question is redesignated as Class III, any permit application or related
materials shall be made available for public inspection prior to a public
hearing.
      6.   The redesignation is submitted to the administrator as a revision to
the SIP.
   G.   A redesignation shall not be effective until approved by the
administrator as part of an applicable implementation plan.
   H.   Lands within the exterior boundaries of Indian reservations may be
redesignated only by the appropriate Indian governing body.
(Ord. 1995-87 § 9, 1995: Ord. 1994-83 § 4, 1994: Ord. 1993-128 § 2 (part),
1993)
Article IV. Attainment/Nonattainment Area Designations
17.08.110   Tucson CO attainment area.
17.08.120   Rillito nonattainment area.
17.08.130   Ajo attainment area.
17.08.140   General county areas.
17.08.150   Limitation of pollutants in classified attainment areas.
17.08.110   Tucson CO attainment area.
   An area defined by the following Township/Range/Section coordinates, as
listed in 40 CFR 81.303, shall be an attainment area for CO:
 
Designated Area                      Designation              Classification
                                     Date          Type       Date Type
Tucson Area:
Pima County
Township and Ranges as follows: T11-
12S, R12-14E; T13-15S, R11-16E; and
T16S, R12-16E Gila and Salt River    July 10, 2000 Attainment
Baseline and Meridian excluding
portions of the Saguaro National
Monument and the Coronado National
Forest.
 
(Ord. 2004-97 § 2 (part), 2004; Ord. 1993-128 § 2 (part), 1993)
17.08.120   Rillito nonattainment area.
   An area defined by the following township/range/section coordinates shall be
a nonattainment area for PM10: T11S-R9E, T11S-R10E, T11S-R11E, T11S-R12E; T12S-
R8E, T12S-R9E, T12S-R10E, T12S-R11E, T12S-R12E.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 2 (part), 1993)
17.08.130   Ajo attainment area.
   A.   An area defined by the following Township/Range/Section coordinates, as
listed in 40 CFR 81.303, shall be an attainment area for SO 2 .
 
                   Does not meet     Does not meet Cannot be  Better than
Designated Area    primary standards secondary     classified nations standards
                                     standards
Ajo (T11-13S, R5W- -                 -             -          X
R6W)
 
   B.   An additional area shall be unclassifiable for SO 2 , defined by the
following coordinates: T11S-R7W; T12S-R7W; T13S-R7W; T13S-R5W.
   C.   An area defined by the following coordinates shall be a nonattainment
area for TSP: T12S-R6W.
   D.   The Ajo area shall be a Class II area for CO, NO 2 , and O 3 .
(Ord. 2004-97 § 2 (part), 2004; Ord. 1993-128 § 2 (part), 1993)
17.08.140   General county areas.
   Portions of the county not otherwise designated as Class I (attainment),
Class III (attainment), unclassifiable, or nonattainment areas for specific
pollutants shall be Class II (attainment) areas for TSP, PM10, SO 2 , CO, O 3 ,
and NO 2 .
(Ord. 1993-128 § 2 (part), 1993)
17.08.150   Limitation of pollutants in classified attainment areas.
   A.   Areas designated as Class I, II, or III shall be limited to the
increases in air pollutant concentrations shown in
Table 17.08.150 occurring over the baseline concentration, provided that for
any period other than an annual period, the applicable maximum allowable
increase may be exceeded once per year at any one location.
   B.   The baseline concentration shall be that ambient concentration level
which exists in the baseline area at the time of the applicable minor source
baseline date.
      1.   The major source baseline date is:
         a.   January 6, 1975 for sulfur dioxide and particulate matter; and
         b.   February 8, 1988 for nitrogen dioxide.
      2.   The minor source baseline date shall be the earliest date after
August 7, 1977 for sulfur dioxide and particulate matter, and February 8, 1988
for nitrogen dioxide, that either:
         a.   A major source as defined in
Chapter 17.04,
Article IX, or a major modification submits a complete permit application to
the administrator under 40 CFR 52.21; or
         b.   A major source as defined in
Chapter 17.04,
Article IX, or a major modification submits a complete permit application to
the control officer under Section
17.12.010(F) or Section
17.13.010(E).
      3.   A baseline concentration shall be determined for each pollutant for
which there is a minor source baseline date and shall include both:
         a.   The actual emissions representative of sources in existence on
the minor source baseline date, except as provided in paragraph 4 of this
subsection; and
         b.   The allowable emissions of major sources as defined in
Chapter 17.04,
Article IX, which commenced construction before the major source base.
      4.   The following shall not be included in the baseline concentration
and shall affect the applicable maximum allowable increase:
         a.   Actual emissions from any major source as defined in
Chapter 17.04,
Article IX, on which construction commenced after the major source baseline
date; and
         b.   Actual emissions increases and decreases at any stationary source
occurring after the minor source baseline date.
   C.   The baseline date shall be established for each pollutant for which
maximum allowable increases or other equivalent measures have been established
if both:
      1.   The area in which the proposed source or modification would
construct is designated as attainment or unclassifiable for the pollutant on
the date of its complete application under either subsection (B)(2)(a) or (b);
and
      2.   In the case of a major source as defined in
Chapter 17.04,
Article IX, the pollutant would be emitted in significant amounts, or in the
case of a major modification, there would be a significant net emissions
increase of the pollutant.
   D.   The baseline area shall be any area, within any intrastate area
designated as attainment or unclassifiable, in which the major source as
defined in
Chapter 17.04,
Article IX, or a major modification establishing the minor source baseline date
would construct or would have an air quality impact equal to or greater than 1
ìg/m 3 (annual average) of the pollutant for which the minor source baseline
date is established. Area redesignations under Section
17.08.100 cannot intersect or be smaller than the area of impact of any new
major source as defined in
Chapter 17.04,
Article IX, or a major modification which either:
      1.   Establishes a minor source baseline date; or
      2.   Is subject to either 40 CFR 52.21 or
Chapter 17.16,
Article VIII, and would be constructed in Arizona.
   E.   The maximum allowable concentration of any air pollutant in any area to
which subsection (A) of this section applies shall not exceed a concentration
for each pollutant equal to the concentration permitted under the ambient air
quality standards contained in
Article I of this Chapter.
   F.   For purposes of determining compliance with the maximum allowable
increases in ambient concentrations of an air pollutant, the following
concentrations of such pollutant shall not be taken into account:
      1.   Concentration of such pollutant attributable to the increase in
emissions from major and stationary sources which have converted from the use
of petroleum products, or natural gas, or both, by reason of a natural gas
curtailment order which is in effect under the provisions of Sections 2(a) and
(b) of the Energy Supply and Environmental Coordination Act of 1974, 15 U.S.C.
792, over the emissions from such sources before the effective date of such
order;
      2.   The concentration of such pollutant attributable to the increase in
emissions from major and stationary sources which have converted from using gas
by reason of a natural gas curtailment plan in effect pursuant to the Federal
Power Act, 16 U.S.C. 792—825r, over the emissions from such sources before the
effective date of the natural gas curtailment plan;
      3.   Concentrations of particulate matter attributable to the increase in
emissions from construction or other temporary activities of a new or altered
source;
      4.   The increase in concentrations attributable to new sources outside
the United States over the concentrations attributable to existing sources
which are included in the baseline concentration; and
      5.   Concentrations attributable to the temporary increase in emissions
of sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides or particulate matter from major sources as
defined in
Chapter 17.04,
Article IX, when the following conditions are met:
         a.   The permit issued to such sources specifies the time period
during which the temporary emissions increase of sulfur dioxide, nitrogen
oxides or particulate matter would occur. Such time period shall not be
renewable and shall not exceed two years unless a longer period is specifically
approved by the control officer.
         b.   No emissions increase shall be approved which would either:
            i.   Impact any portion of any Class I area or any portion of any
other area where an applicable incremental ambient standard is known to be
violated in that portion; or
            ii.   Cause or contribute to the violation of a state ambient air
quality standard.
         c.   The permit issued to such sources specifies that at the end of
the time period described in paragraph a of this subdivision, the emissions
levels from the sources would not exceed the levels occurring before the
temporary emissions increase was approved.
      6.   The exception granted with respect to increment consumption under
subdivisions 1 and 2 of subsection F shall not apply more than five years after
the effective date of the order or natural gas curtailment plan on which the
exception is based.
   G.   If the control officer or the administrator determines that the SIP is
substantially inadequate to prevent significant deterioration or that an
applicable maximum allowable increase as specified in subsection (A) of this
section is being violated, the SIP shall be revised to correct the inadequacy
or the violation. The SIP shall be revised within 60 days of such a finding by
the control officer or within 60 days following notification by the
administrator, or by such later date as prescribed by the administrator after
consultation with the control officer.
   H.   The control officer shall review the adequacy of the SIP on a periodic
basis and within 60 days of such time as information becomes available that an
applicable maximum allowable increase is being violated.
Table 17.08.150
Air Pollutant Concentration Increase Limits 
Class I Areas 
 
Pollutant Applicable Standard    Maximum Allowable Increase (ìg/m 3 )
PM 10     Annual arithmetic mean 4
PM 10     24-hour maximum        8
SO 2      Annual arithmetic mean 2
SO 2      24-hour maximum        5
SO 2      3-hour maximum         25
NO 2      Annual arithmetic mean 2.5
 
Class II Areas 
 
Pollutant Applicable Standard    Maximum Allowable Increase (ìg/m 3 )
PM 10     Annual arithmetic mean 17
PM 10     24-hour maximum        30
SO 2      Annual arithmetic mean 20
SO 2      24-hour maximum        91
SO 2      3-hour maximum         512
NO 2      Annual arithmetic mean 25
 
Class III Areas 
 
Pollutant Applicable Standard    Maximum Allowable Increase (ìg/m 3 )
PM 10     Annual arithmetic mean 34
PM 10     24-hour maximum        60
SO 2      Annual arithmetic mean 40
SO 2      24-hour maximum        182
SO 2      3-hour maximum         700
NO 2      Annual arithmetic mean 50
 
(Ord. 2017-20 § 1 (part), 2017: Ord.1993-128 § 2 (part), 1993)
Chapter 17.11
GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR PERMITS
   
Article I. - Scope and Authority
   
Article II. - General Provisions for Stationary Source Permits
Article I. Scope and Authority
17.11.010   Statutory authority.
17.11.020   Planning, constructing, or operating without a permit.
17.11.030   Notice by building permit agencies.
17.11.040   Assistance to small business.
17.11.010   Statutory authority.
   A.   Statutory provisions relating to the control officer's jurisdiction
over permit requirements and authority for permit fees are contained in
Articles 1 and 3 of Chapter 3 of Title 49 of the Arizona Revised Statutes.
   B.   Permits (requiring fees) shall be issued pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-480.
   C.   Open burning permits (requiring fees) shall be issued pursuant to
A.R.S. § 49-501.
   D.   Issuance of an air permit shall not relieve the permittee from
compliance with all local, county, state, and federal laws, statutes, and
codes.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.010.
17.11.020   Planning, constructing, or operating without a permit.
   No person may commence construction, operate or make a modification to any
source subject to this title without complying with the requirements of this
title.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.020.
17.11.030   Notice by building permit agencies.
   All agencies of the county that issue or grant building permits or approvals
shall examine the plans and specifications submitted by an applicant for a
permit or approval to determine if an air pollution permit will possibly be
required under the provisions of this title. If it appears that an air
pollution permit will be required, the agency or political subdivision shall
give written notice to the applicant to contact the control officer and shall
furnish a copy of that notice to the control officer.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.085.
17.11.040   Assistance to small business.
   The control officer shall appoint one or more representatives to provide
small business stationary source technical and compliance assistance,
consistent with the requirements of the Act and the State Implementation Plan.
Assistance may include, but is not limited to, advice regarding the permit
application process, emissions inventory requirements, and compliance and
control technology standards.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.130.
Article II. General Provisions for Stationary Source Permits
17.11.050   Transition from installation and operating permit program to
unitary permit program.
17.11.060   Permit display or posting.
17.11.070   Public records—Confidentiality.
17.11.080   Permit shield.
17.11.090   Applicability—Classes of permits.
17.11.100   Permits for state delegated emission sources.
17.11.110   Portable sources.
17.11.120   Material permit condition.
17.11.130   Permits containing the terms and conditions of federal delayed
compliance orders (DCO) or consent decrees.
17.11.140   Sampling, testing, and analysis requirements.
17.11.150   Stack height limitation.
17.11.160   Test methods and procedures.
17.11.170   Quality assurance.
17.11.180   Emission standards and limitations.
17.11.190   Permits containing synthetic emission limitations and standards.
17.11.200   Existing source emission monitoring.
17.11.210   Performance tests.
17.11.220   Refund of overpayment of permit fees.
17.11.050   Transition from installation and operating permit program to
unitary permit program.
   A.A.C. R18-2-303, as amended on November 15, 1993 (and no future amendments)
and which is on file with the office of the secretary of state, is hereby
adopted in its entirety and is incorporated herein by this reference, except
that all references to the "director" shall be to the "control officer."
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.150.
17.11.060   Permit display or posting.
   Any person who has been granted an individual or general permit by PDEQ or a
general permit by ADEQ shall maintain a complete copy of the permit onsite. If
it is not feasible to maintain a copy of the permit onsite, the permittee may
request, in writing, to maintain a copy of the permit at an alternate location.
Upon written approval by the control officer, the permittee must maintain a
complete copy of the permit at the approved alternative location.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.080.
17.11.070   Public records—Confidentiality.
   A.   The control officer shall make all permits, including all elements
required to be in the permit pursuant to Section
17.12.040 or Section
17.13.020, available to the public. No permit shall be issued unless the
information required by Section
17.12.040 or Section
17.13.020 is present in the permit.
   B.   Any records, reports or information obtained from any person under this
title, including records, reports or information obtained or prepared by the
control officer or a county employee, shall be available to the public, except
that the information or any part of the information shall be considered
confidential on either of the following:
      1.   A showing, satisfactory to the control officer, by any person that
the information or a part of the information if made public would divulge the
trade secrets of the person. A request for confidentiality shall:
         a.   Precisely identify the information in the documents submitted
which is considered confidential.
         b.   Contain sufficient supporting information to allow the control
officer to evaluate whether such information satisfies the requirements related
to trade secrets or, if applicable, how the information, if disclosed, is
likely to cause substantial harm to the person's competitive position.
      2.   A determination by the county attorney that disclosure of the
information or a particular part of the information would be detrimental to an
ongoing criminal investigation or to an ongoing or contemplated civil
enforcement action under this chapter in superior court.
   C.   Notwithstanding subsection B of this section, the following information
shall be available to the public:
      1.   The name and address of any permit applicant or permittee;
      2.   The chemical constituents, concentrations and amounts of any
emission of any air contaminant;
      3.   The existence or level of a concentration of an air pollutant in the
environment.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.170.
17.11.080   Permit shield.
   A.   Each permit issued under this chapter shall specifically identify all
federal, state, and local air pollution control requirements that apply to the
source at the time the permit is issued. The permit shall state that compliance
with the conditions of the permit shall be deemed in compliance with any
applicable requirement identified in the permit as of the date of permit
issuance, provided that such applicable requirements are included and expressly
identified in the permit. The control officer may include in a permit
determination that other requirements specifically identified are not
applicable. Any permit under this chapter that does not expressly state that a
permit shield exists shall not provide such a shield.
   B.   Nothing in this section or in any permit shall alter or affect the
following:
      1.   The provisions of Section 303 of the Act (emergency orders),
including the authority of the administrator under that section;
      2.   The liability of an owner or operator of a source for any violation
of applicable requirements prior to or at the time of permit issuance;
      3.   The applicable requirements of the acid rain program, consistent
with Section 408(a) of the Act (Permits and Compliance Plans);
      4.   The ability of the administrator or the control officer to obtain
information from a source pursuant to Section 114 of the Act (Inspections,
Monitoring and Entry), or any provision of state law;
      5.   The authority of the control officer to require compliance with new
applicable requirements adopted after the permit is issued.
   C.   In addition to the provisions of Section
17.12.130 or Section
17.13.150, a permit may be reopened by the control officer and the permit
shield revised when it is determined that standards or conditions in the permit
are based on incorrect information provided by the applicant.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.310.
17.11.090   Applicability—Classes of permits.
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this title, no person shall commence
construction of, operate, or make a modification to any source subject to
regulation under this title without first obtaining a permit or permit revision
from the control officer. Permits issued pursuant to this section shall be
issued for a period of five years.
   B.   There shall be three classes of permits as follows:
      1.   A Class I permit shall be required for a person to commence
construction of or operate any of the following:
         a.   Any major source.
         b.   Solid waste incineration units required to obtain a permit
pursuant to Section 129(e) of the Act (Solid Waste Combustion).
         c.   An affected source.
         d.   Any source in a source category designated by the administrator
pursuant to 40 CFR 70.3 and adopted by the control officer by rule.
      2.   A Class II permit shall be required for a person to commence
construction of or modify the following:
         a.   Any source, including an area source, subject to a standard,
limitation, or other requirement under Section 111 of the Act (Standards of
Performance for New Stationary Sources).
         b.   Any source, including an area source, subject to a standard or
other requirement under Section 112 of the Act, except that a source is not
required to obtain a permit solely because it is subject to regulations or
requirements under Section 112(r) of the Act.
      3.   A Class III permit shall be required for a person to commence
construction of or modify the following:
         a.   Any source that emits, or has the potential to emit, without
controls, significant quantities of regulated air pollutants.
         b.   Stationary rotating machinery of greater than three hundred
twenty-five brake horsepower.
         c.   Fuel-burning equipment which, at a location or property other
than a one- or two-family residence, are fired at a sustained rate of more than
one million BTUs per hour for more than an eight-hour period.
   C.   Notwithstanding subsections A and B of this section, the following
sources shall not require a permit unless the source is a major source, or
unless operation without a permit would result in a violation of the Act:
      1.   Sources subject to 40 CFR 60, Subpart AAA, Standards of Performance
for New Residential Wood Heaters.
      2.   Sources and source categories that would be required to obtain a
permit solely because they are subject to 40 CFR 61.145.
      3.   Agricultural equipment used in normal farm operations. "Agricultural
equipment used in normal farm operations" does not include equipment that would
be classified as a source that would require a permit under Title V of the Act
(Permits), or would be subject to a standard under 40 CFR Part 60 or 61.
   D.   No person may construct or reconstruct any major source of hazardous
air pollutants, unless the control officer determines that maximum achievable
control technology emission limitation (MACT) for new sources under Section 112
of the Act will be met. If MACT has not been established by the administrator,
such determination shall be made on a case-by-case basis pursuant to 40 CFR
63.40 through 63.44, as incorporated by reference in Section
17.16.530(B). For purposes of this subsection, constructing and reconstructing
a major source shall have the meanings described in 40 CFR 63.41.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.140.
17.11.100   Permits for state delegated emission sources.
   A.   If the director of the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality
delegates to the control officer jurisdiction over an emission source, all
requirements and conditions for permits contained herein shall apply to the
delegated source.
   B.   Additional requirements for delegated emission sources shall be as
follows:
      1.   A permit may be issued by the control officer to operate portable
equipment at more than one location in the county; and
      2.   Owners or operators holding permits for portable equipment shall
notify the control officer of any change of operating location.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.100.
17.11.110   Portable sources.
   A.   A portable source that will operate for the duration of its permit
solely in one county that has established a local air pollution control program
pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-479 shall obtain a permit from that county. A portable
source with a county permit, shall not operate in any other county.
   B.   Permits for portable sources shall include the following:
      1.   Conditions that will assure compliance with all applicable
requirements at all authorized locations; and
      2.   Conditions that assure compliance with all other provisions of this
title.
   C.   A portable source which has a county permit but proposes to operate
outside the county shall obtain a permit from the director. Upon issuance of a
permit by the director, the county shall terminate the county permit for that
source. Before commencing operation in the new county, the source shall notify
the director and the control officer who has jurisdiction over the geographic
area that includes the new location according to subsection E of this section.
   D.   An owner of portable source equipment which requires a permit under
this title shall obtain the permit prior to renting or leasing said equipment.
This permit shall be provided by the owner to the renter or lessee and the
renter or lessee shall be bound by the permit provisions. In the event a copy
of the permit is not provided to the renter or lessee, both the owner and the
lessee or renter shall be responsible for the operation of this equipment in
compliance with the permit conditions and any violations thereof.
   E.   A portable source may be transferred from one location to another
provided that the owner or operator of such equipment provide notification
according to the conditions specified in the permit. In no case will more than
ten days' notice be required.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.300.
17.11.120   Material permit condition.
   A.   For the purposes of A.R.S. §§ 49-464(G) and 49-514(G), a "material
permit condition" shall mean a condition that satisfies all of the following:
      1.   The condition is in a permit or permit revision issued by the
director or the control officer after the effective date of this section;
      2.   The condition is identified within the permit as a material permit
condition;
      3.   The condition is one of the following:
         a.   An enforceable emission standard imposed to avoid classification
as a major modification or major source or to avoid triggering any other
applicable requirement,
         b.   A requirement for the installation or certification of a
monitoring device,
         c.   A requirement for the installation of air pollution control
equipment,
         d.   A requirement for the operation of air pollution control
equipment,
         e.   An opacity standard required by Section 111 (Standards of
Performance for New Stationary Sources) or Title I, part C or D (Air Pollution
Prevention and Control) of the Act.
      4.   Violation of the condition is not covered by A.R.S. § 49-464 (A)
through (F), or (H) through (J) or A.R.S. § 49-514 (A) through (F), or (H)
through (J).
   B.   For the purposes of paragraphs (A)(3)(b), (c) and (d) of this section,
a permit condition shall not be material where the failure to comply resulted
from circumstances that were outside the control of the source. As used in this
section, "circumstances outside the control of the source" shall mean
circumstances where the violation resulted from a sudden and unavoidable
breakdown of the process or the control equipment, resulted from unavoidable
conditions during a start up or shut down or resulted from upset of operations.
   C.   For purposes of this section, the term "emission standard" shall have
the meaning specified in A.R.S. §§ 49-514(T) and 49-464(U).
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.350.
17.11.130   Permits containing the terms and conditions of federal delayed
compliance orders (DCO) or consent decrees.
   A.   The terms and conditions of either a DCO or consent decree shall be
incorporated into a permit through a permit revision. In the event the permit
expires prior to the expiration of the DCO or consent decree, the DCO or
consent decree shall be incorporated into any permit renewal.
   B.   The owner or operator of a source subject to a DCO or consent decree
shall submit to the control officer a quarterly report of the status of the
source and construction progress and copies of any reports to the administrator
required under the order or decree. The control officer may require additional
reporting requirements and conditions in permits issued under this article.
   C.   For the purpose of this chapter, sources subject to a consent decree
issued by a federal court shall meet the same requirements as those subject to
a DCO.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.330.
17.11.140   Sampling, testing, and analysis requirements.
   A.   Prior to issuing a permit, the control officer may require the
applicant to test the air for regulated air pollutants and/or provide an
analysis showing the planned source's emissions impact on air quality, or to
assess other air quality related variables in the impact area of the source as
specified by the control officer.
   B.   Prior to issuing a permit, the control officer may require the
applicant to measure the emissions from the source or the air quality in the
vicinity of the source. Air quality impact analyses shall be submitted in
accordance with methodology either specified or approved by the control
officer.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.030.
17.11.150   Stack height limitation.
   A.   The limitations set forth herein shall not apply to stacks or
dispersion techniques used by the owner or operator prior to December 31, 1970,
for which the owner or operator had:
      1.   Begun, or caused to begin, a continuous program of physical on-site
construction of the stack;
      2.   Entered into building agreements or contractual obligations, which
could not be canceled or modified without substantial loss to the owner or
operator, to undertake a program of construction of the stack to be completed
in a reasonable time; or
      3.   Coal fired steam electric generating units, subject to the
provisions of Section 118 of the Act (Control of Pollution from Federal
Facilities) which commenced operation before July 1, 1975, with stacks
constructed under a construction contract awarded before February 8, 1974.
   B.   GEP stack height is calculated as the greater of the following four
numbers in subdivisions 1 through 4:
      1.   213.25 feet (sixty-five meters).
      2.   For stacks in existence on January 12, 1979 and for which the owner
or operator had obtained all applicable preconstruction permits or approvals
required under 40 CFR parts 51 and 52 and Section
17.16.560, Hg = 2.5H.
      3.   For all other stacks, Hg = H + 1.5L, where:
         Hg = Good engineering practice stack height, measured from the ground-
level elevation at the base of the stack;
         H = Height of nearby structure measured from the ground-level
elevation at the base of the stack;
         L = Lesser dimension (height or projected width) of nearby structure;
provided that the EPA, state, or local control agency may require the use of a
field study or fluid model to verify GEP stack height for the source; or
      4.   The height demonstrated by a fluid model or a field study approved
by the reviewing agency, which ensures that the emissions from a stack do not
result in excessive concentrations of any air pollutant as a result of
atmospheric downwash, wakes, or eddy effects created by the source itself,
nearby structures, or nearby terrain obstacles.
      5.   For a specific structure or terrain feature, "nearby" shall be:
         a.   For purposes of applying the formulae in subdivisions 2 and 3 of
this subsection, that distance up to five times the lesser of the height or the
width dimension of a structure but not greater than 0.8 km (one-half mile);
         b.   For conducting demonstrations under subdivision 4 of this
subsection, means not greater than 0.8 km (one-half mile). An exception is that
the portion of a terrain feature may be considered to be nearby which falls
within a distance of up to ten times the maximum height (H+) of the feature,
not to exceed two miles if such feature achieved a height (H+) 0.8 km from the
stack. The height shall be at least forty percent of the GEP stack height
determined by the formula provided in subdivision 3, or eighty-five feet
(twenty-six meters), whichever is greater, as measured from the ground-level
elevation at the base of the stack.
      6.   "Excessive concentrations" means, for the purpose of determining
good engineering practice stack height under subdivision 4 of this subsection:
         a.   For sources seeking credit for stack height exceeding that
established under subdivisions 2 and 3 of this subsection, a maximum ground-
level concentration due to emissions from a stack due in whole or in part to
downwash, wakes, and eddy effects produced by nearby structures or nearby
terrain features which individually is at least forty percent in excess of the
maximum concentration experienced in the absence of such downwash, wakes, or
eddy effects and which contributes to a total concentration due to emissions
from all sources that is greater than an ambient air quality standard. For
sources subject to the requirements for permits or permit revisions under this
chapter, an excessive concentration alternatively means a maximum ground-level
concentration due to emissions from a stack due in whole or part to downwash,
wakes or eddy effects produced by nearby structures or nearby terrain features
which individually is at least forty percent in excess of the maximum
concentration experienced in the absence of such downwash, wakes or eddy
effects and greater than the applicable maximum allowable increase contained in
Section
17.08.150. The allowable emission rate to be used in making demonstrations
under subdivision 4 of this subsection shall be prescribed by the new source
performance standard which is applicable to the source category unless the
owner or operator demonstrates that this emission rate is infeasible. Where
such demonstrations are approved by the control officer, an alternative
emission rate shall be established in consultation with the source owner or
operator;
         b.   For sources seeking credit after October 11, 1983, for increases
in existing stack heights up to the heights established under subdivisions 2
and 3 of this subsection, either.
            i.   A maximum ground-level concentration due in whole or in part
to downwash, wakes, or eddy effects as provided in paragraph a of this
subdivision, except that emission rate specified by any applicable SIP shall be
used, or
            ii.   The actual presence of a local nuisance caused by the
existing stack, as determined by the control officer; and
         c.   For sources seeking credit after January 12, 1979, for a stack
height determined under subdivisions 2 and 3 of this subsection, where the
control officer requires the use of a field study or fluid model to verify GEP
stack height, for sources seeking stack height credit after November 9, 1984,
based on the aerodynamic influence of cooling towers, and for sources seeking
stack height credit after December 31, 1970 based on the aerodynamic influence
of structures not adequately represented by the equations in subdivisions 2 and
3 of this subsection, a maximum ground-level concentration due in whole or in
part to downwash, wakes, or eddy effects that is at least forty percent in
excess of the maximum concentration experienced in the absence of such
downwash, wakes, or eddy effects.
   C.   The degree of emission limitation required of any source after the
respective date given in subsection A of this section for control of any
pollutant shall not be affected by so much of any source's stack height that
exceeds good engineering practice or by any other dispersion technique.
   D.   The good engineering practice (GEP) stack height for any source seeking
credit because of plume impaction which results in concentrations in violation
of national ambient air quality standards or applicable maximum allowable
increases under Section
17.08.150 can be adjusted by determining the stack height necessary to predict
the same maximum air pollutant concentration on any elevated terrain feature as
the maximum concentration associated with the emission limit which results from
modeling the source using the GEP stack height as determined herein and
assuming the elevated terrain features to be equal in elevation to the GEP
stack height. If this adjusted GEP stack height is greater than stack height
the source proposes to use, the source's emission limitation and air quality
impact shall be determined using the proposed stack height and the actual
terrain heights.
   E.   Before the control officer issues a permit or permit revision under
this article to a source based on a good engineering practice stack height that
exceeds the height allowed by subsection B of this section, ADEQ shall notify
the public of the availability of the demonstration study and provide
opportunity for public hearing in accordance with the requirements of Section
17.12.190 and Section
17.13.210.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.360.
17.11.160   Test methods and procedures.
   A.   The following test methods and protocols are approved for use as
directed by the department under this chapter. These standards adopted as of
July 1, 2019, and no future editions or amendments, are incorporated by
reference as applicable requirements. These standards are on file with the
department and are also available from the U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Superintendent of Documents, Mail Stop SSOP, Washington D.C. 20402-9328.
      1.   40 CFR 50;
      2.   40 CFR 50, Appendices A through N;
      3.   40 CFR 51, Appendix M, Section IV of Appendix S, and Appendix W;
      4.   40 CFR 52, Appendices D and E;
      5.   40 CFR 53;
      6.   40 CFR 58;
      7.   40 CFR 58, all appendices;
      8.   40 CFR 60, all appendices;
      9.   40 CFR 61, all appendices;
      10.   40 CFR 63, all appendices;
      11.   40 CFR 75, all appendices.
   B.   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection the opacity of visible
emissions shall be determined by Reference Method 9 of the Arizona Testing
Manual or Appendix A in 40 CFR 60. A permit may specify a method, other than
Method 9, for determining the opacity of emissions from a particular emissions
unit, if the method has been promulgated by the administrator in 40 CFR 60,
Appendix A.
   C.   Except as otherwise specified in this chapter, the heat content of
solid fuel shall be determined according to ASTM Method D-3176-89, (Practice
for Ultimate Analysis of Coal and Coke) and ASTM Method D-2015-91, (Test Method
for Gross Calorific Value of Coal and Coke by the Adiabatic Bomb Calorimeter).
   D.   Except for ambient air monitoring and emissions testing required under
Chapter 17.16,
Articles VI and
VII, alternative and equivalent test methods in any test plan submitted to the
control officer may be approved by the control officer for the duration of that
plan provided that the following three criteria are met:
      1.   The alternative or equivalent test method measures the same chemical
and physical characteristics as the test method it is intended to replace.
      2.   The alternative or equivalent test method has substantially the same
or better reliability, accuracy, and precision as the test method it is
intended to replace.
      3.   Applicable quality assurance procedures are followed in accordance
with the Arizona Testing Manual, 40 CFR 60 or other methods approved by the
control officer.
(Ord. 2019-28 § 2, 2019; Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.045.
17.11.170   Quality assurance.
   Facilities subject to permit requirements of this chapter shall submit a
quality assurance plan to the control officer that meets the requirements of
Section
17.11.160(D)(3) within twelve months of the effective date of this section.
Facilities subject to the requirements of Section
17.11.200 shall submit a quality assurance plan as specified in the permit.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.070.
17.11.180   Emission standards and limitations.
   Wherever applicable requirements apply different standards or limitations to
a source for the same item, all applicable requirements shall be included in
the permit.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.210.
17.11.190   Permits containing synthetic emission limitations and standards.
   A.   A source may voluntarily propose in its application emission
limitations, controls or other requirements that are permanent, quantifiable
and otherwise enforceable as a practical matter that incorporate pollution
prevention programs that provide source operational flexibility and achieve
regulatory compliance. A new or existing source requesting a permit with
conditions for operation flexibility under this subsection shall pay to the
control officer all applicable fees pursuant to Section
17.13.240.
   B.   A source may voluntarily propose in its application, and accept in its
permit, emissions limitations, controls or other requirements that are
permanent, quantifiable, and otherwise enforceable as a practical matter in
order to avoid classification as a source that requires a Class I permit or to
avoid one or more other federal applicable requirements. For the purposes of
this section, "enforceable as a practical matter" means that specific means to
assess compliance with a limit or trade provision are provided for in the
permit in a manner that allows compliance with the limit or trade provision to
be readily determined by an inspection of records and reports.
   C.   In order for a source to obtain a permit containing voluntarily
accepted emissions limitations, controls or other requirements, the source
shall demonstrate all of the following in its permit application:
      1.   The emissions limitations, controls or other requirements to be
imposed for the purpose of avoiding an applicable requirement are at least as
stringent as the emissions limitations, controls or other requirements that
would otherwise be applicable to that source, including those that originate in
an applicable implementation plan; and the permit does not waive, or make less
stringent, any limitations or requirements contained in or issued pursuant to
an applicable implementation plan, or that are otherwise federally enforceable.
      2.   All voluntarily accepted emissions limitations, controls or other
requirements will be permanent, quantifiable and otherwise enforceable as a
practical matter.
   D.   At the same time as notice of proposed issuance is first published
pursuant to Section
17.12.190 or Section
17.13.210, the control officer shall send a copy of any Class II permit
proposed to be issued pursuant to this section to the administrator for review
during the comment period described in the notice pursuant to Section
17.12.190(D) or Section
17.13.210(D).
   E.   The control officer shall send a copy of each final permit issued
pursuant to this section to the administrator.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.190.
17.11.200   Existing source emission monitoring.
   A.   Every source subject to an existing source performance standard as
specified in this title shall install, calibrate, operate, and maintain all
monitoring equipment necessary for continuously monitoring the pollutants and
other gases specified in this section for the applicable source category.
      1.   Applicability.
         a.   Fossil-fuel fired steam generators as specified in subsection (C)
(1) of this section, shall be monitored for opacity, nitrogen oxides emissions,
sulfur dioxide emissions, and oxygen or carbon dioxide.
         b.   Fluid bed catalytic cracking unit catalyst regenerators, as
specified in subsection (C)(4) of this section, shall be monitored for opacity.
         c.   Sulfuric acid plants, as specified in subsection (C)(3) of this
section, shall be monitored for sulfur dioxide emissions.
         d.   Nitric acid plants, as specified in subsection (C)(2) of this
section, shall be monitored for nitrogen oxides emissions.
      2.   Emission monitoring shall not be required when the source of
emissions is not operating.
      3.   Variations.
         a.   Unless otherwise prohibited by the Act, the control officer may
approve, on a case-by-case basis, alternative monitoring requirements different
from the provisions of this section if the installation of a continuous
emission monitoring system cannot be implemented by a source due to physical
plant limitations or extreme economic reasons. Alternative monitoring
procedures shall be specified by the control officer on a case-by-case basis
and shall include as a minimum, annual manual stack tests for the pollutants
identified for each type of source in this section. Extreme economic reasons
shall mean that the requirements of this section would cause the source to be
unable to continue in business.
         b.   Alternative monitoring requirements may be prescribed when
installation of a continuous monitoring system or monitoring device specified
by this section would not provide accurate determinations of emissions (e.g.,
condensed, uncombined water vapor may prevent an accurate determination of
opacity using commercially available continuous monitoring systems).
         c.   Alternative monitoring requirements may be prescribed when the
affected facility is infrequently operated (e.g., some affected facilities may
operate less than one month per year).
      4.   Monitoring System Malfunction. A temporary exemption from the
monitoring and reporting requirements of this section may be provided during
any period of monitoring system malfunction, provided that the source owner or
operator demonstrates that the malfunction was unavoidable and is being
repaired expeditiously.
   B.   Installation and performance testing required under this section shall
be completed and monitoring and recording shall commence within eighteen months
of the effective date of this section.
   C.   Minimum Monitoring Requirements.
      1.   Fossil-fuel Fired Steam Generators. Each fossil-fuel fired steam
generator, except as provided in the following paragraphs, with an annual
average capacity factor of greater than thirty percent, as reported to the
Federal Power Commission for calendar year 1976, or as otherwise demonstrated
to the department by the owner or operator, shall conform with the following
monitoring requirements when such facility is subject to an emission standard
for the pollutant in question.
         a.   A continuous monitoring system for the measurement of opacity
which meets the performance specifications of this section shall be installed,
calibrated, maintained, and operated in accordance with the procedures of this
section by the owner or operator of any such steam generator of greater than
two hundred fifty million BTU per hour heat input except where:
            i.   Gaseous fuel is the only fuel burned; or
            ii.   Oil or a mixture of gas and oil are the only fuels burned and
the source is able to comply with the applicable particulate matter and opacity
rules without utilization of particulate matter collection equipment, and where
the source has never been found to be in violation through any administrative
or judicial proceedings, or accepted responsibility for any violation of any
visible emission standard.
         b.   A continuous monitoring system for the measurement of sulfur
dioxide which meets the performance specifications of this section shall be
installed, calibrated, using sulfur dioxide calibration gas mixtures or other
gas mixtures approved by the control officer, maintained and operated on any
fossil-fuel fired steam generator of greater than two hundred fifty million BTU
per hour heat input which has installed sulfur dioxide pollutant control
equipment.
         c.   A continuous monitoring system for the measurement of nitrogen
oxides which meets the performance specification of this section shall be
installed, calibrated, using nitric oxide calibration gas mixtures or other gas
mixtures approved by the control officer, maintained and operated on fossil-
fuel fired steam generators of greater than one thousand million BTU per hour
heat input when such facility is located in an air quality control region where
the control officer has specifically determined that a control strategy for
nitrogen dioxide is necessary to attain the ambient air quality standard
specified in Section
17.08.060, unless the source owner or operator demonstrates during source
compliance tests as required by the department that such a source emits
nitrogen oxides at levels thirty percent or more below the emission standard
within this title.
         d.   A continuous monitoring system for the measurement of the percent
oxygen or carbon dioxide which meets the performance specifications of this
section shall be installed, calibrated, operated, and maintained on fossil-fuel
fired steam generators where measurements of oxygen or carbon dioxide in the
flue gas are required to convert either sulfur dioxide or nitrogen oxides
continuous emission monitoring data, or both, to units of the emission standard
within this title.
      2.   Nitric Acid Plants. Each nitric acid plant of greater than three
hundred tons per day production capacity, the production capacity being
expressed as one hundred percent acid located in an air quality control region
where the control officer has specifically determined that a control strategy
for nitrogen dioxide is necessary to attain the ambient air quality standard
specified in
Chapter 17.08,
Article I, shall install, calibrate, using nitrogen dioxide calibration gas
mixtures, maintain, and operate a continuous monitoring system for the
measurement of nitrogen oxides which meets the performance specifications of
this section for each nitric acid producing facility within such plant.
      3.   Sulfuric Acid Plants. Each sulfuric acid plant as defined in Section
17.04.340, of greater than three hundred tons per day production capacity, the
production being expressed as one hundred percent acid, shall install,
calibrate, using sulfur dioxide calibration gas mixtures or other gas mixtures
approved by the control officer, maintain and operate a continuous monitoring
system for the measurement of sulfur dioxide which meets the performance
specifications of this section for each sulfuric acid producing facility within
such a plant.
      4.   Fluid Bed Catalytic Cracking Unit Catalyst Regenerators at Petroleum
Refineries. Each catalyst regenerator for fluid bed catalytic cracking units of
greater than twenty thousand barrels per day fresh feed capacity shall install,
calibrate, maintain and operate a continuous monitoring system for the
measurement of opacity which meets the performance specifications of this
section for each regenerator within such refinery.
   D.   Minimum Specifications. Owners or operators of monitoring equipment
installed to comply with this section shall demonstrate compliance with the
following performance specifications:
      1.   The performance specifications set forth in Appendix B of 40 CFR 60
are incorporated herein by reference, and shall be used by the control officer
to determine acceptability of monitoring equipment installed pursuant to this
section. However where reference is made to the administrator in Appendix B of
40 CFR 60, the control officer may allow the use of either the state approved
reference method or the federally approved reference method as published in 40
CFR 60. The performance specifications to be used with each type of monitoring
system are listed below:
         a.   Continuous monitoring systems for measuring opacity shall comply
with performance specification 1.
         b.   Continuous monitoring systems for measuring nitrogen oxides shall
comply with performance specification 2.
         c.   Continuous monitoring systems for measuring sulfur dioxide shall
comply with performance specification 2.
         d.   Continuous monitoring systems for measuring oxygen shall comply
with performance specification 3.
         e.   Continuous monitoring systems for measuring carbon dioxide shall
comply with performance specification 3.
      2.   Calibration Gases. Span and zero gases should be traceable to
National Bureau of Standards reference gases whenever these reference gases are
available. Every six months from date of manufacture, span and zero gases shall
be reanalyzed by conducting triplicate analyses using the reference methods in
Appendix A, Part 60, (Chapter 1, Title 40, CFR as amended. For sulfur dioxide,
use Reference Method 6; for nitrogen oxides, use Reference Method 7; and for
carbon dioxide or oxygen, use Reference Method 3). The gases may be analyzed at
less frequent intervals if longer shelf lives are guaranteed by the
manufacturer.
      3.   Cycling Time. Time includes the total time required to sample,
analyze and record an emission measurement.
         a.   Continuous monitoring systems for measuring opacity shall
complete a minimum of one cycle of sampling and analyzing for each successive
six-minute period.
         b.   Continuous monitoring systems for measuring oxides of nitrogen,
carbon dioxide, oxygen, or sulfur dioxide shall complete a minimum of one cycle
of operation (sampling, analyzing, and date recording) for each successive
fifteen-minute period.
      4.   Monitor Location. All continuous monitoring systems or monitoring
devices shall be installed such that representative measurements of emissions
of process parameter (i.e., oxygen, or carbon dioxide) from the affected
facility are obtained. Additional guidance for location of continuous
monitoring systems to obtain representative samples is contained in the
applicable performance specifications of Appendix B of 40 CFR 60.
      5.   Combined Effluents. When the effluents from two or more affected
facilities of similar design and operating characteristics are combined before
being released to the atmosphere through more than one point, separate monitors
shall be installed.
      6.   Zero and Drift. Owners or operators of all continuous monitoring
systems installed in accordance with the requirements of this section shall
record the zero and span drift in accordance with the method prescribed by the
manufacturer's recommended zero and span check at least once daily, using
calibration gases specified in subsection C of this section as applicable,
unless the manufacturer has recommended adjustments at shorter intervals, in
which case such recommendations shall be followed; shall adjust the zero span
whenever the twenty-four-hour zero drift or twenty-four-hour calibration drift
limits of the applicable performance specifications in Appendix B of Part 60,
Chapter 1, Title 40 CFR are exceeded.
      7.   Span. Instrument span should be approximately two hundred percent of
the expected instrument data display output corresponding to the emission
standard for the source.
   E.   Minimum Data Requirement. The following paragraphs set forth the
minimum data reporting requirements for sources employing continuous monitoring
equipment as specified in this section. These periodic reports do not relieve
the source operator from the reporting requirements of Section
17.12.170 and Section
17.12.040.
      1.   The owners or operators of facilities required to install continuous
monitoring systems shall submit to the control officer a written report of
excess emissions for each calendar quarter and the nature and cause of the
excess emissions, if known. The averaging period used for data reporting shall
correspond to the averaging period specified in the emission standard for the
pollutant source category in question. The required report shall include, as a
minimum, the data stipulated in this subsection.
      2.   For opacity measurements, the summary shall consist of the magnitude
in actual percent opacity of all six-minute opacity averages greater than any
applicable standards for each hour of operation of the facility. Average values
may be obtained by integration over the averaging period or by arithmetically
averaging a minimum of four equally spaced, instantaneous opacity measurements
per minute. Any time periods exempted shall be deleted before determining any
averages in excess of opacity standards.
      3.   For gaseous measurements the summary shall consist of emission
averages in the units of the applicable standard for each averaging period
during which the applicable standard was exceeded.
      4.   The date and time identifying each period during which the
continuous monitoring system was inoperative, except for zero and span checks
and the nature of system repair or adjustment shall be reported. The control
officer may require proof of continuous monitoring system performance whenever
system repairs or adjustments have been made.
      5.   When no excess emissions have occurred and the continuous monitoring
system(s) have not been inoperative, repaired, or adjusted, such information
shall be included in the report.
      6.   Owners or operators of affected facilities shall maintain a file of
all information reported in the quarterly summaries, and all other data
collected either by the continuous monitoring system or as necessary to convert
monitoring data to the units of the applicable standard for a minimum of two
years from the date of collection of such data or submission of such summaries.
   F.   Data Reduction. Owners or operators of affected facilities shall use
the following procedures for converting monitoring data to units of the
standard where necessary.
      1.   For fossil-fuel fired steam generators the following procedures
shall be used to convert gaseous emission monitoring data in parts per million
to g/million cal (lb/million BTU) where necessary.
         a.   When the owner or operator of a fossil-fuel fired steam generator
elects under (C)(1)(d) of this section to measure oxygen in the flue gases, the
measurements of the pollutant concentration and oxygen concentration shall each
be on a consistent basis (wet or dry).
            i.   When measurements are on a wet basis, except where wet
scrubbers are employed or where moisture is otherwise added to stack gases, the
following conversion procedure shall be used:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4382.png]
            ii.   When measurements are on a wet basis and the water vapor
content of the stack gas is determined at least once every fifteen minutes the
following conversion procedure shall be used:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4384.png]
   Note: Use of this equation is contingent upon demonstrating the ability to
accurately determine B(ws) such that any absolute error in B(ws) will not cause
an error of more than ±1.5 percent in the term.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4386.png]
            iii.   When measurements are on a dry basis, the following
conversion procedure shall be used:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4388.png]
         b.   When the owner or operator elects under subsection (C)(1)(d) of
this section to measure carbon dioxide in the flue gases, the measurement of
the pollutant concentration and the carbon dioxide concentration shall each be
on a consistent basis (wet or dry) and the following conversion procedure used:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4390.png]
         c.   The values used in the equations under subsection (F)(1) of this
section are derived as follows:
            EQ = Pollutant emission, g/million cal (lb/million BTU).
            C = Pollutant concentration, g/dscm (lb/dscf), determined by
multiplying the average concentration (ppm) for each hourly period by 4.16 × 10
[-5] M g/dscm per ppm (2.64 × 10[-9] M lb/dscf per ppm) where M = pollutant
molecular weight, g/g-mole (lb/lb-mole), M = 64 for sulfur dioxide and 46 for
oxides of nitrogen.
            C WS = Pollutant concentrations at stack conditions, g/wscm (lb/
wscf), determined by multiplying the average concentration (ppm) for each one-
hour period by 4.15 × 10[-5] M lb/wscm per ppm) (2.59 × 10[-5] M lb/wscf per
ppm) where M = pollutant molecular weight, g/g mole (lb/lb mole). M = 64 for
sulfur dioxide and 46 for nitrogen oxides.
            %O 2 , %CO 2 = Oxygen or carbon dioxide volume (expressed as
percent) determined with equipment specified under (D)(1)(d) of this section.
            F, F c = A factor representing a ratio of the volume of dry flue
gases generated to the calorific value of the fuel combusted (F), a factor
representing a ratio of the volume of carbon dioxide generated to the calorific
value of the fuel combusted (F c ), respectively. Values of F and F c are given
in § 60.45(f) of Part 60, Chapter 1, Title 40 CFR.
            F W = A factor representing a ratio of the volume of wet flue gases
generated to the caloric value of the fuel combusted. Values of F W are given
in Reference Method 19 of the Arizona Testing Manual and in Appendix A-7,
Method 19 of 40 CFR 60.
            B WA = Proportion by volume of water vapor in the ambient air.
Approval may be given for determination of B WA by on-site instrumental
measurement provided that the absolute accuracy of the measurement technique
can be demonstrated to be within ±0.7 percent water vapor. Estimation methods
for B wa are given in Reference Method 19 of the Arizona Testing Manual and in
Appendix A-7, Method 19 of 40 CFR 60.
            B WS = Proportion by volume of water vapor in the stack gas.
      2.   For sulfuric acid plants as defined in Section
17.04.340, the owner or operator shall:
         a.   Establish a conversion factor three times daily according to the
procedures of § 60.84(b) of Chapter 1, Title 40 CFR;
         b.   Multiply the conversion factor by the average sulfur dioxide
concentration in the flue gases to obtain average sulfur dioxide emissions in
Kg/metric ton (lb/short ton); and
         c.   Report the average sulfur dioxide emission for each averaging
period in excess of the applicable emission standard in the quarterly summary.
      3.   For nitric acid plants the owner or operator shall:
         a.   Establish a conversion factor according to the procedures of §
60.73(b) of Chapter 1, Title 40 CFR;
         b.   Multiply the conversion factor by the average nitrogen oxides
concentration in the flue gases to obtain the nitrogen oxides emissions in the
units of the applicable standard;
         c.   Report the average nitrogen oxides emission for each averaging
period in excess of applicable emission standard in the quarterly summary.
      4.   The control officer may allow data reporting or reduction procedures
varying from those set forth in this section if the owner or operator of a
source shows to the satisfaction of the control officer that his procedures are
at least as accurate as those in this section. Such procedures may include but
are not limited to the following:
         a.   Alternative procedures for computing emission averages that do
not require integration of data (e.g., some facilities may demonstrate that the
variability of their emissions is sufficiently small to allow accurate
reduction of data based upon computing averages from equally spaced data points
over the averaging period);
         b.   Alternative methods of converting pollutant concentration
measurements to the units of the emission standards.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.060.
17.11.210   Performance tests.
   A.   Sources required to conduct performance tests pursuant to this title
shall do so within sixty days after the source has achieved the capability to
operate at its maximum production rate on a sustained basis but no later than
one hundred eighty days after initial startup of such source and at such other
times as may be required by the control officer, the owner or operator of such
source shall conduct performance tests and furnish the control officer a
written report of the results of the tests.
   B.   Performance tests shall be conducted and data reduced in accordance
with the test method and procedures contained in the Arizona Testing Manual, 40
CFR 52; Appendices D and E, 40 CFR 60; Appendices A through F; and 40 CFR 61,
Appendices B and C, unless the control officer:
      1.   Specifies or approves, in specific cases, the use of a reference
method with minor changes in methodology;
      2.   Approves the use of an equivalent method;
      3.   Approves the use of an alternative method the results of which he
has determined to be adequate for indicating whether a specific source is in
compliance; or
      4.   Waives the requirement for performance tests because the owner or
operator of a source has demonstrated by other means to the control officer's
satisfaction that the source is in compliance with the standard.
      5.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to abrogate the control
officer's authority to require testing.
   C.   Performance tests shall be conducted under such conditions as the
control officer shall specify to the plant operator based on representative
performance of the source. The owner or operator shall make available to the
control officer such records as may be necessary to determine the conditions of
the performance tests. Operations during periods of start-up, shutdown, and
malfunction shall not constitute representative conditions of performance tests
unless otherwise specified in the applicable standard.
   D.   The owner or operator of a permitted source shall provide the control
officer two weeks' prior notice of the performance test to afford the control
officer the opportunity to have an observer present.
   E.   The owner or operator of a permitted source shall provide, or cause to
be provided, performance testing facilities as follows:
      1.   Sampling ports adequate for test methods applicable to such
facility;
      2.   Safe sampling platform(s);
      3.   Safe access to sampling platform(s);
      4.   Utilities for sampling and testing equipment.
   F.   Each performance test shall consist of three separate runs using the
applicable test method. Each run shall be conducted for the time and under the
conditions specified in the applicable standard. For the purpose of determining
compliance with an applicable standard, the arithmetic means of results of the
three runs shall apply. In the event that a sample is accidentally lost or
conditions occur in which one of the three runs is required to be discontinued
because of forced shutdown, failure of an irreplaceable portion of the sample
train, extreme meteorological conditions, or other circumstances beyond the
owner or operator's control, compliance may, upon the control officer's
approval, be determined using the arithmetic means of the results of the two
other runs. If the control officer, or the control officer's designee, is
present, tests may only be stopped with the control officer's, or such
designee's, approval. If the control officer, or the control officer's
designee, is not present, tests may only be stopped for good cause, which
includes forced shutdown, failure of an irreplaceable portion of the sample
train, extreme meteorological conditions, or other circumstances beyond the
operator's control. Termination of testing without good cause after the first
run is commenced shall constitute a failure of the test.
   G.   Except as provided in subsection H of this section, compliance with the
emission limits established in this title or as prescribed in permits issued
pursuant to this title shall be determined by the performance tests specified
in this section or in the permit.
   H.   In addition to performance tests specified in this section, compliance
with specific emission limits may be determined by:
      1.   Opacity tests;
      2.   Emission limit compliance tests specifically designated as such in
the regulation establishing the emission limit to be complied with;
      3.   Continuous emission monitoring, where applicable quality assurance
procedures are followed and where it is designated in the permit or in an
applicable requirement to show compliance.
   I.   Nothing in this section shall be so construed as to prevent the
utilization of measurements from emissions monitoring devices or techniques not
designated as performance tests as evidence of compliance with applicable good
maintenance and operating requirements.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.050.
17.11.220   Refund of overpayment of permit fees.
   No fees shall be refunded except those paid in excess of the amount
required. An excess payment shall be refunded upon the written request of the
permittee within one year of overpayment.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.620.
Chapter 17.12
INDIVIDUAL PERMITS AND PERMIT REVISIONS FOR CLASS I PERMITS [1] 
   
Article I. - Application Processing and Procedures
   
Article II. - Permit Revisions, Renewals and Transfers for Class I Permits
   
Article III. - Emissions for Class I Sources
   
Article IV. - Public Participation and Notification Requirements
   
Article V. - Fees for Class I Permits
   FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-20, § 2, adopted July 11, 2017, amended
Chapter 17.12 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former
Chapter 17.12, §§ 17.12.010—17.12.620, pertained to permits and permit
revisions, and derived from Ord. No. 1979-93, 1979; Ord. No. 1989-165, 1989;
Ord. No. 1990-113, 1990; Ord. No. 1993-128, 1993; Ord. No. 1994-83, 1994; Ord.
No. 1995-87, 1995; Ord. No. 1998-27, 1998; Ord. No. 1997-79, 1997; Ord. No.
1997-95, 1997; Ord. No. 1998-27, 1998; Ord. No. 2001-121, 2001; Ord. No. 2002-
108, 2002; Ord. No. 2004-97, 2004; Ord. No. 2005-43 2005; Ord. No. 2006-9,
2006; Ord. No. 2007-37, 2007; Ord. No. 2007-54, 2007; Ord. No. 2007-104, 2007;
Ord. No. 2008-55, 2008 and Ord. No. 2016-42, 2016. Ord. No. 2017-20 also
renumbered various sections from
Chapter 17.12 as various sections of Chapters 17.11, 17.12, 17.13 and 17.14.
See the ordinance list for further clarification. (Back)
Article I. Application Processing and Procedures
17.12.010   Permit application processing procedures for Class I permits.
17.12.020   Grant or denial of applications for Class I permits.
17.12.030   Appeals of permit actions for Class I permits.
17.12.040   Permit contents for Class I permits.
17.12.050   Establishment of an emissions cap for Class I permits.
17.12.060   Review by the EPA and affected states for Class I permits.
17.12.070   Acid rain.
17.12.080   Compliance plan—Certification for Class I permits.
17.12.010   Permit application processing procedures for Class I permits.
   A.   Unless otherwise noted, this section applies to each source requiring a
Class I permit or permit revision.
   B.   Standard Application Form and Required Information. To apply for any
permit in this section, applicants shall complete the "Standard Permit
Application Form" and supply all information required by the "Filing
Instructions" as shown in Title 18, Chapter 2, Appendix 1 of the A.A.C.
   C.   A proposed emission limitation, control or other requirement that meets
the requirements of Section
17.11.190.
   D.   Unless otherwise required by Section
17.11.050, a timely application is:
      1.   For purposes of permit renewal, a timely application is one that is
submitted at least six months, but not greater than eighteen months, prior to
the date of permit expiration.
      2.   For initial Phase II acid rain permits under Title IV of the Act and
regulations incorporated pursuant to Section
17.12.070, one that is submitted to the control officer by January 1, 1996, for
sulfur dioxide, and by January 1, 1998, for nitrogen oxides.
      3.   Any existing source which becomes subject to a standard promulgated
by the administrator pursuant to Section 112(d) of the Act (Hazardous Air
Pollutants) shall, within twelve months of the date on which the standard is
promulgated, submit an application for a permit revision demonstrating how the
source will comply with the standard.
   E.   If an applicable implementation plan allows the determination of an
alternate emission limit, a source may, in its application, propose an emission
limit that is equivalent to the emission limit otherwise applicable to the
source under the applicable implementation plan. The source shall also
demonstrate that the equivalent limit is quantifiable, accountable, enforceable
and subject to replicable compliance determination procedures.
   F.   A complete application is one that satisfies all of the following:
      1.   To be complete, an application shall provide all information
required pursuant to subsection B of this section (standard application form
section), except that applications for permit revision need supply such
information only if it is related to the proposed change. A responsible
official shall certify the submitted information consistent with subsection H
of this section (section on certification of truth, accuracy, and
completeness).
      2.   An application for a new permit or permit revision shall contain an
assessment of the applicability of the requirements of
Chapter 17.16,
Article VIII. If the applicant determines that the proposed new source is a
major source as defined in Section
17.04.340, or the proposed permit revision constitutes a major modification as
defined in Section
17.04.340, then the application shall comply with all applicable requirements
of
Chapter 17.16,
Article VIII.
      3.   Except for proposed new major sources or major modifications subject
to the requirements of
Chapter 17.16,
Article VIII, an application for a new permit, a permit revision, or a permit
renewal shall be deemed to be complete unless within sixty days of receipt of
the application, the control officer notifies the applicant by certified mail
that the application is not complete.
      4.   If a source wishes to voluntarily enter into an emissions
limitation, control or other requirement pursuant to Section
17.11.190, the source shall describe that emissions limitation, control or
other requirement in its application, along with proposed associated
monitoring, recordkeeping and reporting requirements necessary to demonstrate
that the emissions limitation, control or other requirement is permanent,
quantifiable, and otherwise enforceable as a practical matter.
      5.   If, while processing an application that has been determined or
deemed to be complete, the control officer determines that additional
information is necessary to evaluate or take final action on that application,
the control officer may request such information in writing, delivered by
certified mail and set a reasonable deadline for a response. Except for minor
permit revisions as set forth in Section
17.12.110, a source's ability to operate without a permit, as set forth in this
article, shall be in effect from the date the application is determined to be
complete until the final permit is issued, provided that the applicant submits
any requested additional information by the deadline specified by the control
officer. If the control officer notifies an applicant that the application is
not complete under subdivision 4 of this subsection, the application may not be
deemed automatically complete until an additional sixty days after the next
submittal by the applicant. The control officer may, after one submittal by the
applicant pursuant to this subdivision, reject an application that is
determined to be still incomplete and shall notify the applicant of the
decision by certified mail. After a rejection under this subdivision, the
control officer may deny or revoke an existing permit, as applicable.
      6.   The completeness determination shall not apply to revisions
processed through the minor permit revision process.
      7.   Activities which are insignificant shall be listed in the
application. The application need not provide emissions data regarding
insignificant activities. If the control officer determines that an activity
listed as insignificant is not insignificant, the control officer shall notify
the applicant in writing and specify additional information required.
      8.   If a permit applicant requests terms and conditions allowing for the
trading of emission increases and decreases in the permitted facility solely
for the purpose of complying with a federally enforceable emission cap that is
established in the permit independent of otherwise applicable requirements, the
permit applicant shall include in its application proposed replicable
procedures and permit terms that ensure the emissions trades are quantifiable
and enforceable.
      9.   The control officer is not in disagreement with a notice of
confidentiality submitted with the application pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-487.
   G.   A source applying for a Class I permit that has submitted information
with an application under a claim of confidentiality pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-
432 and Section
17.11.070 shall submit a copy of such information directly to the
administrator.
   H.   Duty to Supplement or Correct Application. Any applicant who fails to
submit any relevant facts or who has submitted incorrect information in a
permit application shall, upon becoming aware of such failure or incorrect
submittal, promptly submit such supplementary facts or corrected information.
In addition, an applicant shall provide additional information as necessary to
address any requirements that become applicable to the source after the date it
filed a complete application but prior to release of a proposed permit.
   I.   Certification of Truth, Accuracy, and Completeness. Any application
form, report, or compliance certification submitted pursuant to this title
shall contain certification by a responsible official of truth, accuracy, and
completeness. This certification and any other certification required under
this title shall state that, based on information and belief formed after
reasonable inquiry, the statements and information in the document are true,
accurate, and complete.
   J.   Action on Application.
      1.   The control officer shall issue or deny each permit according to the
provisions of A.R.S. § 49-481. The control officer may issue a permit with a
compliance schedule for a source that is not in compliance with all applicable
requirements at the time of permit issuance.
      2.   In addition, a permit may be issued, revised, or renewed only if all
of the following conditions have been met:
         a.   The application received by the control officer for a permit,
permit revision, or permit renewal shall be complete according to subsection F
of this section.
         b.   Except for revisions qualifying as administrative or minor under
Section
17.12.100 and Section
17.12.110, all of the requirements for public notice and participation under
Section
17.12.190 shall have been met.
         c.   The control officer shall have complied with the requirements of
Section
17.12.060 for notifying and responding to affected states, and if applicable,
other notification requirements of Sections
17.16.550(D)(2) and
17.16.630(C)(2).
         d.   The conditions of the permit shall require compliance with all
applicable requirements.
         e.   For permits for which an application is required to be submitted
to the administrator under Section
17.12.060(A) and to which the administrator has properly objected to its
issuance in writing within forty-five days of receipt of the proposed final
permit and all necessary supporting information from PDEQ, the control officer
has revised and submitted a proposed final permit in response to the objection
and EPA has not objected to this proposed final permit.
         f.   For permits to which the administrator has objected to issuance
pursuant to a petition filed under 40 CFR 70.8(d), the administrator's
objection has been resolved.
         g.   For a permit that contains voluntary emission limitations,
controls, or other requirements established pursuant to Section
17.11.190, the control officer shall have complied with the requirement of
subsection C of Section
17.11.190 to provide the administrator with a copy of the proposed permit.
      3.   The control officer may issue a notice of termination of a permit
issued pursuant to this chapter if:
         a.   The control officer has reasonable cause to believe that the
permit was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation.
         b.   The person applying for the permit failed to disclose a material
fact required by the permit application form or the regulation applicable to
the permit, of which the applicant had or should have had knowledge at the time
the application was submitted.
         c.   The terms and conditions of the permit have been or are being
violated.
      4.   If the control officer issues a notice of denial or termination of a
permit under this section, the notice shall be served on the applicant or
permittee by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall include
a statement detailing the grounds for the denial or revocation and a statement
that the permit applicant or permittee is entitled to a hearing.
      5.   The control officer shall provide a statement that sets forth the
legal and factual basis for the proposed permit conditions including references
to the applicable statutory or regulatory provisions. The control officer shall
send this statement to any person who requests it, and for Class I permits, to
the administrator.
      6.   Except as provided in 40 CFR 70.4(b)(11), Section
17.11.050 and Section
17.16.550, regulations promulgated under Title IV or V of the Act (Acid
Deposition Control or Permits), or the permitting of affected sources under the
acid rain program pursuant to Section
17.12.070, the control officer shall take final action on each permit
application (and request for revision or renewal) within eighteen months after
receiving a complete application.
      7.   Priority shall be given by the control officer to taking action on
applications for construction or modification submitted pursuant to Title I,
Parts C and D of the Act (Prevention of Significant Deterioration and
Nonattainment Areas).
      8.   A proposed permit decision shall be published within nine months of
receipt of a complete application and any additional information requested
pursuant to subdivision (F)(5) of this section to process the application. The
control officer shall provide notice of the decision as provided in Section
17.12.190 and any public hearing shall be scheduled as expeditiously as
possible.
   K.   Requirement for a Permit. Except as noted under the provisions in
Section
17.12.090 and Section
17.12.110, no source may operate after the time that it is required to submit a
timely and complete application, except in compliance with a properly issued
permit. However, if an existing source submits a timely and complete
application for permit issuance, revision or renewal, the source's failure to
have a permit is not a violation of this article until the control officer
takes final action on the application. This protection shall cease to apply if,
subsequent to the completeness determination, the applicant fails to submit, by
the deadline specified in writing by the control officer, any additional
information identified as being needed to process the application.
   L.   Application for Coverage Under Class I General Permit.
      1.   Once the director has issued a general permit, any source which is a
member of the class of facilities covered by the general permit may apply to
the control officer for authority to operate under the general permit.
Applicants shall complete the specific application form for general permits, or
if none has been adopted, the standard application form contained in Title 18,
Chapter 2, Appendix 1, of the A.A.C.
      2.   For sources required to obtain a permit under Title V of the Act
(Permits), the control officer shall provide the administrator with a permit
application summary form and any relevant portion of the permit application and
compliance plan. To the extent possible, this information shall be provided in
computer readable format compatible with the administrator's national database
management system.
      3.   The control officer shall give notice of the general permit
application pursuant to Section
17.12.190.
      4.   The control officer shall act on the application for coverage under
the general permit as expeditiously as possible, but a final decision shall be
reached within one hundred eighty days. The source may operate under the terms
of its application during that time. If the application for coverage is denied,
the control officer shall notify the source that it shall apply for an
individual permit within one hundred eighty days of receipt of notice. The
control officer may defer acting on an application under this subsection if the
control officer has provided notice of intent to renew or not renew the permit.
      5.   Sources operating under a general permit shall apply to the director
for the permit revisions pursuant to A.A.C. Title 18, Chapter 2, Article 5.
   M.   Class I General Permit Enforcement. The control officer shall
administer, inspect and enforce all standards and applicable requirements
contained in general permits issued by the director to sources operating in the
county.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.160.
17.12.020   Grant or denial of applications for Class I permits.
   A.   The control officer shall deny a permit or revision if the applicant
does not show that every such source is so designed, controlled, or equipped
with such air pollution control equipment that it may be expected to operate
without emitting or without causing to be emitted air contaminants in violation
of the provisions of this title, Title 49, Chapter 3, Article 3, A.R.S., and
the rules adopted by the director.
   B.   Prior to acting on an application for a permit, the control officer may
require the applicant to provide and maintain such facilities as are necessary
for sampling and testing purposes in order to secure information that will
disclose the nature, extent, quantity or degree of air contaminants discharged
into the atmosphere from the source described in the application. In the event
of such a requirement, the control officer shall notify the applicant in
writing of the type and characteristics of such facilities.
   C.   In acting upon an application for a permit renewal, if the control
officer finds that such source has been constructed not in accordance with any
prior permit or revision issued pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-480.01, he shall
require the person to obtain a permit revision or deny the application for such
permit. The control officer shall not accept any further application for a
permit for such source so constructed until he finds that such source has been
reconstructed in accordance with the prior permit or a revision, or a revision
to the permit has been obtained.
   D.   After a decision on a permit or revision, the control officer shall
notify the applicant and any person who filed a comment on the permit pursuant
to A.R.S. § 49-480 or the revision pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-480.01 in writing of
the decision, and if the permit is denied, the reasons for such denial. Service
of this notification may be made in person or by first class mail. The control
officer shall not accept a further application unless the applicant has
corrected the reasons for the objections specified by the control officer as
reasons for such denial.
   E.   The control officer may issue a permit with a compliance schedule for a
source that is not in compliance with all applicable requirements at the time
of permit issuance.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.110.
17.12.030   Appeals of permit actions for Class I permits.
   A.   Within thirty days after the control officer gives notice of approval,
denial or revocation of a permit, the applicant or any person who submitted
comments pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-480, may request an appeal as provided under
A.R.S. § 49-482. The decision after that hearing constitutes the final permit
action from which judicial review may be taken pursuant to
Chapter 17.28.
   B.   Any person who has an interest that is or may be adversely affected may
commence a civil action in superior court against the control officer alleging
that the control officer has failed to act in a timely manner consistent with
the requirements of A.R.S. § 49-480. No action may be commenced before sixty
days after the plaintiff has given notice to the control officer of the
plaintiff's intent to file. The court has jurisdiction to require the control
officer to act without additional delay.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.120.
17.12.040   Permit contents for Class I permits.
   A.   Each permit issued shall include the following elements:
      1.   The date of issuance and the permit term.
      2.   Enforceable emission limitations and standards, including
operational requirements and limitations that assure compliance with all
applicable requirements at the time of issuance and those that have been
voluntarily accepted under Section
17.11.190.
         a.   The permit shall specify and reference the origin of and
authority for each term or condition, and identify any difference in form as
compared to the applicable requirement upon which the term or condition is
based.
         b.   The permit shall state that, if an applicable requirement of the
Act is more stringent than an applicable requirement of regulations promulgated
under Title IV of the Act (Acid Deposition Control), both provisions shall be
incorporated into the permit and shall be enforceable by the administrator.
         c.   Any permit containing an equivalency demonstration for an
alternative emission limit submitted under Section
17.12.010(D) shall contain provisions to ensure that any resulting emissions
limit has been demonstrated to be quantifiable, accountable, enforceable, and
based on replicable procedures.
         d.   The permit shall specify applicable requirements for fugitive
emission limitations, regardless of whether the source category in question is
included in the list of sources contained in the definition of major source in
Section
17.04.340.
      3.   Each permit shall contain the following requirements with respect to
monitoring:
         a.   All monitoring and analysis procedures or test methods required
under applicable monitoring and testing requirements, including:
            i.   Monitoring and analysis procedures or test methods under 40
CFR 64;
            ii.   Other procedures and methods promulgated under sections 114
(a)(3) or 504(b) of the Act; and
            iii.   Monitoring and analysis procedures or test methods required
under Section
17.12.080.
         b.   40 CFR 64 adopted July 1, 2019 and no future editions or
amendments, is incorporated by reference as applicable requirements and on file
with the department and shall be applied by the department. If more than one
monitoring or testing requirement applies, the permit may specify a streamlined
set of monitoring or testing provisions if the specified monitoring or testing
is adequate to assure compliance at least to the same extent as the monitoring
or testing applicable requirements not included in the permit as a result of
the streamlining;
         c.   If the applicable requirement does not require periodic testing
or instrumental or noninstrumental monitoring (which may consist of
recordkeeping designed to serve as monitoring), periodic monitoring sufficient
to yield reliable data from the relevant time period that are representative of
the source's compliance with the permit as reported under subsection (A)(4).
The monitoring requirements shall ensure use of terms, test methods, units,
averaging periods, and other statistical conventions consistent with the
applicable requirement, and as otherwise required under Section
17.12.080. Recordkeeping provisions may be sufficient to meet the requirements
of this subsection; and
         d.   As necessary, requirements concerning the use, maintenance, and,
if appropriate, installation of monitoring equipment or methods.
      4.   With respect to recordkeeping, the permit shall incorporate all
applicable recordkeeping requirements including recordkeeping requirements
established pursuant to Section
17.12.080, where applicable, for the following:
         a.   Records of required monitoring information that include the
following:
            i.   The date, place as defined in the permit, and time of sampling
or measurements;
            ii.   The date(s) analyses were performed;
            iii.   The name of the company or entity that performed the
analyses;
            iv.   A description of the analytical techniques or methods used;
            v.   The results of such analyses; and
            vi.   The operating conditions as existing at the time of sampling
or measurement.
         b.   Retention of records of all required monitoring data and support
information for a period of at least five years from the date of the monitoring
sample, measurement, report, or application. Support information includes all
calibration and maintenance records and all original strip-chart recordings for
continuous monitoring instrumentation, and copies of all reports required by
the permit.
      5.   The permit shall incorporate all applicable reporting requirements,
including reporting requirements established under Section
17.12.170 and Section
17.11.190, and require the following:
         a.   Submittal of reports of any required monitoring at least every
six months. All instances of deviations from permit requirements shall be
clearly identified in such reports. All required reports shall be certified by
a responsible official consistent with Section
17.12.010(H) and Section
17.12.080(A)(5).
         b.   Prompt reporting of deviations from permit requirements,
including those attributable to upset conditions as defined in the permit, the
probable cause of such deviations, and any corrective actions or preventive
measures taken. Notice in accordance with subsection (E)(3)(d) of this section
shall be considered prompt for purposes of this paragraph.
      6.   A permit condition prohibiting emissions exceeding any allowances
that the source lawfully holds under Title IV of the Act (Acid Deposition
Control) or the regulations promulgated thereunder.
         a.   A permit revision is not required for increases in emissions that
are authorized by allowances acquired under the acid rain program, if the
increases do not require a permit revision under any other applicable
requirement.
         b.   A limit shall not be placed on the number of allowances held by
the source. The source may not, however, use allowances as a defense to
noncompliance with any other applicable requirement.
         c.   Any allowance shall be accounted for according to the procedures
established in regulations promulgated under Title IV of the Act (Acid
Deposition Control).
         d.   Any permit issued under the requirements of this Chapter and
Title V of the Act (Permits) to a unit subject to the provisions of Title IV of
the Act (Acid Deposition Control) shall include conditions prohibiting all of
the following:
            i.   Annual emissions of sulfur dioxide in excess of the number of
allowances to emit sulfur dioxide held by the owners or operators of the unit
or the designated representative of the owners or operators.
            ii.   Exceedances of applicable emission rates.
            iii.   Use of any allowance prior to the year for which it was
allocated.
            iv.   Contravention of any other provision of the permit.
      7.   A severability clause to ensure the continued validity of the
various permit requirements in the event of a challenge to any portion of the
permit.
      8.   Provisions stating the following:
         a.   The permittee shall comply with all conditions of the permit
including all applicable requirements of Arizona air quality statutes A.R.S.
Title 49, Chapter 3, and Pima County air quality rules. Any permit
noncompliance is grounds for enforcement action; for a permit termination,
revocation and reissuance, or revision; or for denial of a permit renewal
application. Noncompliance with any federally enforceable requirement in a
permit is a violation of the Act.
         b.   It shall not be a defense for a permittee in an enforcement
action that it would have been necessary to halt or reduce the permitted
activity in order to maintain compliance with the conditions of this permit.
         c.   The permit may be revised, reopened, revoked and reissued, or
terminated for cause. The filing of a request by the permittee for a permit
revision, revocation and reissuance, or termination, or of a notification of
planned changes or anticipated noncompliance does not stay any permit
condition.
         d.   The permit does not convey any property rights of any sort, or
any exclusive privilege to the permit holder.
         e.   The permittee shall furnish to the control officer, within a
reasonable time, any information that the control officer may request in
writing to determine whether cause exists for revising, revoking and reissuing,
or terminating the permit or to determine compliance with the permit. Upon
request, the permittee shall also furnish to the control officer copies of
records required to be kept by the permit. For information claimed to be
confidential, the permittee shall furnish a copy of such records directly to
the administrator along with a claim of confidentiality.
         f.   For any major source operating in a nonattainment area for all
pollutants for which the source is classified as a major source, the source
shall comply with reasonably available control technology.
      9.   A provision to ensure that the source pays fees to the control
officer pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-426(E) and
Article V of this chapter.
      10.   A provision stating that no permit revision shall be required under
any approved economic incentives, marketable permits, emissions trading and
other similar programs or processes for changes that are provided for in the
permit.
      11.   Terms and conditions for reasonably anticipated operating scenarios
identified by the source in its application as approved by the control officer.
Such terms and conditions shall:
         a.   Require the source, contemporaneously with making a change from
one operating scenario to another, to record in a log at the permitted facility
a record of the scenario under which it is operating;
         b.   Extend the permit shield described in Section
17.11.080 to all terms and conditions under each such operating scenario; and
         c.   Ensure that the terms and conditions of each such alternative
scenario meet all applicable requirements and the requirements of this title.
      12.   Terms and conditions, if the permit applicant requests them, as
approved by the control officer, for the trading of emissions increases and
decreases in the permitted facility, to the extent that the applicable
requirements provide for trading increases and decreases without a case-by-case
approval of each emissions trade. Such terms and conditions:
         a.   Shall include all terms required under subsections A and C of
this section to determine compliance;
         b.   May extend the permit shield described in subsection D of this
section to all terms and conditions that allow such increases and decreases in
emissions;
         c.   Shall not include trading that involves emission units for which
emissions are not quantifiable or for which there are no replicable procedures
to enforce the emission trades; and
         d.   Shall meet all applicable requirements and requirements of this
title.
      13.   Terms and conditions, if the permit applicant requests them and
they are approved by the control officer, setting forth intermittent operating
scenarios including potential periods of downtime. If such terms and conditions
are included, the state's emissions inventory shall not reflect the zero
emissions associated with the periods of downtime.
      14.   Upon request of a permit applicant, the control officer shall issue
a permit that contains terms and conditions allowing for the trading of
emission increases and decreases in the permitted facility solely for the
purpose of complying with a federally enforceable emission cap established in
the permit independent of otherwise applicable requirements. The permit
applicant shall include in its application proposed replicable procedures and
permit terms that ensure the emissions trades are quantifiable and enforceable.
The control officer shall not include in the emissions trading provisions any
emissions units for which emissions are not quantifiable or for which there are
no replicable procedures to enforce the emissions trades. The permit shall also
require compliance with all applicable requirements. Changes made under this
paragraph shall not include modifications under any provision of Title I of the
Act and may not exceed emissions allowable under the permit. The terms and
conditions shall provide for Class I Sources, for notice that conforms to
Sections
17.12.090(D) and (E). In addition, the notices for Class I sources shall
describe how the increases and decreases in emissions will comply with the
terms and conditions of the permit.
      15.   Other terms and conditions as are required by the Act, A.R.S. Title
49, Chapter 3, Articles 1, 2 and 3 and the rules adopted in Title 17.
   B.   Federally Enforceable Requirements.
      1.   The following permit conditions shall be enforceable by the
administrator and citizens under the Act:
         a.   Except as provided in paragraph (B)(2) of this subsection, all
terms and conditions in a Class I permit, including any provision designed to
limit a source's potential to emit;
         b.   Terms and conditions in any permit entered into voluntarily
pursuant to Section
17.11.190, as follows:
            i.   Emissions limitations, controls or other requirements; and
            ii.   Monitoring, recordkeeping and reporting requirements
associated with the emissions limitations, controls or other requirements in
subdivision (b)(i) of this subparagraph.
      2.   Notwithstanding subsection (B)(1)(a), the control officer shall
specifically designate as not being federally enforceable under the Act any
terms and conditions included in a Class I permit that are not required under
the Act or under any of its applicable requirements.
   C.   Each permit shall contain a compliance plan that meets the requirements
of Section
17.12.080.
   D.   Each permit shall include the applicable permit shield provisions set
forth in Section
17.11.080.
   E.   A Class I permit issued to a major source shall require that revisions
be made under Section
17.12.130 to incorporate additional applicable requirements adopted by the
administrator under the Act that become applicable to a source with a permit
with a remaining permit term of three or more years. No reopening shall be
required if the effective date of the applicable requirement is after the
expiration of the permit. The revisions shall be made as expeditiously as
practicable, but not later than eighteen months after the promulgation of such
standards and regulations. Any permit revision required pursuant to this
subsection shall comply with provisions in Section
17.12.140 for permit renewal and shall reset the five-year permit term.
(Ord. 2025-9 § 1 (part), 2025; Ord. 2019-28 § 3 (part), 2019; Ord. 2017-20 § 2
(part), 2017)
17.12.050   Establishment of an emissions cap for Class I permits.
   A.   An applicant may, in its application for a new permit, renewal of an
existing permit, or as a significant permit revision, request an emissions cap
for a particular pollutant expressed in tons per year as determined on a
twelve-month rolling average, or any shorter averaging time necessary to
enforce any applicable requirement, for any emissions unit, combination of
emissions units, or an entire source to allow operating flexibility including
emissions trading for the purpose of complying with the cap. This section shall
not apply to sources that hold an authority to operate under a general permit
pursuant to Section
17.13.080.
   B.   In order to incorporate an emissions cap in a permit the applicant must
demonstrate to the control officer that terms and conditions in the permit
will:
      1.   Ensure compliance with all applicable requirements for the
pollutant;
      2.   Contain replicable procedures to ensure that the emissions cap is
enforceable as a practical matter and emissions trading conducted under it is
quantifiable and enforceable as a practical matter. For the purposes of this
section, "enforceable as a practical matter" shall include the following
criteria:
         a.   The permit conditions are permanent and quantifiable;
         b.   The permit includes a legally enforceable obligation to comply;
         c.   The limits impose an objective and quantifiable operational or
production limit or require the use of in-place air pollution control
equipment;
         d.   The permit limits have short-term averaging times consistent with
the averaging times of the applicable requirement;
         e.   The permit conditions are enforceable and are independent of any
other applicable limitations; and
         f.   The permit conditions for monitoring, recordkeeping, and
reporting requirements are sufficient to comply with Sections
17.12.040(A)(3), (A)(4), and (A)(5).
      3.   For a Class I permit, include all terms required under Section
17.12.040(A) and Section
17.11.180.
   C.   Class I sources shall log an increase or decrease in actual emissions
authorized as a trade under an emissions cap unless an applicable requirement
requires notice to the control officer. The log shall contain the information
required by the permit including, at a minimum, when the proposed emissions
increase or decrease occurred, a description of the physical change or change
in method of operation that produced the increase or decrease, the change in
emissions from the physical change or change in method of operation, and how
the increase or decrease in emissions complies with the permit.
   D.   The control officer shall not include in an emissions cap or emissions
trading allowed under a cap any emissions unit for which the emissions are not
quantifiable or for which there are no replicable procedures or practical means
to enforce emissions trades.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.195.
17.12.060   Review by the EPA and affected states for Class I permits.
   A.   Except as provided in Section
17.12.010(F) and as waived by the administrator, for each Class I permit, a
copy of each of the following shall be provided to the administrator as
follows:
      1.   The applicant shall provide a complete copy of the application
including any attachments, compliance plans and other information required by
Section
17.12.010(E) at the time of submittal of the application to the control
officer.
      2.   The control officer shall provide the proposed final permit after
public and affected state review.
      3.   The control officer shall provide the final permit at the time of
issuance.
   B.   The control officer shall keep all records associated with all permits
for a minimum of five years from issuance.
   C.   No permit for which an application is required to be submitted to the
administrator under subsection A of this section shall be issued if the
administrator properly objects to its issuance in writing within forty-five
days of receipt of the proposed permit from the department and all necessary
supporting information.
   D.   Review by Affected States.
      1.   For each Class I permit, the control officer shall provide notice of
each proposed permit to any affected state on or before the time that the
control officer provides this notice to the public as required under Section
17.12.190 except to the extent Section
17.12.110 (Minor Revisions for Class I permits) requires the timing of the
notice to be different.
      2.   If the control officer refuses to accept a recommendation of any
affected state submitted during the public or affected state review period, the
control officer shall notify the administrator and the affected state in
writing. The notification shall include the control officer's reasons for not
accepting any such recommendation, and shall be provided to the administrator
as part of the submittal of the proposed final permit. The control officer
shall not be required to accept recommendations that are not based on federal
applicable requirements or requirements of state law.
   E.   Any person who petitions the administrator pursuant to 40 CFR 70.8(d)
shall notify the control officer by certified mail of such petition as soon as
possible, but in no case more than ten days following such petition. Such
notice shall include the grounds for objection and whether such objections were
raised during the public comment period. If the administrator objects to the
permit as a result of a petition filed under this subsection, the control
officer shall not issue the permit until the EPA's objection has been resolved,
except that a petition for review does not stay the effectiveness of a permit
or its requirements if the permit was issued after the end of the forty-five-
day administrative review period and prior to the administrator's objection.
   F.   If the control officer has issued a permit prior to receipt of the
administrator's objection under subsection E of this section, and the
administrator indicates that it should be revised, terminated, or revoked and
reissued, the control officer shall respond consistent with Section
17.12.130 and may thereafter issue only a revised permit that satisfies the
administrator's objection. In any case, the source shall not be in violation of
the requirement to have submitted a timely and complete application.
   G.   Prohibition on Default Issuance.
      1.   No Class I permit including a permit renewal or revision shall be
issued until affected states and the administrator have had an opportunity to
review the proposed permit.
      2.   No permit or renewal shall be issued unless the control officer has
acted on the application.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.200.
17.12.070   Acid rain.
   A.   40 CFR 72, 74, 75, and 76, and all accompanying appendices, adopted as
of July 1, 2019, and no future editions or amendments are incorporated by
reference as applicable requirements. These standards are on file with the
department and shall be applied by the department. These standards can be
obtained from the U.S. Government Publishing Office, Superintendent of
Documents, Mail Stop SSOP, Washington D.C. 20402-9328.
   B.   When used in 40 CFR 72, 74, 75, and 76 "Permitting Authority" means the
Pima County department of environmental quality and "Administrator" means the
administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
   C.   If the provisions or requirements of the regulations incorporated in
this section conflict with any of the remaining portions of this title, the
regulations incorporated in this section shall apply and take precedence.
(Ord. 2019-28 § 3 (part), 2019; Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.365.
17.12.080   Compliance plan—Certification for Class I permits.
   A.   All Class I permits shall contain the following elements with respect
to compliance:
      1.   The elements required by Sections
17.12.040(A)(3), (A)(4), and (A)(5).
      2.   Requirements for certifications of compliance with terms and
conditions contained in a Class I permit, including emissions limitations,
standards, and work practices. Permits shall include each of the following:
         a.   The frequency of submissions of compliance certifications, which
shall not be less than annually.
         b.   The means to monitor the compliance of the source with its
emissions limitations, standards, and work practices.
         c.   A requirement that the compliance certification include all of
the following (the identification of applicable information may cross-reference
the permit or previous reports, as applicable):
            i.   The identification of each term or condition of the permit
that is the basis of the certification;
            ii.   The identification of the methods or other means used by the
owner or operator for determining the compliance status with each term and
condition during the certification period. The methods and other means shall
include, at a minimum, the methods, and means required under Section
17.12.040(A)(3). If necessary, the owner or operator also shall identify any
other material information that must be included in the certification to comply
with Section 113(c)(2) of the Act, which prohibits knowingly making a false
certification or omitting material information;
            iii.   The status of compliance with the terms and conditions of
the permit for the period covered by the certification, including whether
compliance during the period was continuous or intermittent. The certification
shall be based on the methods or means designated in subsection (2)(c)(ii). The
certification shall identify each deviation and take it into account in the
compliance certification. For emission units subject to 40 CFR 64, the
certification shall also identify as possible exceptions to compliance any
period during which compliance is required and in which an excursion or
exceedance defined under 40 CFR 64 occurred; and
            iv.   Other facts the control officer may require to determine the
compliance status of the source.
         d.   A requirement that permittees submit all compliance
certifications to the control officer. Class I permittees shall also submit
compliance certifications to the administrator.
         e.   Additional requirements specified in Sections 114(a)(3) and 504
(b) of the Act (Inspections, Monitoring and Entry or Permit Requirements and
Conditions) or pursuant to Section
17.11.190.
      3.   A requirement for any document required to be submitted by a
permittee, including reports, to contain a certification by a responsible
official of truth, accuracy, and completeness. This certification and any other
certification required under this chapter shall state that, based on
information and belief formed after reasonable inquiry, the statements and
information in the document are true, accurate, and complete.
      4.   Inspection and entry provisions that require that, upon presentation
of proper credentials, the permittee shall allow the control officer to:
         a.   Enter upon the permittee's premises where a source is located or
emissions-related activity is conducted, or records are required to be kept
under the conditions of the permit;
         b.   Have access to and copy, at reasonable times, any records that
are required to be kept under the conditions of the permit;
         c.   Inspect, at reasonable times, any facilities, equipment
(including monitoring and air pollution control equipment), practices, or
operations regulated or required under the permit;
         d.   Sample or monitor, at reasonable times, substances or parameters
for the purpose of assuring compliance with the permit or other applicable
requirements; and
         e.   Record any inspection by use of written, electronic, magnetic or
photographic media.
      5.   A compliance plan that contains all the following:
         a.   A description of the compliance status of the source with respect
to all applicable requirements;
         b.   A description as follows:
            i.   For applicable requirements with which the source is in
compliance, a statement that the source will continue to comply with
requirements;
            ii.   For applicable requirements that will become effective during
the permit term, a statement that the source will meet the requirements on a
timely basis; and
            iii.   For requirements for which the source is not in compliance
at the time of permit issuance, a narrative description of how the source will
achieve compliance with such requirements;
         c.   A compliance schedule as follows:
            i.   For applicable requirements with which the source is in
compliance, a statement that the source will continue to comply with the
requirements;
            ii.   For applicable requirements that will become effective during
the permit term, a statement that the source will meet such requirements on a
timely basis. A statement that the source will meet in a timely manner
applicable requirements that become effective during the permit term shall
satisfy this provision, unless a more detailed schedule is expressly required
by the applicable requirement;
            iii.   A schedule of compliance for sources that are not in
compliance with all applicable requirements at the time of permit issuance. The
schedule shall include a schedule of remedial measures, including an
enforceable sequence of actions with milestones, leading to compliance with any
applicable requirement for which the source will be in noncompliance at the
time of permit issuance. This compliance schedule shall resemble and be at
least as stringent as that contained in any judicial consent decree or
administrative order to which the source is subject. The schedule of compliance
shall supplement, and shall not sanction noncompliance with, the applicable
requirements on which it is based.
         d.   A schedule for submission of certified progress reports no less
frequently than every six months for sources required to have a schedule of
compliance to remedy a violation. The progress reports shall contain:
            i.   Dates for achieving the activities, milestones, or compliance
required in the schedule of compliance, and dates when such activities,
milestones or compliance were achieved; and
            ii.   An explanation of why any dates in the schedule of compliance
were not or will not be met, and any preventative or corrective measures
adopted.
      6.   The compliance plan content requirements specified in subdivision
(A)(5) shall apply and be included in the acid rain portion of a compliance
plan for an affected source, except as specifically superseded by regulations
promulgated under Title IV of the Act (Acid Deposition Control) and
incorporated under Section
17.12.070 with regard to the schedule and each method the source will use to
achieve compliance with the acid rain emissions limitations.
      7.   If there is a Federal Implementation Plan (FIP) applicable to the
source, a provision that compliance with the FIP is required.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.220.
Article II. Permit Revisions, Renewals and Transfers for Class I Permits
17.12.090   Facility changes allowed without permit revisions for Class I
permits.
17.12.100   Administrative permit amendments for Class I permits.
17.12.110   Minor permit revisions for Class I permits.
17.12.120   Significant permit revisions for Class I permits.
17.12.130   Reopening, revocation, reissuance, or termination for Class I
permits.
17.12.140   Permit renewal and expiration for Class I permits.
17.12.150   Transfers for Class I permits.
17.12.090   Facility changes allowed without permit revisions for Class I
permits.
   A.   A facility with a Class I permit may make changes without a permit
revision if all of the following apply:
      1.   The changes are not modifications under any provision of Title I of
the Act (Air Pollution Prevention and Control) or under A.R.S. § 49-401.01(24);
      2.   The changes do not exceed the emissions allowable under the permit
whether expressed therein as a rate of emissions or in terms of total
emissions;
      3.   The changes do not violate any applicable requirements or trigger
any additional applicable requirements;
      4.   The changes satisfy all requirements for a minor permit revision
under Section
17.12.110; and
      5.   The changes do not contravene federally enforceable permit terms and
conditions that are monitoring (including test methods), record keeping,
reporting, or compliance certification requirements.
   B.   The substitution of an item of process or pollution control equipment
for an identical or substantially similar item of process or pollution control
equipment shall qualify as a change that does not require a permit revision, if
the substitution meets all of the requirements of subsections A, D and E.
   C.   Except for sources with authority to operate under general permits,
permitted sources may trade increases and decreases in emissions within the
permitted facility, as established in the permit under Section
17.12.040(A)(12), if an applicable implementation plan provides for the
emissions trades without applying for a permit revision and based on the seven
working days' notice prescribed in subsection D of this section. This provision
is available if the permit does not provide for the emissions trading as a
minor permit revision.
   D.   For each change under subsections A through C, a written notice, by
certified mail or hand delivery, shall be received by the control officer and
the administrator a minimum of seven working days in advance of the change.
Notifications of changes associated with emergency conditions, such as
malfunctions necessitating the replacement of equipment, may be provided less
than seven working days in advance of the change but must be provided as far in
advance of the change, or if advance notification is not practicable, as soon
after the change as possible.
   E.   Each notification shall include:
      1.   When the proposed change will occur;
      2.   A description of the change;
      3.   Any change in emissions of regulated air pollutants;
      4.   The pollutants emitted subject to the emissions trade, if any;
      5.   The provisions in the implementation plan that provide for the
emissions trade with which the source will comply and any other information as
may be required by the provisions in the implementation plan authorizing the
trade;
      6.   If the emissions trading provisions of the implementation plan are
invoked, then the permit requirements with which the source will comply; and
      7.   Any permit term or condition that is no longer applicable as a
result of the change.
   F.   The permit shield described in Section
17.11.080 shall not apply to any change made under subsections A through C.
Compliance with the permit requirements that the source will meet using the
emissions trade shall be determined according to requirements of the
implementation plan authorizing the emissions trade.
   G.   Except as otherwise provided for in the permit, making a change from
one alternative operating scenario to another as provided under Section
17.12.040(A)(11) shall not require any prior notice under this section.
   H.   Notwithstanding any other part of this section, the control officer may
require a permit to be revised for any change that when considered together
with any other changes submitted by the same source under this section over the
term of the permit, do not satisfy subsection A.
   I.   The control officer shall make available to the public monthly
summaries of all notices received under this section.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.230.
17.12.100   Administrative permit amendments for Class I permits.
   A.   Except for provisions pursuant to Title IV of the Act (Acid Deposition
Control), an administrative permit amendment is a permit revision that does any
of the following:
      1.   Corrects typographical errors;
      2.   Identifies a change in the name, address, or phone number of any
person identified in the permit, or provides a similar minor administrative
change at the source;
      3.   Requires more frequent monitoring or reporting by the permittee; and
      4.   Allows for a change in ownership or operational control of a source
as approved under Section
17.12.150 where the control officer determines that no other change in the
permit is necessary, provided that a written agreement containing a specific
date for transfer of permit responsibility coverage, and liability between the
current and new permittee has been submitted to the control officer.
   B.   Administrative permit amendments to Title IV provisions of the permit
shall be governed by regulations promulgated by the administrator under Title
IV of the Act (Acid Deposition Control).
   C.   The control officer shall take no more than sixty days from receipt of
a request for an administrative permit amendment to take final action on such
request, and for Class I permits may incorporate such changes without providing
notice to the public or affected states provided that it designates any such
permit revisions as having been made pursuant to this section.
   D.   The control officer shall submit a copy of Class I permits revised
under this section to the administrator.
   E.   Except for administrative permit amendments involving a transfer under
Section
17.12.150, the source may implement the changes addressed in the request for an
administrative amendment immediately upon submittal of the request.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.245.
17.12.110   Minor permit revisions for Class I permits.
   A.   Minor permit revision procedures may be used only for those changes at
a Class I source that satisfy all of the following:
      1.   Do not violate any applicable requirement;
      2.   Do not involve substantive changes to existing monitoring,
reporting, or recordkeeping requirements in the permit;
      3.   Do not require or change a case-by-case determination of an emission
limitation or other standard, or a source specific determination of ambient
impacts, or a visibility or increment analysis;
      4.   Do not seek to establish or change a permit term or condition for
which there is no corresponding underlying applicable requirement and that the
source has assumed in order to avoid an applicable requirement to which the
source would otherwise be subject. The terms and conditions include:
         a.   A federally enforceable emissions cap that the source would
assume to avoid classification as a modification under any provision of Title I
of the Act (Air Pollution Prevention and Control),
         b.   An alternative emissions limit approved under regulations
promulgated under the Section 112(i)(5) of the Act (Hazardous Air Pollutants);
      5.   Are not modifications under any provision of Title I of the Act (Air
Pollution Prevention and Control);
      6.   Are not changes in fuels not represented in the permit application
or provided for in the permit;
      7.   The increase in the source's potential to emit any regulated air
pollutant is not significant as defined in Section
17.04.340; and
      8.   Are not required to be processed as a significant revision under
Section
17.12.120.
   B.   As approved by the control officer, minor permit revision procedures
may be used for permit revisions involving the use of economic incentives,
marketable permits, emissions trading, and other similar approaches, to the
extent that the minor permit revision procedures are explicitly provided for in
an applicable implementation plan or in applicable requirements promulgated by
the administrator.
   C.   An application for minor permit revision shall be on the standard
application form contained in Title 18, Chapter 2, Appendix 1 of the A.A.C. and
include the following:
      1.   A description of the change, the emissions resulting from the
change, and any new applicable requirements that will apply if the change
occurs;
      2.   For Class I sources, and any source that is making the change
immediately after it files the application, the source's suggested proposed
permit;
      3.   Certification by a responsible official, consistent with standard
permit application requirements, that the proposed revision meets the criteria
for use of minor permit revision procedures and a request that the procedures
be used;
   D.   EPA and Affected State Notification. For Class I permits, within five
working days of receipt of an application for a minor permit revision, the
control officer shall notify the administrator and affected states of the
requested permit revision in accordance with Section
17.12.060.
   E.   The control officer shall follow the following timetable for action on
an application for a minor permit revision:
      1.   For Class I permits, the control officer shall not issue a final
permit revision until after the administrator's forty-five-day review period or
until the administrator has notified the control officer that the administrator
will not object to issuance of the permit revision, whichever is first,
although the control officer may approve the permit revision before that time.
Within ninety days of the control officer's receipt of an application under
minor permit revision procedures, or fifteen days after the end of the
administrator's forty-five-day review period, whichever is later, the control
officer shall do one or more of the following:
         a.   Issue the permit revision as proposed;
         b.   Deny the permit revision application;
         c.   Determine that the proposed permit revision does not meet the
minor permit revision criteria and should be reviewed under the significant
revision procedures in Section
17.12.120; or
         d.   Revise the proposed permit revision and transmit to the
administrator the new proposed permit revision as required in Section
17.12.060.
   F.   The source may make the change proposed in its minor permit revision
application immediately after it files the application. After the source makes
the change allowed by the preceding sentence, and until the control officer
takes any of the actions specified in subsection E, the source shall comply
with both the applicable requirements governing the change and the proposed
revised permit terms and conditions. During this time period, the source need
not comply with the existing permit terms and conditions it seeks to modify.
However, if the source fails to comply with its proposed permit terms and
conditions during this time period, the existing permit terms and conditions it
seeks to revise may be enforced against it.
   G.   The permit shield under Section
17.11.080 shall not extend to minor permit revisions.
   H.   Notwithstanding any other part of this section, the control officer may
require a permit to be revised under Section
17.12.120 for any change that, when considered together with any other changes
submitted by the same source under this section over the life of the permit, do
not satisfy subsection A for Class I sources.
   I.   The control officer shall make available to the public monthly
summaries of all applications for minor revisions.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.255.
17.12.120   Significant permit revisions for Class I permits.
   A.   For Class I sources, a significant revision shall be used for an
application requesting a permit revision that does not qualify as a minor
permit revision or as an administrative amendment. A significant revision that
is only required because of a change described in Section
17.12.110(A)(6) or (7) shall not be considered a significant permit revision
under Part 70 for the purposes of 40 CFR 64.5(a)(2). Every significant change
in existing monitoring permit terms or conditions and every relaxation of
reporting or record keeping permit terms or conditions shall follow significant
revision procedures.
   B.   Any modifications to major sources of federally listed hazardous air
pollutants, and any reconstruction of a source, or a process or production
unit, under Section 112(g) of the Act and regulations promulgated thereunder,
shall follow significant revision procedures and any rules adopted under A.R.S.
§§ 49-426.03 and 49-480.03.
   C.   Significant permit revisions shall meet all requirements of this
chapter for applications, public participation, review by affected states, and
review by the administrator that apply to permit issuance and renewal.
   D.   The control officer shall process the majority of significant permit
revision applications received each calendar year within nine months of receipt
of a complete permit application but in no case longer than eighteen months.
Applications for which the control officer undertakes accelerated processing
under Section
17.12.220 shall not be included in this requirement.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.260.
17.12.130   Reopening, revocation, reissuance, or termination for Class I
permits.
   A.   Reopening for Cause.
      1.   Each issued permit shall include provisions specifying the
conditions under which the permit shall be reopened prior to the expiration of
the permit. A permit shall be reopened and revised under any of the following
circumstances:
         a.   Additional applicable requirements under the Act become
applicable to a major source with a remaining permit term of three or more
years. Such a reopening shall be completed not later than eighteen months after
promulgation of the applicable requirement. No such reopening is required if
the effective date of the requirement is later than the date on which the
permit is due to expire, unless the original permit or any of its terms and
conditions has been extended pursuant to Section
17.12.140(B). Any permit reopening required pursuant to this paragraph shall
comply with provisions in Section
17.12.140 for permit renewal and shall reset the five-year permit term.
         b.   Additional requirements, including excess emissions requirements,
become applicable to an affected source under the acid rain program. Upon
approval by the administrator, excess emissions offset plans shall be deemed to
be incorporated into the Class I permit.
         c.   The control officer or the administrator determines that the
permit contains a material mistake or that inaccurate statements were made in
establishing the emissions standards or other terms or conditions of the
permit.
         d.   The control officer or the administrator determines that the
permit needs to be revised or revoked to assure compliance with the applicable
requirements.
      2.   Proceedings to reopen and issue a permit, including appeal of any
final action relating to a permit reopening, shall follow the same procedures
as apply to initial permit issuance and shall affect only those parts of the
permit for which cause to reopen exists. Such reopening shall be made as
expeditiously as practicable.
      3.   Reopenings under subdivision (A)(1) of this section shall not be
initiated before a notice of such intent is provided to the source by the
control officer at least thirty days in advance of the date that the permit is
to be reopened, except that the control officer may provide a shorter time
period in the case of an emergency.
      4.   When a permit is reopened and revised pursuant to this section, the
control officer may make appropriate revisions to the permit shield established
pursuant to Section
17.11.080.
   B.   Within ten days of receipt of notice from the administrator that cause
exists to reopen a Class I permit, the control officer shall notify the source.
The source shall have thirty days to respond to the control officer. Within
ninety days of receipt of notice from the administrator that cause exists to
reopen a permit, or within any extension to the ninety days granted by EPA, the
control officer shall forward to the administrator and the source a proposed
determination of termination, revision, revocation or reissuance of the permit.
Within ninety days of receipt of an EPA objection to the control officer's
proposal, the control officer shall resolve the objection and act on the
permit.
   C.   The control officer may issue a notice of termination of a permit
issued pursuant to this title if:
      1.   The control officer has reasonable cause to believe that the permit
was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation;
      2.   The person applying for the permit failed to disclose a material
fact required by the permit application form or the regulation applicable to
the permit, of which the applicant had or should have had knowledge at the time
the application was submitted;
      3.   The terms and conditions of the permit have been or are being
violated.
   If the control officer issues a notice of termination under this section,
the notice shall be served on the permittee by certified mail, return receipt
requested. The notice shall include a statement detailing the grounds for the
revocation and a statement that the permittee is entitled to a hearing. A
notice of termination issued by the control officer shall become effective
immediately upon the expiration of the time during which a request for a
hearing may be made pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-511 unless the person or persons
named in such notice shall have made a timely request for a hearing before the
hearing board.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.270.
17.12.140   Permit renewal and expiration for Class I permits.
   A.   A permit being renewed is subject to the same procedural requirements,
including any for public participation and affected states and administrator
review, that would apply to that permit's initial issuance.
   B.   Except as provided in Section
17.11.050, permit expiration terminates the source's right to operate unless a
timely application for renewal that is sufficient under A.R.S. § 41-1064 has
been submitted in accordance with Section
17.12.010. Any testing that is required for renewal shall be completed before
the proposed permit is issued by the control officer.
   C.   The control officer shall act on an application for a permit renewal
within the same time frames as on an initial permit.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.280.
17.12.150   Transfers for Class I permits.
   A.   Except as provided in A.R.S. § 49-483 and subsection B of this section,
a permit may be transferred to another person if:
      1.   The person who holds the permit gives notice of the following to the
control officer in writing at least thirty days before the proposed transfer:
         a.   The permit number and expiration date;
         b.   The name, address and telephone number of the current permit
holder;
         c.   The name, address and telephone number of the organization to
receive the permit;
      2.   The new owner gives notice of the following to the control officer
in writing at least thirty days before the proposed transfer:
         a.   The name and title of the individual within the organization who
is accepting responsibility for the permit along with a signed statement by
that person indicating such acceptance;
         b.   A description of the equipment to be transferred;
         c.   A written agreement containing a specific date for transfer or
permit responsibility, coverage, and liability between the current and new
permittee;
         d.   Provisions for the payment of any fees pursuant to
Chapter 17.12,
Article V that will be due and payable before the effective date of transfer;
         e.   Sufficient information about the source's technical and financial
capabilities of operating the source to allow the control officer to make the
decision in subsection B of this section including:
            i.   The qualifications of each person principally responsible for
the operation of the source,
            ii.   A statement by the chief financial officer of the new
permittee that it is financially capable of operating the facility in
compliance with the law, and the information that provides the basis for that
statement,
            iii.   A brief description of any action for the enforcement of any
federal or state law, rule or regulation, or any county, city or local
government ordinance relating to the protection of the environment, instituted
against any person employed by the new permittee and principally responsible
for operating the facility during the five years preceding the date of
application. In lieu of this description, the new permittee may submit a copy
of the certificate of disclosure or 10K form required under A.R.S. § 49-109, or
a statement that this information has been filed in compliance with A.R.S. §
49-109.
   B.   The control officer shall deny the transfer if the control officer
determines that the organization receiving the permit is not capable of
operating the source in compliance with Article 3, Chapter 3, Title 49, Arizona
Revised Statutes, the provisions of this title or the provisions of the permit.
Notice of the denial shall be sent to the original permit holder by certified
mail stating the reason for the denial within ten working days of the control
officer's receipt of the application. If the transfer is not denied within ten
working days after receipt of the notice, it shall be deemed approved.
   C.   To appeal the transfer denial:
      1.   Both the transferor and transferee shall petition the hearing board
in writing for a public hearing; and
      2.   The appeal process for a permit shall be followed.
   D.   The control officer shall make available to the public monthly
summaries of all notices received under this section.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.290.
Article III. Emissions for Class I Sources
17.12.160   Annual emissions inventory questionnaire for Class I permits.
17.12.170   Excess emissions reporting requirements for Class I permits.
17.12.160   Annual emissions inventory questionnaire for Class I permits.
   A.   Every source with a Class I permit shall complete and submit to the
control officer an annual emissions inventory questionnaire. The questionnaire
is due by March 31st, or ninety days after the control officer makes the
inventory form available, whichever occurs later, and shall include emission
information for the previous calendar year. These requirements apply whether or
not a permit has been issued and whether or not a permit application has been
filed.
   B.   The questionnaire shall be on a form provided by or approved by the
control officer and shall include the following information:
      1.   The source's name, description, mailing address, contact person and
contact person phone number, and physical address and location, if different
than the mailing address.
      2.   Process information for the source, including design capacity,
operations schedule, and emissions control devices, their description and
efficiencies.
      3.   The actual quantity of emissions from permitted emission points and
fugitive emissions as provided in the permit, including documentation of the
method of measurement, calculation or estimation determined pursuant to
subsection C of this section of the following regulated air pollutants:
         a.   Any single regulated air pollutant in a quantity greater than one
ton or the amount listed for the pollutant in the definition of "significant"
in Section
17.04.340, whichever is less.
         b.   Any combination of regulated air pollutants in a quantity greater
than 2.5 tons.
   C.   Actual quantities of emissions shall be determined using the following
emission facts or data:
      1.   Whenever available, emissions estimates shall either be calculated
from continuous emissions monitors certified pursuant to 40 CFR 75, Subpart C
and referenced appendices, or data quality assured pursuant to Appendix F of 40
CFR 60.
      2.   When sufficient data pursuant to subsection (C)(1) of this section
is not available, emissions estimates shall be calculated from data from source
performance tests conducted pursuant to Section
17.11.210 in the calendar year being reported or, when not available, conducted
in the most recent calendar year representing the operating conditions of the
year being reported.
      3.   When sufficient data pursuant to subsection (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this
section is not available, emissions estimates shall be calculated using
emissions factors from EPA Publication No. AP-42 "Compilation of Air Pollutant
Emission Factors," Volume I: Stationary Point and Area Sources, Fifth Edition,
1995, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, NC,
including Supplements A through F and all updates published through July 1,
2011 (and no future editions). AP-42 is incorporated by reference and is on
file with the Department of Environmental Quality and can be obtained from the
Government Printing Office, 732 North Capitol Street, NW, Washington, D.C.
20401, telephone (202) 512-1800, or by downloading the document from the web
site for the EPA Clearinghouse for Emission Inventories and Emission Factors.
      4.   When sufficient data pursuant to subsections (C)(1) through (C)(3)
of this section is not available, emissions estimates shall be calculated from
material balance using engineering knowledge of process.
      5.   When sufficient data pursuant to subsections (C)(1) through (C)(4)
of this section is not available, emissions estimates shall be calculated by
equivalent methods approved by the control officer. The control officer shall
only approve methods that are demonstrated as accurate and reliable as the
applicable method in subsections (C)(1) through (C)(4) of this section.
   D.   Actual quantities of emissions calculated under subsection C of this
section shall be determined on the basis of actual operating hours, production
rates, in-place process control equipment, operational process control data,
and types of materials processed, stored or combusted.
   E.   An amendment to an annual emission inventory questionnaire, containing
the documentation required by subsection (B)(3) of this section, shall be
submitted to the control officer by any source whenever it discovers or
receives notice, within two years of the original submittal, that incorrect or
insufficient information was submitted to the control officer by a previous
questionnaire. If the incorrect or insufficient information resulted in an
incorrect annual emissions fee, the control officer shall require that
additional payment be made or shall apply an amount as a credit to a future
annual emissions fee. The submittal of an amendment under this subsection shall
not subject the owner or operator to an enforcement action or a civil or
criminal penalty if the original submittal of incorrect or insufficient
information was due to reasonable cause and not willful neglect.
   F.   The control officer may require submittal of supplemental emissions
inventory questionnaires for air contaminants pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-476.01.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.320.
17.12.170   Excess emissions reporting requirements for Class I permits.
   A.   The owner or operator of any source shall report to the control officer
any emissions in excess of the limits established by this chapter or the
applicable permit. The report shall be in two parts as specified below:
      1.   Notification by telephone or facsimile within twenty-four hours of
the time the owner or operator first learned of the occurrence of excess
emissions that includes all available information from subsection B.
      2.   Detailed written notification by submission of an excess emissions
report within seventy-two hours of the notification under subsection (A)(1).
   B.   The excess emissions report shall contain the following information:
      1.   The identity of each stack or other emission point where the excess
emissions occurred;
      2.   The magnitude of the excess emissions expressed in the units of the
applicable emission limitation and the operating data and calculations used in
determining the magnitude of the excess emissions;
      3.   The time and duration or expected duration of the excess emissions;
      4.   The identity of the equipment from which the excess emissions
emanated;
      5.   The nature and cause of the emissions;
      6.   The steps taken, if the excess emissions were the result of a
malfunction, to remedy the malfunction and the steps taken or planned to
prevent the recurrence of the malfunctions;
      7.   The steps that were or are being taken to limit the excess
emissions; and
      8.   If the source's permit contains procedures governing source
operation during periods of startup or malfunction and the excess emissions
resulted from startup or malfunction, a list of the steps taken to comply with
the permit procedures.
   C.   In the case of continuous or recurring excess emissions, the
notification requirements of this section shall be satisfied if the source
provides the required notification after excess emissions are first detected
and includes in the notification an estimate of the time the excess emissions
will continue. Excess emissions occurring after the estimated time period or
changes in the nature of the emissions as originally reported shall require
additional notification pursuant to subsections A and B.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.040.
Article IV. Public Participation and Notification Requirements
17.12.190   Public participation for Class I permits.
17.12.200   Public notification for Class I permits.
17.12.190   Public participation for Class I permits.
   A.   The control officer shall provide public notice, an opportunity for
public comment, and an opportunity for a hearing before taking the following
actions:
      1.   A permit issuance or renewal of a permit.
      2.   A significant permit revision.
      3.   Revocation and reissuance or reopening of a permit.
      4.   Any conditional orders pursuant to Section
17.28.100.
   B.   The control officer shall provide public notice of receipt of complete
applications for permits to construct or make a major modification to major
sources by publishing a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county where the source will be located.
   C.   The control officer shall provide notice required pursuant to
subsection A of this section, or any other section of this title, as follows:
      1.   The control officer shall publish the notice once each week for two
consecutive weeks for any Class I permit in two newspapers of general
circulation in the county where the source is or will be located.
      2.   The control officer shall mail a copy of the notice to persons on a
mailing list developed by the control officer consisting of those persons who
have requested in writing to be placed on such a mailing list.
   D.   The notice required by subsection C shall include the following:
      1.   Identification of the affected facility;
      2.   Name and address of the permittee or applicant;
      3.   Name and address of the permitting authority processing the permit
action;
      4.   The activity or activities involved in the permit action;
      5.   The emissions change involved in any permit revisions;
      6.   The air contaminants to be emitted;
      7.   If applicable, that a notice of confidentiality has been filed under
Section
17.11.070;
      8.   A statement that any person may submit written comments, or a
written request for a public hearing, or both, on the proposed permit action,
along with the deadline for such requests or comments;
      9.   The name, address, and telephone number of a person from PDEQ from
whom additional information may be obtained;
      10.   Locations where copies of the permit or permit revision
application, the proposed permit, and all other materials available to the
control officer that are relevant to the permit decision may be reviewed,
including the PDEQ office, and the times at which they shall be available for
public inspection.
   E.   The control officer shall hold a public hearing to receive comments on
petitions for conditional orders which would vary from requirements of the
applicable implementation plan. For all other actions involving a proposed
permit, the control officer shall hold a public hearing only upon written
request pursuant to the provisions of A.R.S. § 49-426. If a public hearing is
requested, the control officer shall schedule the hearing and publish notice as
described in A.R.S. § 49-444 and subsection D of this section. The control
officer shall give notice of any public hearing at least thirty days in advance
of the hearing.
   F.   At the time the control officer publishes the first notice according to
subdivision (C)(1) of this section, the applicant shall post a notice
containing the information required in subsection D of this section at the site
where the source is or may be located. Consistent with federal, state, and
local law, the posting shall be prominently placed at a location under the
applicant's legal control, adjacent to the nearest public roadway, and visible
to the public using the public roadway. If a public hearing is to be held, the
applicant shall place an additional posting providing notice of the hearing.
Any posting shall be maintained until the public comment period is closed.
   G.   The control officer shall provide at least thirty days from the date of
its first notice for an opportunity for public comment for every Class I
permit. For a source required to obtain a permit pursuant to Section
17.11.090(B)(3)(a), the control officer shall provide at least thirty days from
the date of its first notice for an opportunity for public comment. For sources
required to obtain a permit pursuant to Section
17.11.090(B)(3)(b) or Section
17.11.090(B)(3)(c), the control officer shall provide at least five days from
the date of its first notice for an opportunity for public comment. The control
officer shall keep a record of the commenters and of the issues raised during
the public participation process and shall prepare written responses to all
comments received. At the time a final decision is made, the record and copies
of the control officer's responses shall be made available to the applicant and
all commenters.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.340.
17.12.200   Public notification for Class I permits.
   The control officer shall utilize any medium of communication, publication
and exhibition when disseminating information, advertising and publicity in any
field of its purposes, objectives or duties.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.345.
Article V. Fees for Class I Permits
17.12.210   General provisions.
17.12.220   Fees related to Class I permits.
17.12.210   General provisions.
   A.   Permits issued pursuant to a program adopted under this title are
subject to payment of a reasonable fee to be determined as outlined in this
chapter.
   B.   Funds received for permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
deposited in a special public health fund and shall be used by the control
officer to defray the costs of implementing provisions of this title.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.500.
17.12.220   Fees related to Class I permits.
   A.   Source Category. The owner or operator of a source required to have an
air quality permit from the control officer shall pay the fees described in
this section unless authorized to operate under a general permit issued under
Section
17.12.010(L). The fees are based on a source being classified in the following
category: Class I sources are those required or that elect to have a permit
under Section
17.11.090(B)(1).
   B.   Fees for Permit Actions. Except as otherwise provided in this
subsection the owner or operator of a Class I source shall pay to the control
officer one hundred five dollars and eighty cents per hour, adjusted annually
under subsection F, for all permit processing time required for a billable
permit action. Upon completion of permit processing activities other than
issuance or denial of the permit or permit revision, the control officer shall
send notice of the decision to the applicant along with a final itemized bill.
The minimum fee for any billable permit action is one hour of the current
hourly rate. Except as provided in subsection E, the control officer shall not
issue a permit or permit revision until the final bill is paid in full. The
owner or operator of a Class I source that applies for authority to operate
under a general permit shall pay to the control officer five hundred forty
dollars with the submittal of each application. This fee applies to the owner
or operator of any source that intends to continue operating under the
authority of a general permit that has been proposed for renewal.
   C.   The owner or operator of a Class I source that has undergone initial
startup by January 1 shall annually pay to the control officer an
administrative fee plus an emissions-based fee as follows:
      1.   The applicable administrative fee from the table below, as adjusted
annually under subsection F. The fee is due by February 1 or sixty days after
the control officer mails the invoice under subsection D, whichever, is later.
Class I Source Category Administrative Fee
Class I Source Category                     Administrative Fee
Aerospace                                   $15,570.00
Cement Plants                               $47,680.00
Combustion/Boilers                          $11,590.00
Compressor Stations                         $9,530.00
Electronics                                 $15,340.00
Expandable Foam                             $10,990.00
Foundries                                   $14,610.00
Landfills                                   $11,940.00
Lime Plants                                 $44,660.00
Copper and Nickel Mines                     $11,220.00
Gold Mines                                  $11,220.00
Mobile Home Manufacturing                   $11,110.00
Paper Mills                                 $15,330.00
Paper Coaters                               $11,590.00
Petroleum Products Terminal Facilities      $17,020.00
Polymeric Fabric Coaters                    $15,330.00
Reinforced Plastics                         $11,590.00
Semiconductor Fabrication                   $20,170.00
Copper Smelters                             $47,680.00
Utilities—Natural Gas                     $12,310.00
Utilities—Fossil Fuel Except Natural Gas  $24,380.00
Vitamin/Pharmaceutical Manufacturing        $11,830.00
Wood Furniture                              $11,590.00
Others                                      $11,940.00
Others with Continuous Emissions Monitoring $15,340.00
 
      2.   An emissions-based fee of fourteen dollars and eighteen cents per
ton of actual emissions of all regulated pollutants emitted during the previous
calendar year ending twelve months earlier. The fee is adjusted annually under
subsection D and due by February 1 or 60 days after the control officer mails
the invoice under subsection D, whichever is later.
         a.   For purposes of this section, "actual emissions" means the
quantity of all regulated pollutants emitted during the calendar year, as
determined by the annual emissions inventory under Section
17.12.160.
         b.   For purposes of this section, regulated pollutants consist of the
following:
            i.   Nitrogen oxides and any volatile organic compounds;
            ii.   Conventional air pollutants, except carbon monoxide and
ozone;
            iii.   Any pollutant that is subject to any standard promulgated
under Section 111 of the Act, including fluorides, sulfuric acid mist, hydrogen
sulfide, total reduced sulfur, and reduced sulfur compounds; and
            iv.   Any federally listed hazardous air pollutant.
         c.   For purposes of this section, the following emissions of
regulated pollutants are excluded from a source's actual emissions:
            i.   Emissions of any regulated pollutant from the source in excess
of four thousand tons per year;
            ii.   Emissions of any regulated pollutant already included in the
actual emissions for the source, such as a federally listed hazardous air
pollutant that is already accounted for as a VOC or as PM 10 ;
            iii.   Emissions from insignificant activities listed in the permit
application for the source under Section
17.12.010(F)(8);
            iv.   Fugitive emissions of PM 10 from activities other than
crushing, belt transfers, screening, or stacking; and
            v.   Fugitive emissions of VOC from solution-extraction units.
         d.   The control officer shall adjust the rate for emission-based fees
every November 1, beginning on November 1, 2008, by multiplying fourteen
dollars and eighteen cents by the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for the most
recent year, and then dividing by the CPI for the year 2007. The Consumer Price
Index for any year is the average of the Consumer Price Index for all-urban
consumers published by the United States Department of Labor, as of the close
of the twelve-month period ending on August 31 of that year.
   D.   The control officer shall mail the owner or operator of each source an
invoice for all fees due under subsections C by December 1.
   E.   Any person who receives a final itemized bill from the control officer
under this section for a billable permit action may request an informal review
of the hours billed and may pay the bill under protest as provided below:
      1.   The request shall be made in writing, and received by the control
officer within thirty days of the date of the final bill. Unless the control
officer and person agree otherwise, the informal review shall take place within
thirty days after the control officer's receipt of the request. The control
officer shall arrange the date and location of the informal review with the
person at least ten business days before the informal review. The control
officer shall review whether the amounts of time billed are correct and
reasonable for the tasks involved. The control officer shall mail his or her
decision on the informal review to the person within ten business days after
the informal review date.
      2.   The control officer's decision after informal review shall become
final unless, within thirty days after person's receipt of the informal review
decision, the person requests in writing a hearing pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-482.
      3.   If the final itemized bill is paid under protest, the control
officer shall take final action on the permit or permit revision.
   F.   The control officer shall adjust the hourly rate every November 1, to
the nearest ten cents per hour, beginning on November 1, 2008, by multiplying
one hundred five dollars and eighty cents by the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for
the most recent year, and then dividing by the CPI for the year 2007. The
control officer shall adjust the administrative fees listed in subsection C
every November 1, to the nearest ten dollars, beginning on November 1, 2008, by
multiplying the administrative fee by the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for the
most recent year, and then dividing by the CPI for the year 2007. The Consumer
Price Index for any year is the average of the Consumer Price Index for all-
urban consumers published by the United States Department of Labor, as of the
close of the twelve-month period ending on August 31 of that year.
   G.   An applicant for a Class I permit or permit revision may request that
the control officer provide accelerated processing of the application by
providing the control officer written notice sixty days before filing the
application. The request shall be accompanied by an initial fee of fifteen
thousand dollars. The fee is non-refundable to the extent of the control
officer's costs for accelerating the processing if the control officer
undertakes the accelerated processing described below:
      1.   If an applicant requests accelerated permit processing, the control
officer may, to the extent practicable, undertake to process the permit or
permit revision according to the following schedule:
         a.   For applications for initial Class I permits under Section
17.12.010 or significant permit revisions under Section
17.12.120, the control officer shall issue or deny the proposed permit or
permit revision within one hundred twenty days after the control officer
determines that the application is complete.
         b.   For minor permit revisions under Section
17.12.110, the control officer shall issue or deny the permit revision within
sixty days after receiving a complete application.
      2.   At any time after an applicant requests accelerated permit
processing, the control officer may require additional advance payments based
on the most recent estimate of additional costs.
      3.   Upon completion of permit processing activities but before issuance
or denial of the permit or permit revision, the control officer shall send
notice of the decision to the applicant along with a final bill. The final bill
shall include all regular permit processing and other fees due, and, in
addition, the difference between the cost of accelerating the permit
application, including any costs incurred by the control officer in contracting
for, hiring, or supervising the work of outside consultants, and all advance
payments submitted for accelerated processing. In the event all payments made
exceed actual accelerated permit costs, the control officer shall refund the
excess advance payments. Nothing in this subsection affects the public
participation requirements of Section
17.12.190, or EPA and affected state review as required under Section
17.12.060 or Section
17.12.110.
   H.   Inactive Sources. The owner or operator of a permitted source that has
undergone initial startup but was shut down for the entire preceding year shall
pay fifty percent of the administrative fee required under subsection C. The
owner or operator of a source claiming inactive status under this subsection
shall submit a letter to the control officer by November 1 of the calendar year
for which the source was inactive. Termination of a permit does not relieve a
source of any past fees due.
   I.   Transition.
      1.   Subsections A through H of this section are effective December 20,
2007. The first administrative fees are due on February 1, 2008.
      2.   All fees incurred after December 20, 2007, are payable in accordance
with the rates contained in this section.
         a.   Emission-based fees for calendar year 2006 shall be billed at
fourteen dollars and eighteen cents per ton and be due on February 1, 2008.
         b.   Permit processing fees incurred after December 20, 2007 for any
new permit, permit revision, transfer, or renewal shall be billed in accordance
with the rates in this section.
         c.   Fees accrued but not yet paid before the effective date of this
section remain as obligations to be paid to the control officer.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.510.
Chapter 17.13
INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL PERMITS AND PERMIT REVISIONS FOR CLASS II AND CLASS III
PERMITS
   
Article I. - General Provisions
   
Article II. - Permit Revisions, Renewals and Transfers for Class II and Class
III Permits
   
Article III. - Emissions for Class II and Class III Sources
   
Article IV. - Public Participation and Notification Requirements for Class II
and Class III Permits
   
Article V. - Fees for Class II, Class III, and General Permits
Article I. General Provisions
17.13.010   Application processing procedures for Class II and Class III
permits.
17.13.020   Permit contents for Class II and Class III permits.
17.13.030   Grant or denial of applications for Class II and Class III permits.
17.13.040   Appeals of permit actions for Class II and Class III permits.
17.13.050   Annual summary of amendments for Class II or Class III permits.
17.13.060   Voluntary termination of a permit for Class II and Class III
permits.
17.13.070   Establishment of an emissions cap for Class II and Class III
permits.
17.13.080   Application for coverage under general permit.
17.13.090   General permit enforcement.
17.13.010   Application processing procedures for Class II and Class III
permits.
   A.   This section applies to each source requiring a Class II or Class III
permit or permit revision.
   B.   Standard Application Form and Required Information. To apply for any
permit in this section, applicants shall complete the "Standard Permit
Application Form" and supply all information required by the "Filing
Instructions" developed by the control officer. At a minimum an application
must include the following:
      1.   The applicable requirements to which the source may be subject.
      2.   A statement or evidence that the source is so designed, controlled,
or equipped with such air pollution control equipment that it may be expected
to operate without emitting, or without causing to be emitted, air contaminants
in violation of the provisions of A.R.S. Title 49, Chapter 3, Article 3, and
this Title.
      3.   The fees to which the source may be subject.
      4.   A proposed emission limitation, control or other requirement that
meets the requirements of Section
17.11.190.
   C.   Unless otherwise required by Section
17.11.050, a timely application is:
      1.   For a source applying for a permit for the first time, one that is
submitted within twelve months after the source become subject to the permit
program.
      2.   For purposes of permit renewal, one that is submitted at least six
months, but not greater than eighteen months prior to the date of permit
expiration.
      3.   Any existing source which becomes subject to a standard promulgated
by the administrator pursuant to Section 112(d) of the Act (Hazardous Air
Pollutants) shall, within twelve months of the date on which the standard is
promulgated, submit an application for a permit revision demonstrating how the
source will comply with the new standard.
   D.   If an applicable implementation plan allows the determination of an
alternate emission limit, a source may, in its application, propose an emission
limit that is equivalent to the emission limit otherwise applicable to the
source under the applicable implementation plan. The source shall also
demonstrate that the equivalent limit is quantifiable, accountable, enforceable
and subject to replicable compliance determination procedures.
   E.   A complete application is one that satisfies all of the following:
      1.   To be complete, an application shall provide all information
required pursuant to subsection B, of this section (standard application form
section), except that applications for a permit revision need supply such
information only if it is related to the proposed change. A responsible
official shall certify the submitted information consistent with subsection H
of this section (section on certification of truth, accuracy, and
completeness).
      2.   An application for a new permit, a permit revision, or a permit
renewal shall be deemed to be complete unless within sixty days of receipt of
the application, the control officer notifies the applicant by certified mail
that the application is not complete.
      3.   If a source wishes to voluntarily enter into an emission limitation,
control or other requirement pursuant to Section
17.11.190, the source shall describe that emissions limitation, control or
other requirement in its application, along with the proposed associated
monitoring, recordkeeping, and reporting requirements necessary to demonstrate
that the emission limitation, control, or other requirement is permanent,
quantifiable, and otherwise enforceable as a practical matter.
      4.   If while processing an application that has been determined or
deemed to be complete, the control officer determines that additional
information is necessary to evaluate or take final action on that application,
the control officer may request such information in writing, delivered by mail
and set a reasonable deadline for a response. Except for minor permit revisions
as set forth in Section
17.13.130, a source's ability to operate without a permit, as set forth in this
article, shall be in effect from the date the application is determined to be
complete until the final permit is issued, provided that the applicant submits
any requested additional information by the deadline specified by the control
officer. If the control officer notifies an applicant that the application is
not complete under subdivision 3 of this subsection, the application may not be
deemed automatically complete until an additional sixty days after the next
submittal by the applicant. The control officer may, after/on submittal by the
applicant pursuant to this subdivision, reject an application that is
determined to be still incomplete and shall notify the applicant of the
decision by certified mail. After a rejection under this subdivision, the
control officer may deny or revoke an existing permit, as applicable.
      5.   The completeness determination shall not apply to revisions
processed through the minor permit revision process.
      6.   If a permit applicant request terms and conditions allowing for the
trading of emission increases and decreases in the permitted facility solely
for the purpose of complying with a federally enforceable emission cap that is
established in the permit independent of otherwise applicable requirements, the
permit applicant shall include in its application proposed replicable
procedures and permit terms that ensure the emissions trades are quantifiable
and enforceable.
      7.   The control officer is not in disagreement with a notice of
confidentiality submitted with the application pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-487.
   F.   The control officer, either upon the control officer's own initiative
or the request of a permit applicant, may waive a requirement that specific
information or data be submitted in the application for a particular source if
the control officer determines that the information or data would be
unnecessary to determine the sources potential emissions, applicable
requirements, or air pollution control equipment effectiveness.
   G.   Duty to Supplement or Correct Application. Any applicant who fails to
submit any relevant facts or who has submitted incorrect information in a
permit application shall, upon becoming aware of such failure or incorrect
submittal, promptly submit such supplementary fact or corrected information. In
addition, an applicant shall provide additional information as necessary to
address any requirements that become applicable to the source after the date it
files a complete application, but prior to release of a proposed permit.
   H.   Certification of Truth, Accuracy, and Completeness. Any application
form or report submitted pursuant to this title shall contain certification by
a responsible official of truth, accuracy, and completeness. This certification
and any other certification required under this Title shall state that, based
on information and belief formed after reasonable inquiry, the statements and
information in the document are true, accurate, and complete.
   I.   Action on Application.
      1.   The control officer shall issue or deny each permit according to the
provisions of A.R.S. § 49-481. The control officer may issue a permit with a
compliance schedule for a source that is not in compliance with all applicable
requirements at the time of permit issuance.
      2.   In addition, a permit may be issued, revised, or renewed only if all
of the following conditions have been met:
         a.   The application received by the control officer for a permit,
permit revision, or permit renewal shall be complete according to subsection E
of this section.
         b.   Except for revision qualifying as administrative or minor under
Section
17.13.120 and Section
17.13.130, all of the requirements for public notice shall require compliance
with all applicable requirements.
         c.   The conditions of the permit shall require compliance with all
applicable requirements.
         d.   For Class II or Class III permits that contain voluntary emission
limitations, controls, or other requirements established pursuant to Section
17.11.190, the control officer shall have complied with the requirement of
subsection C of Section
17.11.190 to provide the administrator with a copy of the proposed permit.
      3.   The control officer may issue a notice of termination of a permit
issued pursuant to this section if:
         a.   The control officer has reasonable cause to believe that the
permit was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation.
         b.   The person applying for the permit failed to disclose a material
fact required by the permit application form or the regulation applicable to
the permit, of which the applicant had or should have had knowledge at the time
the application was submitted.
         c.   The terms and conditions of the permit have been or are being
violated.
      4.   If the control officer issues a notice of denial or termination of a
permit under this section, the notice shall be served on the applicant or
permittee by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall include
a statement detailing the grounds for the denial or revocation and a statement
that the permit applicant or permittee is entitled to a hearing.
      5.   The control officer shall provide a statement that sets forth the
legal and factual basis for the proposed permit conditions including references
to the applicable statutory or regulatory provisions.
      6.   The control officer shall take final action on each permit
application (and request for revision or renewal) within eighteen months after
receiving a complete application.
      7.   A proposed permit decision shall be published within nine months of
receipt of a complete application and any additional information requested
pursuant to subdivision (E)(4) of this section to process the application. The
control officer shall provide notice of the decision as provided in Section
17.13.210 and any public hearing shall be scheduled as expeditiously as
possible.
   J.   Requirement for a Permit. Except as noted under the provisions in
Section
17.13.110 and Section
17.13.130, no source may operate after the time that is required to submit a
timely and complete application, except in compliance with a properly issued
permit. However, if an existing source submits a timely and complete
application for permit issuance, revision or renewal, the source's failure to
have a permit is not a violation of this Article until the control officer
takes final action on the application. This protection shall cease to apply if,
subsequent to the completeness determination, the applicant fails to submit, by
the deadline specified in writing by the control officer, any additional
information identified as being needed to process the application.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.165.
17.13.020   Permit contents for Class II and Class III permits.
   A.   Each permit issued shall include the following elements:
      1.   The date of issuance and the permit term.
      2.   Enforceable emission limitations and standards, including
operational requirements and limitations that assure compliance with all
applicable requirements at the time of issuance and those that have been
voluntarily accepted under Section
17.11.190.
         a.   The permit shall specify and reference the origin of and
authority for each term or condition, and identify any difference in form as
compared to the applicable requirement upon which the term or condition is
based.
         b.   Any permit containing an equivalency demonstration for an
alternative emission limit submitted under Section
17.13.010(D) shall contain provisions to ensure that any resulting emissions
limit has been demonstrated to be quantifiable, accountable, enforceable, and
based on replicable procedures.
      3.   Each permit shall contain the following requirements with respect to
monitoring:
         a.   All monitoring and analysis procedures or test methods required
under applicable monitoring and testing requirements, including:
            i.   Monitoring and analysis procedures or test methods under 40
CFR 64;
            ii.   Other procedures and methods promulgated under sections 114
(a)(3) or 504(b) of the Act; and
            iii.   Monitoring and analysis procedures or test methods required
under Section
17.11.190.
         b.   40 CFR 64 as codified July 1, 2004, is incorporated by reference
and on file with the control officer. This incorporation by reference contains
no future editions or amendments. If more than one monitoring or testing
requirement applies, the permit may specify a streamlined set of monitoring or
testing provisions if the specified monitoring or testing is adequate to assure
compliance at least to the same extent as the monitoring or testing applicable
requirements not included in the permit as a result of such streamlining;
         c.   If the applicable requirement does not require periodic testing
or instrumental or noninstrumental monitoring (which may consist of
recordkeeping designed to serve as monitoring), monitoring that is commensurate
with the size and rate of emission from each emission unit shall be established
by the control officer. Recordkeeping provisions that are sufficient to meet
the requirements of this subsection; and
         d.   As necessary, requirements concerning the use, maintenance, and,
if appropriate, installation of monitoring equipment or methods.
      4.   With respect to recordkeeping, the permit shall incorporate all
applicable recordkeeping requirements including recordkeeping requirements
established pursuant to Section
17.11.190, where applicable, for the following:
         a.   Records of required monitoring information that includes the
following:
            i.   The date, place as defined in the permit, and time of sampling
or measurements;
            ii.   The date(s) analyses were performed;
            iii.   The name of the company or entity that performed the
analyses;
            iv.   A description of the analytical techniques or methods used;
            v.   The results of such analyses; and
            vi.   The operating conditions as existing at the time of sampling
or measurement.
         b.   Retention of records of all required monitoring data and support
information for a period of at least five years from the date of the monitoring
sample, measurement, report, or application. Support information includes all
calibration and maintenance records and all original strip-chart recordings for
continuous monitoring instrumentation, and copies of all reports required by
the permit.
      5.   The permit shall incorporate all applicable reporting requirements
including reporting requirements established under Section
17.13.190 and Section
17.11.190.
      6.   A severability clause to ensure the continued validity of the
various permit requirements in the event of a challenge to any portion of the
permit.
      7.   Provisions stating the following:
         a.   The permittee shall comply with all conditions of the permit
including all applicable requirements of A.R.S. Title 49, Chapter 3, and Pima
County air quality rules. Any permit noncompliance is grounds for enforcement
action; for a permit termination, revocation and reissuance, or revision; or
for denial of a permit renewal application. Noncompliance with any federally
enforceable requirement in a permit is a violation of the Act.
         b.   It shall not be a defense for a permittee in an enforcement
action that it would have been necessary to halt or reduce the permitted
activity in order to maintain compliance with the conditions of this permit.
         c.   The permit may be revised, reopened, revoked and reissued, or
terminated for cause. The filing of a request by the permittee for a permit
revision, revocation and reissuance, or termination, or of a notification of
planned changes or anticipated noncompliance does not stay any permit
condition.
         d.   The permit does not convey any property rights of any sort, or
any exclusive privilege to the permit holder.
         e.   The permittee shall furnish to the control officer, within a
reasonable time, any information that the control officer may request in
writing to determine whether cause exists for revising, revoking and reissuing,
or terminating the permit or to determine compliance with the permit. Upon
request, the permittee shall also furnish to the control officer copies of
records required to be kept by the permit. For information claimed to be
confidential, the permittee shall furnish a copy of such records directly to
the administrator along with a claim of confidentiality.
      8.   A provision to ensure that the source pays fees to the control
officer pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-426(E) and
Article V of this chapter.
      9.   A provision stating that no permit revision shall be required, under
any approved economic incentives, marketable permits, emissions trading and
other similar programs or processes for changes that are provided for in the
permit.
      10.   Terms and conditions for reasonably anticipated operating scenarios
identified by the source in its application as approved by the control officer.
Such terms and conditions shall:
         a.   Require the source, contemporaneously with making a change from
one operating scenario to another, to record in a log at the permitted facility
a record of the scenario under which it is operating;
         b.   Extend the permit shield described in Section
17.11.080 to all terms and conditions under each such operating scenario; and
         c.   Ensure that the terms and conditions of each such alternative
scenario meet all applicable requirements and the requirements of this title.
      11.   Terms and conditions, if the permit applicant requests them, as
approved by the control officer, for the trading of emissions increases and
decreases in the permitted facility, to the extent that the applicable
requirements provide for trading increases and decreases without a case-by-case
approval of each emissions trade. Such terms and conditions:
         a.   Shall include all terms required under subsections A and C of
this section to determine compliance;
         b.   May extend the permit shield described in subsection D of this
section to all terms and conditions that allow such increases and decreases in
emissions;
         c.   Shall not include trading that involves emission units for which
emissions are not quantifiable or for which there are no replicable procedures
to enforce the emission trades; and
         d.   Shall meet all applicable requirements and requirements of this
title.
      12.   Terms and conditions, if the permit applicant requests them and
they are approved by the control officer, setting forth intermittent operating
scenarios including potential periods of downtime. If such terms and conditions
are included, the state's emissions inventory shall not reflect the zero
emissions associated with the periods of downtime.
      13.   Upon request of a permit applicant, the control officer shall issue
a permit that contains terms and conditions allowing for the trading of
emission increases and decreases in the permitted facility solely for the
purpose of complying with a federally enforceable emission cap established in
the permit independent of otherwise applicable requirements. The permit
applicant shall include in its application proposed replicable procedures and
permit terms that ensure the emissions trades are quantifiable and enforceable.
The control officer shall not include in the emissions trading provisions any
emissions units for which emissions are not quantifiable or for which there are
no replicable procedures to enforce the emissions trades. The permit shall also
require compliance with all applicable requirements. Changes made under this
paragraph shall not include modifications under any provision of Title I of the
Act and may not exceed emissions allowable under the permit. The terms and
conditions shall provide for logging that conforms to Section
17.13.110(B)(5). In addition, the notices shall describe how the increases and
decreases in emissions will comply with the terms and conditions of the permit.
      14.   Other terms and conditions as are required by the Act, A.R.S. Title
49, Chapter 3, Articles 1, 2 and 3 and the rules adopted in Title 17.
   B.   Federally Enforceable Requirements.
      1.    The following permit conditions shall be enforceable by the
administrator and citizens under the Act:
         a.    Terms or conditions in a Class II or III permit setting forth
federally applicable requirements; and
         b.    Terms and conditions in any permit entered into voluntarily
pursuant to Section
17.11.190, as follows:
            i.    Emissions limitations, controls or other requirements; and
            ii.    Monitoring, recordkeeping and reporting requirements
associated with the emissions limitations, controls or other requirements in
subsection (B)(1)(c)(i).
      2.    Terms and conditions included in a permit that are federally
enforceable under the Act or under any of its applicable requirements will be
specifically designated as such.
   C.    A permit issued to a source shall require that revisions be made under
Section
17.13.150 to incorporate additional applicable requirements that become
applicable to a source with a permit with a remaining permit term of three or
more years. No reopening shall be required if the effective date of the
applicable requirement is after the expiration of the permit. The revisions
shall be made as expeditiously as practicable, but not later than eighteen
months after the promulgation of such standards and regulations. Any permit
revision required pursuant to this subsection shall comply with provisions in
Section
17.13.160 for permit renewal and shall reset the five year permit term.
(Ord. 2025-9 § 2 (part), 2025; Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.185.
17.13.030   Grant or denial of applications for Class II and Class III permits.
   A.   The control officer shall deny a permit or revision if the applicant
does not show that every such source is so designed, controlled, or equipped
with such air pollution control equipment that it may be expected to operate
without emitting or without causing to be emitted air contaminants in violation
of the provisions of this title, Title 49, Chapter 3, Article 3, A.R.S., and
the rules adopted by the director.
   B.   Prior to acting on an application for a permit, the control officer may
require the applicant to provide and maintain such facilities as are necessary
for sampling and testing purposes in order to secure information that will
disclose the nature, extent, quantity or degree of air contaminants discharged
into the atmosphere from the source described in the application. In the event
of such a requirement, the control officer shall notify the applicant in
writing of the type and characteristics of such facilities.
   C.   In acting upon an application for a permit renewal, if the control
officer finds that such source has been constructed not in accordance with any
prior permit or revision issued pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-480.01, he shall
require the person to obtain a permit revision or deny the application for such
permit. The control officer shall not accept any further application for a
permit for such source so constructed until he finds that such source has been
reconstructed in accordance with the prior permit or a revision, or a revision
to the permit has been obtained.
   D.   After a decision on a permit or revision, the control officer shall
notify the applicant and any person who filed a comment on the permit pursuant
to A.R.S. § 49-480 or the revision pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-480.01 in writing of
the decision, and if the permit is denied, the reasons for such denial. Service
of this notification may be made in person or by first class mail. The control
officer shall not accept a further application unless the applicant has
corrected the reasons for the objections specified by the control officer as
reasons for such denial.
   E.   The control officer may issue a permit with a compliance schedule for a
source that is not in compliance with all applicable requirements at the time
of permit issuance.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.110.
17.13.040   Appeals of permit actions for Class II and Class III permits.
   A.   Within thirty days after the control officer gives notice of approval,
denial or revocation of a permit, the applicant or any person who submitted
comments pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-480, may request an appeal as provided under
A.R.S. § 49-482. The decision after that hearing constitutes the final permit
action from which judicial review may be taken pursuant to
Chapter 17.28.
   B.   Any person who has an interest that is or may be adversely affected may
commence a civil action in superior court against the control officer alleging
that the control officer has failed to act in a timely manner consistent with
the requirements of A.R.S. § 49-480. No action may be commenced before sixty
days after the plaintiff has given notice to the control officer of the
plaintiff's intent to file. The court has jurisdiction to require the control
officer to act without additional delay.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.120.
17.13.050   Annual summary of amendments for Class II or Class III permits.
   The control officer may amend any Class II or Class III permit annually
without following Section
17.13.150 in order to incorporate changes reflected in logs or notices filed
under Section
17.13.110. The amendment shall be effective to the anniversary date of the
permit. The control officer shall make available to the public for any source:
   A.   A complete record of logs and notices sent to the Department under
Section
17.13.110; and
   B.   Any amendments or revisions to the source's permit.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.250.
17.13.060   Voluntary termination of a permit for Class II and Class III
permits.
   A permittee may voluntarily request that a permit issued under this Title be
terminated.
   A.   The request for a permit termination shall be completed on a form
provided by the control officer.
      1.   A responsible official shall certify the truth and accuracy of the
submitted form.
      2.   The "Notice of Intent to Terminate the Permit" shall set forth the
specific reason and timeline for the termination by the permittee.
      3.   The submittal of the "Notice of Intent to Terminate the Permit" by a
facility does not halt the applicability of any permit condition or any
applicable requirement of this title.
   B.   The control officer may approve a "Notice of Intent to Terminate the
Permit," if the source has paid all applicable fees, and is in compliance with
all applicable requirements of this title.
      1.   Termination of a permit does not relieve a source of any applicable
fees.
      2.   The control officer will transmit the approval or denial of the
"Notice of Intent to Terminate the Permit" by certified mail, with a return
receipt requested.
   C.   Notices issued under this section may not be appealed under A.R.S. §§
49-471.01 or 49-482.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.275.
17.13.070   Establishment of an emissions cap for Class II and Class III
permits.
   A.   An applicant may, in its application for a new permit, renewal of an
existing permit, or as a significant permit revision, request an emissions cap
for a particular pollutant expressed in tons per year as determined on a
twelve-month rolling average, or any shorter averaging time necessary to
enforce any applicable requirement, for any emissions unit, combination of
emissions units, or an entire source to allow operating flexibility including
emissions trading for the purpose of complying with the cap. This section shall
not apply to sources that hold an authority to operate under a general permit
pursuant to Section
17.13.080.
   B.   An emissions cap for a Class II or Class III source that limits the
emissions of a particular pollutant for the entire source shall not exceed any
of the following:
      1.   The applicable requirement for the pollutant if expressed in tons
per year;
      2.   The source's actual emissions plus the applicable significance level
for the pollutant established in Section
17.04.340(A)(211);
      3.   The applicable major source threshold for the pollutant; or
      4.   A source wide emission limitation for the pollutant voluntarily
agreed to by the source under Section
17.11.190.
   C.   In order to incorporate an emissions cap in a permit the applicant must
demonstrate to the control officer that terms and conditions in the permit
will:
      1.   Ensure compliance with all applicable requirements for the
pollutant;
      2.   Contain replicable procedures to ensure that the emissions cap is
enforceable as a practical matter and emissions trading conducted under it is
quantifiable and enforceable as a practical matter. For the purposes of this
section, "enforceable as a practical matter" shall include the following
criteria:
         a.   The permit conditions are permanent and quantifiable;
         b.   The permit includes a legally enforceable obligation to comply;
         c.   The limits impose an objective and quantifiable operational or
production limit or require the use of in-place air pollution control
equipment;
         d.   The permit limits have short-term averaging times consistent with
the averaging times of the applicable requirement;
         e.   The permit conditions are enforceable and are independent of any
other applicable limitations; and
         f.   The permit conditions for monitoring, recordkeeping, and
reporting requirements are sufficient to comply with Sections
17.13.020(A)(3), (A)(4), and (A)(5).
   D.   Class II and Class III sources shall comply with Section
17.13.110(B)(5).
   E.   The control officer shall not include in an emissions cap or emissions
trading allowed under a cap any emissions unit for which the emissions are not
quantifiable or for which there are no replicable procedures or practical means
to enforce emissions trades.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.195.
17.13.080   Application for coverage under general permit.
   A.   Once the director has issued a general permit, any source which is a
member of the class of facilities covered by the general permit may apply to
the control officer for authority to operate under the general permit.
Applicants shall complete the specific application form for general permits, or
if none has been adopted, the standard application form contained in Title 18,
Chapter 2, Appendix 1, of the A.A.C.
   B.   The control officer shall give notice of the general permit application
pursuant to Section
17.13.210.
   C.   The control officer shall act on the application for coverage under the
general permit as expeditiously as possible, but a final decision shall be
reached within one hundred eighty days. The source may operate under the terms
of its application during that time. If the application for coverage is denied,
the control officer shall notify the source that it shall apply for an
individual permit within one hundred eighty days of receipt of notice. The
control officer may defer acting on an application under this subsection if the
control officer has provided notice of intent to renew or not renew the permit.
   D.   Sources operating under a general permit shall apply to the director
for the permit revisions pursuant to A.A.C. Title 18, Chapter 2, Article 5.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.390.
17.13.090   General permit enforcement.
   The control officer shall administer, inspect and enforce all standards and
applicable requirements contained in general permits issued by the director to
sources operating in the county.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.370.
Article II. Permit Revisions, Renewals and Transfers for Class II and Class III
Permits
17.13.100   Facility changes that require a permit revision for Class II or
Class III permits.
17.13.110   Procedures for certain changes that do not require a permit
revision for Class II or Class III permits.
17.13.120   Administrative amendments for Class II or Class III permits.
17.13.130   Minor revisions for Class II or Class III permits.
17.13.140   Significant revisions for Class II or Class III permits.
17.13.150   Reopening, revocation, reissuance, or termination for Class II or
Class III permits.
17.13.160   Renewal and expiration for Class II or Class III permits.
17.13.170   Transfers for Class II or Class III permits.
17.13.100   Facility changes that require a permit revision for Class II or
Class III permits.
   A.   The following changes at a source with a Class II or Class III permit
shall require a permit revision:
      1.   A change that triggers a new applicable requirement, violates an
existing applicable requirement, or is a modification under A.R.S. § 49-401.01
(24).
      2.   Establishment of, or change in, an emissions cap;
      3.   A change that will require a case-by-case determination of an
emission limitation or other standard, or a source-specific determination of
ambient impacts, or a visibility or increment analysis;
      4.   A change that results in emissions that are subject to monitoring,
recordkeeping or reporting under Sections
17.13.020(A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5). If the emissions cannot be measured or
otherwise adequately quantified by monitoring, recordkeeping, or reporting
requirements already in the permit;
      5.   A change that will authorize the burning of used oil, used oil fuel,
hazardous waste, or hazardous waste fuel, or any other fuel not currently
authorized by the permit;
      6.   A change that requires the source to obtain a Class I permit;
      7.   Replacement of an item of air pollution control equipment listed in
the permit with one that does not have the same or better pollutant removal
efficiency;
      8.   Establishment or revision of a limit under Section
17.11.190;
      9.   Increasing operating hours or rates of production above the
permitted level; and
      10.   A change that relaxes monitoring, recordkeeping, or reporting
requirements, except when the change results:
         a.   From removing equipment that results in a permanent decrease in
actual emissions, if the source keeps on-site records of the change in a log
that satisfies Sections
17.13.110(I)(1) and (I)(2) and if the requirements that are relaxed are present
in the permit solely for the equipment that was removed; or
         b.   From a change in an applicable requirement.
   B.   A source with a Class II or Class III permit may make any physical
change or change in the method of operation without revising the source's
permit unless the change is specifically prohibited in the source's permit or
is a change described in subsection A. A change that does not require a permit
revision may still be subject to requirements in Section
17.13.120.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.235.
17.13.110   Procedures for certain changes that do not require a permit
revision for Class II or Class III permits.
   A.   Except for a physical change or change in the method of operation at a
Class II or Class III source requiring a permit revision under Section
17.13.100, or a change subject to logging or notice requirements in subsection
B or C, a change at a Class II or Class III source shall not be subject to
revision, notice, or logging requirements under this chapter.
   B.   Except as otherwise provided in the conditions applicable to an
emissions cap created under Section
17.13.070, the following changes may be made if the source keeps onsite records
of the changes according to subsection I below:
      1.   Implementing an alternative operating scenario, including raw
material changes;
      2.   Changing process equipment, operating procedures, or making any
other physical change if the permit requires the change to be logged;
      3.   Engaging in any new insignificant activity listed in Sections
17.04.340(A)(113)(a) through (i) but not listed in the permit;
      4.   Replacing an item of air pollution control equipment listed in the
permit with an identical (same model, different serial number) item. The
control officer may require verification of efficiency of the new equipment by
performance tests; and
      5.   A change that results in a decrease in actual emissions if the
source wants to claim credit for the decrease in determining whether the source
has a net emissions increase for any purpose. The logged information shall
include a description of the change that will produce the decrease in actual
emissions. A decrease that has not been logged is creditable only if the
decrease is quantifiable, enforceable, and otherwise qualifies as a creditable
decrease.
   C.   Except as provided in the conditions applicable to an emissions cap
created under Section
17.13.070, the following changes may be made if the source provides written
notice to the department in advance of the change as provided below:
      1.   Replacing an item of air pollution control equipment listed in the
permit with one that is not identical but that is substantially similar and has
the same or better pollutant removal efficiency: Seven days. The control
officer may require verification of efficiency of the new equipment by
performance tests;
      2.   A physical change or change in the method of operation that
increases actual emissions more than ten percent of the major source threshold
for any conventional pollutant but does not require a permit revision: Seven
days;
      3.   Replacing an item of air pollution control equipment listed in the
permit with one that is not substantially similar but that has the same or
better efficiency: Thirty days. The control officer may require verification of
efficiency of the new equipment by performance tests;
      4.   A change that would trigger an applicable requirement that already
exists in the permit: Thirty days unless otherwise required by the applicable
requirement;
      5.   A change that amounts to reconstruction of the source or an affected
facility: Seven days. For purposes of this subsection, reconstruction of a
source or an affected facility shall be presumed if the fixed capital cost of
the new components exceeds fifty percent of the fixed capital cost of a
comparable entirely new source or affected facility and the changes to the
components have occurred over the twelve consecutive months beginning with
commencement of construction; and
      6.   A change that will result in the emissions of a new regulated air
pollutant above an applicable regulatory threshold but that does not trigger a
new applicable requirement for that source category: Thirty days. For purposes
of this requirement, an applicable regulatory threshold for a conventional air
pollutant shall be ten percent of the applicable major source threshold for
that pollutant.
   D.   For each change under subsection C, the written notice shall be by
certified mail or hand delivery and shall be received by the control officer
the minimum amount of time in advance of the change. Notifications of changes
associated with emergency conditions, such as malfunctions necessitating the
replacement of equipment, may be provided with less than required notice, but
must be provided as far in advance of the change, or if advance notification is
not practicable, as soon after the change as possible. The written notice shall
include:
      1.   When the proposed change will occur,
      2.   A description of the change,
      3.   Any change in emissions of regulated air pollutants, and
      4.   Any permit term or condition that is no longer applicable as a
result of the change.
   E.   A source may implement any change in subsection C without the required
notice by applying for a minor permit revision under Section
17.13.130 and complying with Sections
17.13.130(C)(2) and (D).
   F.   The permit shield described in Section
17.11.080 shall not apply to any change made under this section, other than
implementation of an alternate operating scenario under subsection (B)(1).
   G.   Notwithstanding any other part of this section, the control officer may
require a permit to be revised for any change that, when considered together
with any other changes submitted by the same source under this section over the
term of the permit, constitutes a change under Section
17.13.100(A).
   H.   If a source change is described under both subsections B and C, the
source shall comply with subsection C. If a source change is described under
both subsection C and Section
17.13.100(B), the source shall comply with Section
17.13.100(B).
   I.   A copy of all logs required under subsection B shall be filed with the
control officer within thirty days after each anniversary of the permit issue
date. If no changes were made at the source requiring logging, a statement to
that effect shall be filed instead.
      1.   Each log entry required by a change under Section
17.13.110(B) shall include at least the following information:
         a.   A description of the change, including:
            i.   A description of any process change.
            ii.   A description of any equipment change, including both old and
new equipment descriptions, model numbers and serial numbers, or any other
unique equipment number.
            iii.   A description of any process material change.
         b.   The date and time that the change occurred.
         c.   The provision of Section
17.13.110 that authorizes the change to be made with logging.
         d.   The date the entry was made and the first and last name of the
person making the entry.
      2.   Logs shall be kept for five years from the date created. Logging
shall be performed in indelible ink in a bound log book with sequentially
numbered pages, or in any other form, including electronic format, approved by
the control officer.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.240.
17.13.120   Administrative amendments for Class II or Class III permits.
   A.   Except for provisions pursuant to Title IV of the Act (Acid Deposition
Control), an administrative permit amendment is a permit revision that does any
of the following:
      1.   Corrects typographical errors;
      2.   Identifies a change in the name, address, or phone number of any
person identified in the permit, or provides a similar minor administrative
change at the source;
      3.   Requires more frequent monitoring or reporting by the permittee; and
      4.   Allows for a change in ownership or operational control of a source
as approved under Section
17.13.170 where the control officer determines that no other change in the
permit is necessary, provided that a written agreement containing a specific
date for transfer of permit responsibility coverage, and liability between the
current and new permittee has been submitted to the control officer.
   B.   Administrative permit amendments to Title IV provisions of the permit
shall be governed by regulations promulgated by the administrator under Title
IV of the Act (Acid Deposition Control).
   C.   The control officer shall take no more than sixty days from receipt of
a request for an administrative permit amendment to take final action on such
request.
   D.   Except for administrative permit amendments involving a transfer under
Section
17.13.170, the source may implement the changes addressed in the request for an
administrative amendment immediately upon submittal of the request.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.245.
17.13.130   Minor revisions for Class II or Class III permits.
   A.   Minor permit revision procedures shall be used for the following
changes at a Class II or Class III source:
      1.   A change that triggers a new applicable requirement if all of the
following apply:
         a.   For emissions units not subject to an emissions cap, the net
emissions increase is less than the significant level defined in Section
17.04.340;
         b.   A case-by-case determination of an emission limitation or other
standard is not required; and
         c.   The change does not require the source to obtain a Class I
permit;
      2.   Increasing operating hours or rates of production above the
permitted level unless the increase otherwise creates a condition that requires
a significant permit revision;
      3.   A change in fuel from fuel oil or coal, to natural gas or propane,
if not authorized in the permit;
      4.   A change that results in emissions subject to monitoring,
recordkeeping, or reporting under Sections
17.13.020(A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) and that cannot be measured or otherwise
adequately quantified by monitoring, recordkeeping, or reporting requirements
already in the permit;
      5.   A decrease in the emissions permitted under an emissions cap unless
the decrease requires a change in the conditions required to enforce the cap or
to ensure that emissions trades conducted under the cap are quantifiable and
enforceable; and
      6.   Replacement of an item of air pollution control equipment listed in
the permit with one that does not have the same or better efficiency.
   B.   As approved by the control officer, minor permit revision procedures
may be used for permit revisions involving the use of economic incentives,
marketable permits, emissions trading, and other similar approaches, to the
extent that the minor permit revision procedures are explicitly provided for in
an applicable implementation plan or in applicable requirements promulgated by
the administrator.
   C.   An application for minor permit revision shall be on the standard
application form contained in Title 18, Chapter 2, Appendix 1 of the A.A.C. and
include the following:
      1.   A description of the change, the emissions resulting from the
change, and any new applicable requirements that will apply if the change
occurs;
      2.   Any source that is making the change immediately after it files the
application, the source's suggested proposed permit;
      3.   Certification by a responsible official, consistent with standard
permit application requirements, that the proposed revision meets the criteria
for use of minor permit revision procedures and a request that the procedures
be used;
   D.   The control officer shall follow the following timetable for action on
an application for a minor permit revision:
      1.   Within sixty days of the control officer's receipt of an application
for a revision of a Class II or Class III permit under this section, the
control officer shall do one or more of the following:
         a.   Issue the permit revision as proposed;
         b.   Deny the permit revision application;
         c.   Determine that the permit revision does not meet the minor permit
revision criteria and should be reviewed under the significant revision
procedures pursuant to Section
17.13.140; or
         d.   Revise and issue the proposed permit revision.
   E.   The source may make the change proposed in its minor permit revision
application immediately after it files the application. After the source makes
the change allowed by the preceding sentence, and until the control officer
takes any of the actions specified in subsection D, the source shall comply
with both the applicable requirements governing the change and the proposed
revised permit terms and conditions. During this time period, the source need
not comply with the existing permit terms and conditions it seeks to modify.
However, if the source fails to comply with its proposed permit terms and
conditions during this time period, the existing permit terms and conditions it
seeks to revise may be enforced against it.
   F.   The permit shield under Section
17.11.080 shall not extend to minor permit revisions.
   G.   Notwithstanding any other part of this section, the control officer may
require a permit to be revised under Section
17.13.140 for any change that, when considered together with any other changes
submitted by the same source under this section or Section
17.13.110 over the life of the permit, or subsection A of this section.
   H.   The control officer shall make available to the public monthly
summaries of all applications for minor revisions.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.255.
17.13.140   Significant revisions for Class II or Class III permits.
   A.   A source with a Class II or Class III permit shall make the following
changes only after the permit is revised following the public participation
requirements of Section
17.13.210:
      1.   Establishing or revising a voluntarily accepted emission limitation
or standard as described by Section
17.11.190 or Section
17.13.070, except a decrease in the limitation authorized by Section
17.13.130;
      2.   Making any change in fuel not authorized by the permit and that is
not fuel oil or coal, to natural gas or propane;
      3.   A change to or addition of an emissions unit not subject to an
emissions cap that will result in a net emission increase of a pollutant
greater than the significance level in Section
17.04.340(A)(211);
      4.   A change that relaxes monitoring, recordkeeping, or reporting
requirements, except when the change results from:
         a.   Removing equipment that results in a permanent decrease in actual
emissions, if the source keeps on-site records of the change in a log that
satisfies Sections
17.13.110(I)(1) and (I)(2) and if the requirements that are relaxed are present
in the permit solely for the equipment that was removed; or
         b.   A change in an applicable requirement.
      5.   A change that will cause the source to violate an existing
applicable requirement including the conditions establishing an emissions cap;
      6.   A change that will require any of the following:
         a.   A case-by-case determination of an emission limitation or other
standard;
         b.   A source-specific determination of ambient impacts, or a
visibility or increment analysis; or
         c.   A case-by-case determination of a monitoring, recordkeeping, and
reporting requirement.
      7.   A change that requires the source to obtain a Class I permit.
   B.   Significant permit revisions shall meet all requirements of this
chapter for applications, public participation, review by affected states, and
review by the administrator that apply to permit issuance and renewal.
   C.   When an existing source applies for a significant permit revision to
revise its permit from a Class II or Class III permit to a Class I permit, it
shall submit a Class I permit application for the entire source in accordance
with Section
17.12.010. The control officer shall issue the entire permit, and not just the
portion being revised, in accordance with Class I permit content and issuance
requirements, including requirements for public, affected state, and EPA
review, contained in Section
17.12.060 and Section
17.13.210.
   D.   The control officer shall process the majority of significant permit
revision applications received each calendar year within nine months of receipt
of a complete permit application but in no case longer than eighteen months.
Applications for which the control officer undertakes accelerated processing
under Section
17.13.240(H) shall not be included in this requirement.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.260.
17.13.150   Reopening, revocation, reissuance, or termination for Class II or
Class III permits.
   A.   Reopening for Cause.
      1.   Each issued permit shall include provisions specifying the
conditions under which the permit shall be reopened prior to the expiration of
the permit. A permit shall be reopened and revised under any of the following
circumstances:
         a.   Additional applicable requirements under the Act become
applicable to a major source with a remaining permit term of three or more
years. Such a reopening shall be completed not later than eighteen months after
promulgation of the applicable requirement. No such reopening is required if
the effective date of the requirement is later than the date on which the
permit is due to expire, unless the original permit or any of its terms and
conditions has been extended pursuant to Section
17.13.160. Any permit reopening required pursuant to this paragraph shall
comply with provisions in Section
17.13.160 for permit renewal and shall reset the five-year permit term.
         b.   The control officer or the administrator determines that the
permit contains a material mistake or that inaccurate statements were made in
establishing the emissions standards or other terms or conditions of the
permit.
         c.   The control officer or the administrator determines that the
permit needs to be revised or revoked to assure compliance with the applicable
requirements.
      2.   Proceedings to reopen and issue a permit, including appeal of any
final action relating to a permit reopening, shall follow the same procedures
as apply to initial permit issuance and shall affect only those parts of the
permit for which cause to reopen exists. Such reopening shall be made as
expeditiously as practicable.
      3.   Reopenings under subdivision (A)(1) of this section shall not be
initiated before a notice of such intent is provided to the source by the
control officer at least thirty days in advance of the date that the permit is
to be reopened, except that the control officer may provide a shorter time
period in the case of an emergency.
      4.   When a permit is reopened and revised pursuant to this section, the
control officer may make appropriate revisions to the permit shield established
pursuant to Section
17.11.080.
   B.   The control officer may issue a notice of termination of a permit
issued pursuant to this title if:
      1.   The control officer has reasonable cause to believe that the permit
was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation;
      2.   The person applying for the permit failed to disclose a material
fact required by the permit application form or the regulation applicable to
the permit, of which the applicant had or should have had knowledge at the time
the application was submitted;
      3.   The terms and conditions of the permit have been or are being
violated.
   If the control officer issues a notice of termination under this section,
the notice shall be served on the permittee by certified mail, return receipt
requested. The notice shall include a statement detailing the grounds for the
revocation and a statement that the permittee is entitled to a hearing. A
notice of termination issued by the control officer shall become effective
immediately upon the expiration of the time during which a request for a
hearing may be made pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-511 unless the person or persons
named in such notice shall have made a timely request for a hearing before the
hearing board.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.270.
17.13.160   Renewal and expiration for Class II or Class III permits.
   A.   A permit being renewed is subject to the same procedural requirements,
including any for public participation and affected states and administrator
review, that would apply to that permit's initial issuance.
   B.   Except as provided in Section
17.11.050, permit expiration terminates the source's right to operate unless a
timely application for renewal that is sufficient under A.R.S. § 41-1064 has
been submitted in accordance with Section
17.13.010. Any testing that is required for renewal shall be completed before
the proposed permit is issued by the control officer.
   C.   The control officer shall act on an application for a permit renewal
within the same time frames as on an initial permit.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.280.
17.13.170   Transfers for Class II or Class III permits.
   A.   Except as provided in A.R.S. § 49-483 and subsection B of this section,
a permit may be transferred to another person if:
      1.   The person who holds the permit gives notice of the following to the
control officer in writing at least thirty days before the proposed transfer:
         a.   The permit number and expiration date;
         b.   The name, address and telephone number of the current permit
holder;
         c.   The name, address and telephone number of the organization to
receive the permit;
      2.   The new owner gives notice of the following to the control officer
in writing at least thirty days before the proposed transfer:
         a.   The name and title of the individual within the organization who
is accepting responsibility for the permit along with a signed statement by
that person indicating such acceptance;
         b.   A description of the equipment to be transferred;
         c.   A written agreement containing a specific date for transfer or
permit responsibility, coverage, and liability between the current and new
permittee;
         d.   Provisions for the payment of any fees pursuant to
Article V of this chapter that will be due and payable before the effective
date of transfer;
         e.   Sufficient information about the source's technical and financial
capabilities of operating the source to allow the control officer to make the
decision in subsection B of this section including:
            i.   The qualifications of each person principally responsible for
the operation of the source,
            ii.   A statement by the chief financial officer of the new
permittee that it is financially capable of operating the facility in
compliance with the law, and the information that provides the basis for that
statement,
            iii.   A brief description of any action for the enforcement of any
federal or state law, rule or regulation, or any county, city or local
government ordinance relating to the protection of the environment, instituted
against any person employed by the new permittee and principally responsible
for operating the facility during the five years preceding the date of
application. In lieu of this description, the new permittee may submit a copy
of the certificate of disclosure or 10K form required under A.R.S. § 49-109, or
a statement that this information has been filed in compliance with A.R.S. §
49-109.
   B.   The control officer shall deny the transfer if the control officer
determines that the organization receiving the permit is not capable of
operating the source in compliance with Article 3, Chapter 3, Title 49, Arizona
Revised Statutes, the provisions of this title or the provisions of the permit.
Notice of the denial shall be sent to the original permit holder by certified
mail stating the reason for the denial within ten working days of the control
officer's receipt of the application. If the transfer is not denied within ten
working days after receipt of the notice, it shall be deemed approved.
   C.   To appeal the transfer denial:
      1.   Both the transferor and transferee shall petition the hearing board
in writing for a public hearing; and
      2.   The appeal process for a permit shall be followed.
   D.   The control officer shall make available to the public monthly
summaries of all notices received under this section.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.290.
Article III. Emissions for Class II and Class III Sources
17.13.180   Annual emissions inventory questionnaire for Class II or Class III
permits.
17.13.190   Excess Emissions reporting requirements for Class II or Class III
permits.
17.13.180   Annual emissions inventory questionnaire for Class II or Class III
permits.
   A.   Sources with a Class II or Class III permit shall complete an annual
emission inventory questionnaire when requested by the control officer. The
questionnaire is due ninety days after the control officer makes a written
request and shall include emission information for the previous calendar year.
   B.   The questionnaire shall be on a form provided by or approved by the
control officer and shall include the following information:
      1.   The source's name, description, mailing address, contact person and
contact person phone number, and physical address and location, if different
than the mailing address.
      2.   Process information for the source, including design capacity,
operations schedule, and emissions control devices, their description and
efficiencies.
      3.   The actual quantity of emissions from permitted emission points and
fugitive emissions as provided in the permit, including documentation of the
method of measurement, calculation or estimation determined pursuant to
subsection C of this section of the following regulated air pollutants:
         a.   Any single regulated air pollutant in a quantity greater than one
ton or the amount listed for the pollutant in the definition of "significant"
in Section
17.04.340, whichever is less.
         b.   Any combination of regulated air pollutants in a quantity greater
than 2.5 tons.
   C.   Actual quantities of emissions shall be determined using the following
emission facts or data:
      1.   Whenever available, emissions estimates shall either be calculated
from continuous emissions monitors certified pursuant to 40 CFR 75, Subpart C
and referenced appendices, or data quality assured pursuant to Appendix F of 40
CFR 60.
      2.   When sufficient data pursuant to subsection (C)(1) of this section
is not available, emissions estimates shall be calculated from data from source
performance tests conducted pursuant to Section
17.11.210 in the calendar year being reported or, when not available, conducted
in the most recent calendar year representing the operating conditions of the
year being reported.
      3.   When sufficient data pursuant to subsection (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this
section is not available, emissions estimates shall be calculated using
emissions factors from EPA Publication No. AP-42 "Compilation of Air Pollutant
Emission Factors," Volume I: Stationary Point and Area Sources, Fifth Edition,
1995, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, NC,
including Supplements A through F and all updates published through July 1,
2011 (and no future editions). AP-42 is incorporated by reference and is on
file with the Department of Environmental Quality and can be obtained from the
Government Printing Office, 732 North Capitol Street, NW, Washington, D.C.
20401, telephone (202) 512-1800, or by downloading the document from the web
site for the EPA Clearinghouse for Emission Inventories and Emission Factors.
      4.   When sufficient data pursuant to subsections (C)(1) through (C)(3)
of this section is not available, emissions estimates shall be calculated from
material balance using engineering knowledge of process.
      5.   When sufficient data pursuant to subsections (C)(1) through (C)(4)
of this section is not available, emissions estimates shall be calculated by
equivalent methods approved by the control officer. The control officer shall
only approve methods that are demonstrated as accurate and reliable as the
applicable method in subsections (C)(1) through (C)(4) of this section.
   D.   Actual quantities of emissions calculated under subsection C of this
section shall be determined on the basis of actual operating hours, production
rates, in-place process control equipment, operational process control data,
and types of materials processed, stored or combusted.
   E.   An amendment to an annual emission inventory questionnaire, containing
the documentation required by subsection (B)(3) of this section, shall be
submitted to the control officer by any source whenever it discovers or
receives notice, within two years of the original submittal, that incorrect or
insufficient information was submitted to the control officer by a previous
questionnaire. If the incorrect or insufficient information resulted in an
incorrect annual emissions fee, the control officer shall require that
additional payment be made or shall apply an amount as a credit to a future
annual emissions fee. The submittal of an amendment under this subsection shall
not subject the owner or operator to an enforcement action or a civil or
criminal penalty if the original submittal of incorrect or insufficient
information was due to reasonable cause and not willful neglect.
   F.   The control officer may require submittal of supplemental emissions
inventory questionnaires for air contaminants pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-476.01.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.320.
17.13.190   Excess Emissions reporting requirements for Class II or Class III
permits.
   A.   The owner or operator of any source shall report to the control officer
any emissions in excess of the limits established by this chapter or the
applicable permit. The report shall be in two parts as specified below:
      1.   Notification by telephone or facsimile within twenty-four hours of
the time the owner or operator first learned of the occurrence of excess
emissions that includes all available information from subsection B.
      2.   Detailed written notification by submission of an excess emissions
report within seventy-two hours of the notification under subsection (A)(1).
   B.   The excess emissions report shall contain the following information:
      1.   The identity of each stack or other emission point where the excess
emissions occurred;
      2.   The magnitude of the excess emissions expressed in the units of the
applicable emission limitation and the operating data and calculations used in
determining the magnitude of the excess emissions;
      3.   The time and duration or expected duration of the excess emissions;
      4.   The identity of the equipment from which the excess emissions
emanated;
      5.   The nature and cause of the emissions;
      6.   The steps taken, if the excess emissions were the result of a
malfunction, to remedy the malfunction and the steps taken or planned to
prevent the recurrence of the malfunctions;
      7.   The steps that were or are being taken to limit the excess
emissions; and
      8.   If the source's permit contains procedures governing source
operation during periods of startup or malfunction and the excess emissions
resulted from startup or malfunction, a list of the steps taken to comply with
the permit procedures.
   C.   In the case of continuous or recurring excess emissions, the
notification requirements of this section shall be satisfied if the source
provides the required notification after excess emissions are first detected
and includes in the notification an estimate of the time the excess emissions
will continue. Excess emissions occurring after the estimated time period or
changes in the nature of the emissions as originally reported shall require
additional notification pursuant to subsections A and B.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.040.
Article IV. Public Participation and Notification Requirements for Class II and
Class III Permits
17.13.210   Public participation for Class II and Class III permits.
17.13.220   Public notification for Class II and Class III permits.
17.13.210   Public participation for Class II and Class III permits.
   A.   The control officer shall provide public notice, an opportunity for
public comment, and an opportunity for a hearing before taking the following
actions:
      1.   A permit issuance or renewal of a permit.
      2.   A significant permit revision.
      3.   Revocation and reissuance or reopening of a permit.
      4.   Any conditional orders pursuant to Section
17.28.100.
   B.   The control officer shall provide public notice of receipt of complete
applications for permits to construct or make a major modification to major
sources by publishing a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county where the source will be located.
   C.   The control officer shall provide notice required pursuant to
subsection A of this section, or any other section of this title, as follows:
      1.   The control officer shall publish the notice once each week for two
consecutive weeks for any Class II permit in two newspapers of general
circulation in the county where the source is or will be located.
      2.   The control officer shall mail a copy of the notice to persons on a
mailing list developed by the control officer consisting of those persons who
have requested in writing to be placed on such a mailing list.
   D.   The notice required by subsection C shall include the following:
      1.   Identification of the affected facility;
      2.   Name and address of the permittee or applicant;
      3.   Name and address of the permitting authority processing the permit
action;
      4.   The activity or activities involved in the permit action;
      5.   The emissions change involved in any permit revisions;
      6.   The air contaminants to be emitted;
      7.   If applicable, that a notice of confidentiality has been filed under
Section
17.11.070;
      8.   A statement that any person may submit written comments, or a
written request for a public hearing, or both, on the proposed permit action,
along with the deadline for such requests or comments;
      9.   The name, address, and telephone number of a person from PDEQ from
whom additional information may be obtained;
      10.   Locations where copies of the permit or permit revision
application, the proposed permit, and all other materials available to the
control officer that are relevant to the permit decision may be reviewed,
including the PDEQ office, and the times at which they shall be available for
public inspection.
   E.   The control officer shall hold a public hearing to receive comments on
petitions for conditional orders which would vary from requirements of the
applicable implementation plan. For all other actions involving a proposed
permit, the control officer shall hold a public hearing only upon written
request pursuant to the provisions of A.R.S. § 49-426. If a public hearing is
requested, the control officer shall schedule the hearing and publish notice as
described in A.R.S. § 49-444 and subsection D of this section. The control
officer shall give notice of any public hearing at least thirty days in advance
of the hearing.
   F.   At the time the control officer publishes the first notice according to
subdivision (C)(1) of this section, the applicant shall post a notice
containing the information required in subsection D of this section at the site
where the source is or may be located. Consistent with federal, state, and
local law, the posting shall be prominently placed at a location under the
applicant's legal control, adjacent to the nearest public roadway, and visible
to the public using the public roadway. If a public hearing is to be held, the
applicant shall place an additional posting providing notice of the hearing.
Any posting shall be maintained until the public comment period is closed.
   G.   The control officer shall provide at least thirty days from the date of
its first notice for an opportunity for public comment for every Class I and
Class II permit. For a source required to obtain a permit pursuant to Section
17.11.090(B)(3)(a), the control officer shall provide at least thirty days from
the date of its first notice for an opportunity for public comment. For sources
required to obtain a permit pursuant to Section
17.11.090(B)(3)(b) or 17.11.090(B)(3)(c), the control officer shall provide at
least five days from the date of its first notice for an opportunity for public
comment. The control officer shall keep a record of the commenters and of the
issues raised during the public participation process and shall prepare written
responses to all comments received. At the time a final decision is made, the
record and copies of the control officer's responses shall be made available to
the applicant and all commenters.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.340.
17.13.220   Public notification for Class II and Class III permits.
   The control officer shall utilize any medium of communication, publication
and exhibition when disseminating information, advertising and publicity in any
field of its purposes, objectives or duties.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.345.
Article V. Fees for Class II, Class III, and General Permits
17.13.230   General provisions.
17.13.240   Fees related to Class II and Class III permits.
17.13.250   Fees related to general permits.
17.13.230   General provisions.
   A.   Permits issued pursuant to a program adopted under this title are
subject to payment of a reasonable fee to be determined as outlined in this
chapter.
   B.   Funds received for permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
deposited in a special public health fund and shall be used by the control
officer to defray the costs of implementing provisions of this title.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.500.
17.13.240   Fees related to Class II and Class III permits.
   A.   Source Categories. The owner or operator of a source required to have
an air quality permit from the control officer shall pay the fees described in
this section unless authorized to operate under a general permit issued under
Article I. The fees are based on a source being classified in one of the
following two categories:
      1.   Class II sources are those required to have a permit under Section
17.11.090(B)(2).
      2.   Class III sources are those required to have a permit under Section
17.11.090(B)(3).
   B.   Fees for Permit Actions. The owner or operator of a Class II or Class
III source shall pay to the control officer one hundred five dollars and eighty
cents per hour, adjusted annually under subsection G, for all permit processing
time required for a billable permit action. Upon completion of permit
processing activities other than issuance or denial of the permit or permit
revision, the control officer shall send notice of the decision to the
applicant along with a final itemized bill. The maximum fee for any billable
permit action is twenty-five thousand dollars. The minimum fee for any billable
permit action is one hour of the current hourly rate. Except as provided in
subsection F, the control officer shall not issue a permit or permit revision
until the final bill is paid in full.
   C.   Class II Annual Fee. The owner or operator of a Class II source that
has undergone initial startup by January 1 shall pay the annual fee from the
table below, adjusted annually under subsection G. The fee is due by February 1
or sixty days after the control officer mails the invoice under subsection E,
whichever is later.
 
Class II Source Category            Annual Fee
Area Sources                        $540.00
NSPS/NESHAP Boilers and Generators  $2,500.00
NSPS/NESHAP True Minor Sources      $6,040.00
NSPS/NESHAP Synthetic Minor Sources $11,040.00
 
   D.   Class III Annual Fee. The owner or operator of a Class III source that
has undergone initial startup by January 1 shall pay the annual fee from the
table below, adjusted annually under subsection G. The fee is due by February 1
or sixty days after the control officer mails the invoice under subsection E,
whichever is later.
 
Class III Source Category              Annual Fee
True Minor Sources                     $1,960.00
Non-NSPS/NESHAP Boilers and Generators $1,960.00
Synthetic Minor Sources                $3,920.00
 
   E.   The control officer shall mail the owner or operator of each source an
invoice for all applicable fees due under subsections C or D by December 1.
   F.   Any person who receives a final itemized bill from the control officer
under this section for a billable permit action may request an informal review
of the hours billed and may pay the bill under protest as provided below:
      1.   The request shall be made in writing, and received by the control
officer within thirty days of the date of the final bill. Unless the control
officer and person agree otherwise, the informal review shall take place within
thirty days after the control officer's receipt of the request. The control
officer shall arrange the date and location of the informal review with the
person at least ten business days before the informal review. The control
officer shall review whether the amounts of time billed are correct and
reasonable for the tasks involved. The control officer shall mail his or her
decision on the informal review to the person within ten business days after
the informal review date.
      2.   The control officer's decision after informal review shall become
final unless, within thirty days after person's receipt of the informal review
decision, the person requests in writing a hearing pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-482.
      3.   If the final itemized bill is paid under protest, the control
officer shall take final action on the permit or permit revision.
   G.   The control officer shall adjust the hourly rate every November 1, to
the nearest ten cents per hour, beginning on November 1, 2008, by multiplying
one hundred five dollars and eighty cents by the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for
the most recent year, and then dividing by the CPI for the year 2007. The
control officer shall adjust the annual fees listed in subsections C and D
every November 1, to the nearest ten dollars, beginning on November 1, 2008, by
multiplying the fee by the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for the most recent year,
and then dividing by the CPI for the year 2007. The Consumer Price Index for
any year is the average of the Consumer Price Index for all-urban consumers
published by the United States Department of Labor, as of the close of the
twelve-month period ending on August 31 of that year.
   H.   An applicant for a Class II or Class III permit or permit revision may
request that the control officer provide accelerated processing of the
application by providing the control officer written notice sixty days before
filing the application. The request shall be accompanied by an initial fee of
fifteen thousand dollars. The fee is non-refundable to the extent of the
control officer's costs for accelerating the processing if the control officer
undertakes the accelerated processing described below:
      1.   If an applicant requests accelerated permit processing, the control
officer may, to the extent practicable, undertake to process the permit or
permit revision according to the following schedule:
         a.   For applications for initial Class II and Class III permits under
Section
17.13.010 or significant permit revisions under Section
17.13.140, the control officer shall issue or deny the proposed permit or
permit revision within one hundred twenty days after the control officer
determines that the application is complete.
         b.   For minor permit revisions under Section
17.13.130, the control officer shall issue or deny the permit revision within
sixty days after receiving a complete application.
      2.   At any time after an applicant requests accelerated permit
processing, the control officer may require additional advance payments based
on the most recent estimate of additional costs.
      3.   Upon completion of permit processing activities but before issuance
or denial of the permit or permit revision, the control officer shall send
notice of the decision to the applicant along with a final bill. The maximum
fee for any billable action for a Class II and Class III source is $25,000.00.
The final bill shall include all regular permit processing and other fees due,
and, in addition, the difference between the cost of accelerating the permit
application, including any costs incurred by the control officer in contracting
for, hiring, or supervising the work of outside consultants, and all advance
payments submitted for accelerated processing. In the event all payments made
exceed actual accelerated permit costs, the control officer shall refund the
excess advance payments. Nothing in this subsection affects the public
participation requirements of Section
17.13.210, or EPA and affected state review as required under Section
17.12.060 or Section
17.13.130.
   I.   Inactive Sources. The owner or operator of a permitted source that has
undergone initial startup but was shut down for the entire preceding year shall
pay fifty percent of the annual fee required under subsection C or D. The owner
or operator of a source claiming inactive status under this subsection shall
submit a letter to the control officer by November 1 of the calendar year for
which the source was inactive. Termination of a permit does not relieve a
source of any past fees due.
   J.   Transition.
      1.   Subsections A through I of this section are effective December 20,
2007. The first annual fees are due on February 1, 2008.
      2.   All fees incurred after December 20, 2007, are payable in accordance
with the rates contained in this section.
         a.   Permit processing fees incurred after December 20, 2007 for any
new permit, permit revision, transfer, or renewal shall be billed in accordance
with the rates in this section.
         b.   Fees accrued but not yet paid before the effective date of this
section remain as obligations to be paid to the control officer.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.520.
17.13.250   Fees related to general permits.
   A.   Permit Processing Fee. The owner or operator of a source that applies
for authority to operate under a general permit shall pay to the control
officer five hundred forty dollars with the submittal of each application. This
fee applies to the owner or operator of any source that intends to continue
operating under the authority of a general permit that has been proposed for
renewal.
   B.   Annual Fee. The owner or operator of a source with authority to operate
under a general permit shall pay to the control officer an annual fee from the
table below, by February 1 or sixty days after the control officer mails the
invoice, whichever is late.
 
General Permit Source Category      Annual Fee
Class II Area Sources               $540.00
Other Class II General Permits      $3,250.00
Class III Gasoline Service Stations $540.00
Class III Crematories               $1,085.00
Other Class III General Permits     $1,085.00
 
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.400.
Chapter 17.14
ACTIVITY PERMITS
   
Article I. - General Provisions
   
Article II. - Fugitive Dust
   
Article III. - Asbestos NESHAP
   
Article IV. - Open Burning
Article I. General Provisions
17.14.010   Definitions.
17.14.020   General provisions.
17.14.030   Refund of overpayment of permit fees.
17.14.010   Definitions.
   In addition to the definitions contained in Section
17.04.340, words, phrases and terms used in this chapter shall have the
following meanings:
   A.   "Demolition" means the wrecking or taking out of any load-supporting
structural member of a facility together with any related handling operations
or intentional burning of any facility.
   B.   "Earthmoving" means the movement of earthen material which causes or
has the potential to cause fugitive dust.
   C.   "Fugitive dust" means the particulate matter not collected by a capture
system that is entrained in the ambient air and is caused from human, animal,
and/or natural activities, such as, but not limited to, movement of soil,
vehicles, equipment, blasting, and wind.
   D.   "Project" means the specific plan, design or phase of the plan for
which the person obtains a permit.
   E.   "Regulated asbestos containing material" or "RACM" means (a) friable
asbestos material, (b) Category I nonfriable ACM that has become friable, (c)
Category I nonfriable ACM that will be or has been subjected to sanding,
grinding, cutting, or abrading, or (d) Category II nonfriable ACM that has a
high probability of becoming or has become crumbled, pulverized, or reduced to
powder by the forces expected to act on the material in the course of
demolition or renovation operations regulated by 40 CFR 61, Subpart M.
   F.   "Renovation" means altering a facility or one or more facility
components in any way, including the stripping or removal of RACM from a
facility component. Operations in which load-supporting structural members are
wrecked or taken out are demolitions.
   G.   "Trenching" means the construction of a narrow excavation, in relation
to its length, made below the surface of the ground for purposes of
facilitating the installation and repair of underground utilities.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.465.
17.14.020   General provisions.
   A.   Permits issued pursuant to a program adopted under this title are
subject to payment of a reasonable fee to be determined as outlined in this
chapter.
   B.   Funds received for permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
deposited in a special public health fund and shall be used by the control
officer to defray the costs of implementing provisions of this title.
   C.   An applicant for an activity or open burning permit shall pay a fee
calculated according to the schedules listed at the end of this chapter and any
other provisions established in subsequent sections.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.500.
17.14.030   Refund of overpayment of permit fees.
   No fees shall be refunded except those paid in excess of the amount
required. An excess payment shall be refunded upon the written request of the
permittee within one year of overpayment.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.620.
Article II. Fugitive Dust
17.14.040   Fugitive dust activity permits.
17.14.050   Fugitive dust activity permit fees.
17.14.040   Fugitive dust activity permits.
   A.   No person shall conduct, cause or allow land stripping, earthmoving,
blasting, trenching or road construction without first obtaining an activity
permit from the control officer.
   B.   There shall be two types of activity permits as follows:
      1.   A single activity permit shall be obtained by persons conducting any
one of the following activities:
         a.   Land stripping and/or earthmoving activities totaling more than
one acre in size;
         b.   Trenching activities totaling more than three hundred feet in
length;
         c.   Road construction activities totaling more than fifty feet in
length; and
         d.   Blasting activities.
      2.   A multiple activity permit may be obtained by persons conducting
more than one dust producing activity to include, but not limited to, land
stripping, earthmoving, trenching, blasting, and road construction at a single
project site covering an acre or greater.
   C.   In the case of an emergency, action may be taken to stabilize the
situation before obtaining an activity permit. Upon stabilizing the emergency
situation, an activity permit shall be obtained.
   D.   Permittees shall notify the control officer within five working days of
the start and completion of the project.
   E.   The following terms apply to the duration of the activity permit:
      1.   An activity permit is valid for one year from the date of issue.
      2.   Upon approval by the control officer, two permits covering the same
scope of work or identical project may be obtained and will be valid for a
period of two years from the date of issue.
      3.   Permit coverage shall not be transferred from the original permit
holder.
      4.   Permits may be voluntarily terminated pursuant to Section
17.13.060.
   F.   The following exemptions will apply to this section:
      1.   Class I, II, or III air quality permit holders pursuant to Section
17.11.090 whose permit authorizes the above described activities in subsection
(B)(1)(a) thru (d).
      2.   Trenching activities associated with the installation of irrigation
lines for landscaping purposes that disturbs less than the first foot of
topsoil.
      3.   Trenching activities located beneath a road for which a current
fugitive dust activity permit for road construction has been issued.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.470.
17.14.050   Fugitive dust activity permit fees.
   A.   Fugitive Dust Activity Permit Fee Schedule (effective July 5, 2007).
 
S.S. 1 ACTIVITY                          RATE COMPONENTS
                                         >1—2 acres        $100.00
A      Land stripping and/or earthmoving >2—10 acres       $500.00
                                         >10—40 acres      $1,500.00
                                         >40+ acres          $3,000.00
                                         300—500 feet      $75.00
B      Trenching                         501—1,500 feet    $200.00
                                         1,501—5,000 feet  $400.00
                                         5,001+ feet         $800.00
                                         50—1,000 feet     $50.00
C      Road construction                 1,001—3,000 feet  $250.00
                                         3,001—6,000 feet  $500.00
                                         6,001+ feet         $1,000.00
D      Blasting                                              $25.00
                                         >1—10 acres       $625.00
E      Multiple Activity Permit          >10—40 acres      $2,000.00
                                         >40+ acres          $4,000.00
 
      1.   S.S. Sub-schedule for identification only.
   B.   The control officer may waive the fugitive dust activity permit fee if
all the following apply:
      1.   The permit is being obtained for cleanup of an illegal dump; and
      2.   The illegal dump was caused by a party other than the property owner
where the dump is located.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.540.
Article III. Asbestos NESHAP
17.14.060   Asbestos NESHAP activity permits.
17.14.070   Asbestos NESHAP activity permit fees.
17.14.060   Asbestos NESHAP activity permits.
   A.   No person shall allow or commence demolition or renovation of any
NESHAP facility as defined in 40 CFR 61 Subpart M without first obtaining an
asbestos NESHAP activity permit from the control officer.
   B.   An asbestos NESHAP activity permit shall be obtained by persons
conducting the following activities:
      1.   Demolition of load supporting structural members.
      2.   Renovation of more than two hundred sixty linear feet of RACM on
pipes.
      3.   Renovation of more than one hundred sixty square feet of RACM on
other facility components.
      4.   Renovation of more than thirty-five cubic feet of RACM off facility
components.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.475.
17.14.070   Asbestos NESHAP activity permit fees.
   A.   Asbestos NESHAP Activity Permit Fee Schedule (effective July 5, 2007).
 
NESHAP Activity Permit                      Rate
                                            Components
Demolition or Renovation of NESHAP Facility $420.00
 
   B.   The control officer may waive the Asbestos NESHAP activity permit fee
if all the following apply:
      1.   The permit is being obtained for cleanup of an illegal dump; and
      2.   The illegal dump was caused by a party other than the property owner
where the dump is located.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.540.
Article IV. Open Burning
17.14.080   Open burning permits.
17.14.090   Open burning permit fees.
17.14.080   Open burning permits.
   A.   In addition to the definitions contained in A.R.S. § 49-501, in this
article:
      1.   "Agricultural burning" means burning of vegetative materials related
to the production and harvesting of crops and raising of animals for the
purpose of marketing for profit, or providing a livelihood, but not including
the burning of household waste or prohibited materials. Burning may be
conducted in fields, piles, ditch banks, fence rows, or canal laterals for
purposes such as weed control, disease and pest prevention, or site
preparation.
      2.   "Air curtain destructor" means an incineration device designed and
used to secure, by means of a fan-generated air curtain, controlled combustion
of only wood waste and slash materials in an earthen trench or refractory-lined
pit or bin.
      3.   "Approved waste burner" means an incinerator constructed of fire
resistant material with a cover or screen that is closed when in use, and has
openings in the sides or top no greater than one inch in diameter.
      4.   "Class I area" means any one of the Arizona mandatory federal Class
I areas defined in A.R.S. § 49-401.01.
      5.   "Construction burning" means burning wood or vegetative material
from land clearing, site preparation, or fabrication, erection, installation,
demolition, or modification of any buildings or other land improvements, but
does not include burning household waste or prohibited material.
      6.   "Dangerous material" means any substance or combination of
substances that is capable of causing bodily harm or property loss unless
neutralized, consumed, or otherwise disposed of in a controlled and safe
manner.
      7.   "Emission reduction techniques" means methods for controlling
emissions from open outdoor fires to minimize the amount of emissions output
per unit of area burned.
      8.   "Flue," as used in this section, means any duct or passage for air
or combustion gases, such as a stack or chimney.
      9.   "Household waste" means any solid waste including garbage, rubbish,
and sanitary waste from a septic tank that is generated from households
including single and multiple family residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses,
ranger stations, crew quarters, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day-use
recreation areas, but does not include construction debris, landscaping rubble,
demolition debris or prohibited materials.
      10.   "Independent authority to permit fires" means the authority of a
county to permit fires by a rule adopted under Arizona Revised Statutes, Title
49, Chapter 3, Article 3, and includes only Maricopa, Pima, and Pinal counties.
      11.   "Open outdoor fire or open burning" means the combustion of
material of any type, outdoors and in the open, where the products of
combustion are not directed through a flue. Open outdoor fires include
agricultural, residential, prescribed, and construction burning, and fires
using air curtain destructors.
      12.   "Prescribed burning" means the controlled application of fire to
wildland fuels that are in either a natural or modified state, under certain
burn and smoke management prescription conditions that have been specified by
the land manager in charge of or assisting the burn, to attain planned resource
management objectives. Prescribed burning does not include a fire set or
permitted by a public officer to provide instruction in fire fighting methods,
or construction or residential burning.
      13.   "Prohibited materials" means nonpaper garbage from the processing,
storage, service, or consumption of food; chemically treated wood; lead-painted
wood; linoleum flooring, and composite counter-tops; tires; explosives or
ammunition; oleanders; asphalt shingles; tar paper; plastic and rubber
products, including bottles for household chemicals; plastic grocery and retail
bags; waste petroleum products, such as waste crankcase oil, transmission oil,
and oil filters; transformer oils; asbestos; batteries; anti-freeze; aerosol
spray cans; electrical wire insulation; thermal insulation; polyester products;
hazardous waste products such as paints, pesticides, cleaners and solvents,
stains and varnishes, and other flammable liquids; plastic pesticide bags and
containers; and hazardous material containers including those that contained
lead, cadmium, mercury, or arsenic compounds.
      14.   "Residential burning" means open burning of vegetative materials
conducted by or for the occupants of residential dwellings, but does not
include burning household waste or prohibited material.
   B.   Unlawful Open Burning. Notwithstanding any other rule in this chapter,
a person shall not ignite, cause to be ignited, permit to be ignited, allow, or
maintain any open outdoor fire in a county without independent authority to
permit fires except as provided in A.R.S. § 49-501 and this section.
   C.   Open Outdoor Fires Exempt From a Permit. The following fires do not
require an open burning permit from the control officer or a delegated
authority:
      1.   Fires used only for:
         a.   Cooking of food,
         b.   Providing warmth for human beings,
         c.   Recreational purposes,
         d.   Branding of animals,
         e.   Orchard heaters for the purpose of frost protection in farming or
nursery operations, and
         f.   The proper disposal of flags under 4 U.S.C. 1, § 8.
      2.   Any fire set or permitted by any public officer in the performance
of official duty, if the fire is set or permission given for the following
purpose:
         a.   Control of an active wildfire; or
         b.   Instruction in the method of fighting fires, except that the
person setting these fires must comply with the reporting requirements of
subsection (D)(3)(f).
      3.   Fire set by or permitted by the control officer of Department of
Agriculture for the purpose of disease and pest prevention in an organized,
area-wide control of an epidemic or infestation affecting livestock or crops.
      4.   Prescribed burns set by or assisted by the federal government or any
of its departments, agencies, or agents, or the state or any of its agencies,
departments, or political subdivisions.
   D.   Open Outdoor Fires Requiring a Permit.
      1.   The following open outdoor fires are allowed with an open burning
permit from the control officer or a delegated authority:
         a.   Construction burning;
         b.   Agricultural burning;
         c.   Residential burning;
         d.   Prescribed burns conducted on private lands without the
assistance of a federal or state land manager as defined under [subsection (A)
(12)];
         e.   Any fire set or permitted by a public officer in the performance
of official duty, if the fire is set or permission given for the purpose of
weed abatement, or the prevention of a fire hazard, unless the fire is exempt
from the permit requirement under subsection (C)(3);
         f.   Open outdoor fires of dangerous material under subsection E;
         g.   Open outdoor fires of household waste under subsection F; and
         h.   Open outdoor fires that use an air curtain destructor, as defined
in Section
17.14.080(A)(2).
      2.   A person conducting an open outdoor fire in a county with
independent authority to permit fires shall obtain a permit from the control
officer or a delegated authority unless exempted under subsection C. Permits
may be issued for a period not to exceed one year. A person shall obtain a
permit by completing an PDEQ-approved application form.
      3.   Open outdoor fire permits issued under this section shall include:
         a.   A list of the materials that the permittee may burn under the
permit;
         b.   A means of contacting the permittee authorized by the permit to
set an open fire in the event that an order to extinguish the open outdoor fire
is issued by the control officer or the delegated authority;
         c.   A requirement that burns be conducted during the following
periods, unless otherwise waived or directed by the control officer on a
specific day basis:
            i.   Year-round: Ignite fire no earlier than one hour after
sunrise; and
            ii.   Year-round: Extinguish fire no later than two hours before
sunset;
         d.   A requirement that the permittee conduct all open burning only
during atmospheric conditions that:
            i.   Prevent dispersion of smoke into populated areas;
            ii.   Prevent visibility impairment on traveled roads or at
airports that result in a safety hazard;
            iii.   Do not create a public nuisance or adversely affect public
safety;
            iv.   Do not cause an adverse impact to visibility in a Class I
area; and
            v.   Do not cause uncontrollable spreading of the fire;
         e.   A list of the types of emission reduction techniques that the
permittee shall use to minimize fire emissions;
         f.   A reporting requirement that the permittee shall meet by
providing the following information in a format provided by the control officer
for each date open burning occurred, on either a daily basis on the day of the
fire, or an annual basis in a report to the control officer or delegated
authority due on February 1 for the previous calendar year:
            i.   The date of each burn;
            ii.   The type and quantity of fuel burned for each date open
burning occurred;
            iii.   The fire type, such as pile or pit, for each date open
burning occurred; and
            iv.   For each date open burning occurred, the legal location, to
the nearest section, or latitude and longitude, to the nearest degree minute,
or street address for residential burns;
         g.   A requirement that the person conducting the open burn notify the
local fire-fighting agency or private fire protection service provider, if the
service provider is a delegated authority, before burning. If neither is in
existence, the person conducting the burn shall notify the state forester;
         h.   A requirement that the permittee start each open outdoor fire
using items that do not cause the production of black smoke;
         i.   A requirement that the permittee attend the fire at all times
until it is completely extinguished;
         j.   A requirement that the permittee provide fire extinguishing
equipment on-site for the duration of the burn;
         k.   A requirement that the permittee ensure that a burning pit,
burning pile, or approved waste burner be at least fifty feet from any
structure;
         l.   A requirement that the permittee have a copy of the burn permit
on-site during open burning;
         m.   A requirement that the permittee not conduct open burning when an
air stagnation advisory, as issued by the National Weather Service, is in
effect in the area of the burn or during periods when smoke can be expected to
accumulate to the extent that it will significantly impair visibility in Class
I areas;
         n.   A requirement that the permittee not conduct open burning when
any stage air pollution episode is declared by ADEQ or PDEQ;
         o.   A statement that the control officer, or any other public
officer, may order that the burn be extinguished or prohibit burning during
periods of inadequate smoke dispersion, excessive visibility impairment, or
extreme fire danger; and
         p.   A list of the activities prohibited and the criminal penalties
provided under A.R.S. § 13-1706.
      4.   The control officer or a delegated authority shall not issue an open
burning permit under this section:
         a.   That would allow burning prohibited materials other than under a
permit for the burning of dangerous materials;
         b.   If the applicant has applied for a permit under this section to
burn a dangerous material which is also hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261, but
does not have a permit to burn hazardous waste under 40 CFR 264, or is not an
interim status facility allowed to burn hazardous waste under 40 CFR 265; or
         c.   If the burning would occur at a solid waste facility in violation
of 40 CFR 258.24 and the control officer has not issued a variance under A.R.S.
§ 49-763.01.
   E.   Open Outdoor Fires of Dangerous Material. A fire set for the disposal
of a dangerous material is allowed by the provisions of this section, when the
material is too dangerous to store and transport, and the control officer has
issued a permit for the fire. A permit issued under this subsection shall
contain all provisions in subsection (D)(3) except for subsections (D)(3)(e)
and (D)(3)(f). The control officer shall permit fires for the disposal of
dangerous materials only when no safe alternative method of disposal exists,
and burning the materials does not result in the emission of hazardous or toxic
substances either directly or as a product of combustion in amounts that will
endanger health or safety.
   F.   Open Outdoor Fires of Household Waste. An open outdoor fire for the
disposal of household waste is allowed by provisions of this section when
permitted in writing by the control officer or a delegated authority. A permit
issued under this subsection shall contain all provisions in subsection (D)(3)
except for subsections (D)(3)(e) and (D)(3)(f). The permittee shall conduct
open outdoor fires of household waste in an approved waste burner and shall
either:
      1.   Burn household waste generated on-site on farms or ranches of forty
acres or more where no household waste collection or disposal service is
available; or
      2.   Burn household waste generated on-site where no household waste
collection and disposal service is available and where the nearest other
dwelling unit is at least five hundred feet away.
   G.   The control officer shall hold an annual public meeting for interested
parties to review operations of the open outdoor fire program and discuss
emission reduction techniques.
   H.   Nothing in this section is intended to permit any practice that is a
violation of any statute, ordinance, rule, or regulation.
   I.   The term of any open burning permit shall be as specified by the
control officer, subject to the following limitations:
      1.   The term of a residential open burning permit shall not exceed 3
consecutive or nonconsecutive days within a 30-day period; and
      2.   The term of a construction or agricultural open burning permit shall
expire as specified on the original application, and shall in no case exceed 90
days, with no limitation on days of burning within the 90-day term.
(Ord. 2020-43, § 1 (part), 2020; Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.480.
17.14.090   Open burning permit fees.
Open Burning Permit Fee Schedules 
 
S.S. 1 Permit Activity                     Permit Fee
A      Residential Burning 2               $30
B      Construction/Agricultural Burning 3 $100
 
   1.   S.S.—Sub-schedule for identification only.
   2.   The term of a residential burning permit shall not exceed 3 consecutive
or nonconsecutive days within a 30-day period.
   3.   The term of a construction or agricultural burning permit shall not
exceed 90 days, with no limitation on days of burning within the 90-day term.
(Ord. 2020-43, § 1 (part), 2020; Ord. 2017-20 § 2 (part), 2017)
Editor's note— Formerly § 17.12.530.
Chapter 17.16
EMISSION LIMITING STANDARDS
Sections: 
   
Article I. - General Provisions
   
Article II. - Visible Emission Standards
   
Article III. - Emissions from Existing and New Nonpoint Sources
   
Article IV. - New and Existing Stationary Source Performance Standards
   
Article V. - Emissions from New and Existing Portable Sources
   
Article VI. - New Source Performance Standards
   
Article VII. - National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants
   
Article VIII. - New Major Sources and Major Modifications to Existing Major
Sources
   
Article IX. - Ozone Depleting Substances
Article I. General Provisions
17.16.010   Local rules and standards—Applicability of more than one standard.
17.16.020   Noncompliance with applicable standards.
17.16.030   Odor limiting standards.
17.16.010   Local rules and standards—Applicability of more than one standard.
   A.   The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all sources of air
contaminants operating in Pima County, including those sources under the
jurisdiction of the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality.
   B.   If more than one emission limit or emission standard is applicable to
the same source, the more stringent standard or emission limit shall apply.
   C.   The owner or operator of any stationary or portable source of air
pollution which burns any material, except natural gas, shall keep complete
records of the materials used as fuel. The owner or operator of any stationary
or portable source of air pollution which incinerates any material shall keep
complete records of all materials incinerated.
   D.   Any facility described in Section
17.16.010C utilizing any fuel source or incinerating any material which the
operator has any cause to believe may be a hazardous waste shall test such
material to determine if the material is a hazardous waste prior to burning or
incinerating the material. If the material is a hazardous waste, the facility
shall comply with Section
17.16.150.
(Ord. 1995-87 § 38, 1995: Ord. 1994-83 § 47, 1994: Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part),
1993)
17.16.020   Noncompliance with applicable standards.
   A.   No person shall cause or permit the planning, construction,
installation, erection, modification, use, or operation of an emission source
which will cause or contribute to a violation of a performance standard
established in this title.
      1.   The actual emission rates of all identical or reasonably similar
emission sources under the control of the same source operator at a contiguous
geographical area shall be summed to determine compliance with a mass-emissions
discharge standard.
      2.   A source shall comply with a discharge standard over the full range
of the source's operating rates.
   B.   Where a stack, vent or other outlet is at such a level that fumes, gas
mist, odor, smoke, vapor or any combination thereof constituting air pollution
are discharged to adjoining property, the control officer may require the
installation of abatement equipment or the alteration of such stack, vent or
other outlet by the owner or operator thereof to a degree that will adequately
reduce or eliminate the discharge of air pollution to adjoining property.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.030   Odor limiting standards.
   No person shall emit gaseous or odorous materials from equipment, operations
or premises under his control in such quantities or concentrations as to cause
air pollution.
(Ord. 1996-50 § 2, 1996: Ord. 1994-83 § 48, 1994: Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part),
1993)
Article II. Visible Emission Standards
17.16.040   Standards and applicability (includes NESHAP).
17.16.050   Visibility limiting standard.
17.16.040   Standards and applicability (includes NESHAP).
   A.   No person shall cause or permit the effluent from a single emission
point, multiple emission point, or fugitive emissions source to have an average
optical density equal to or greater than the opacity limiting standards
specified in
Table 17.16.040 at the end of this chapter, or as otherwise specified in this
title, subject to the following provisions:
      1.   Opacities (optical densities), as measured in accordance with Method
9, of an effluent shall be measured by a certified visible emissions evaluator
with his natural eyes, approximately following the procedures which were used
during his certification, or by an approved and precisely calibrated in-stack
monitoring instrument.
      2.   A violation of an opacity standard shall be determined by measuring
and recording a set of consecutive, instantaneous opacities, and calculating
the arithmetic average of the measurements within the set unless otherwise
noted herein. The measurements shall be made at approximately fifteen-second
intervals for a period of at least six minutes, and the number of required
measurements shall be as specified in
Table 17.16.040. Sets need not be consecutive in time, and in no case shall two
sets overlap. If the average opacity of the set of instantaneous measurements
exceeds the maximum allowed by any rule, this shall constitute a violation.
      3.   The use of air or other gaseous diluents solely for the purpose of
achieving compliance with an opacity standard is prohibited.
   B.   When the presence of uncombined water is the only reason for failure of
a source to otherwise meet the requirements of this article, this article shall
not apply.
Table 17.16.040
EMISSIONS-DISCHARGE OPACITY LIMITING STANDARDS 
               Instantaneous Opacity Measurements            Maximum Allowable
               Required No.  Excluded No.     No. to Use For Average Opacity,
Type of Source (For a Set)   (Highest Values) Averaging      %
                Instantaneous Opacity Measurements            Maximum Allowable
                Required No.  Excluded No.     No. to Use For Average Opacity,
Type of Source  (For a Set)   (Highest Values) Averaging      %

Asbestos-
Containing      25            0                25             0
Operation 1
Cold Diesel     25            0                25             60
Engines 2
Loaded Diesel   26            1                25             60
Engines 3
Incinerators    27            2                25             20
Portland Cement 25            0                25             20
Plants 4
Other Sources 5 25            0                25             20
 
1  An asbestos mill, manufacturing or fabrication operation which uses asbestos
as a raw material, or spraying operation which sprays materials containing more
than one percent asbestos by weight.
2  Applicable to the first ten consecutive minutes after starting up a diesel
engine.
3  Applicable to a diesel engine being accelerated under load.
4  Applicable to kiln, clinker cooler, and other process equipment.
5  Any source not otherwise specifically covered within this table, unless
otherwise specifically covered in this chapter.
(Ord. 2004-97 § 5 (part), 2004; Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.050   Visibility limiting standard.
   A.   No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit operations or activities
likely to result in excessive amounts of airborne dust without taking
reasonable precautions to prevent excessive amounts of particulate matter from
becoming airborne.
   B.   Except for sources located within the boundaries of the Tohono O'Odham,
Pasqua Yaqui and San Xavier Indian Reservations, opacity of an emission from
any nonpoint source, as measured in accordance with the Arizona Testing Manual,
Reference Method 9, shall not exceed the following:
      1.   Twenty percent for such nonpoint sources in eastern Pima County,
east of the eastern boundary of the Tohono O'Odham Reservation.
      2.   Forty percent for such nonpoint sources in all other areas of Pima
County.
   C.   Open fires permitted according to
Chapter 17.14 are exempt from the requirements of this section.
   D.   No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit diffusion of visible
emissions, including fugitive dust, beyond the property boundary line within
which the emissions become airborne, without taking reasonably necessary and
feasible precautions to control generation of airborne particulate matter.
Sources may be required to cease temporarily the activity or operation which is
causing or contributing to the emissions until reasonably necessary and
feasible precautions are taken.
      1.   Sources required to obtain an air quality permit under ARS § 49-426,
§ 49-480 or Section
17.14.040 may request to have the actions constituting reasonably necessary and
feasible precautions approved and included as permit conditions. Compliance
with such permit conditions shall be considered compliance with this
subsection.
      2.   This subsection shall not apply when wind speeds exceed twenty-five
(25) miles per hour (using the Beaufort Scale of Wind-Speed Equivalents, or as
recorded by the National Weather Service). This exception does not apply if
control measures have not been taken or were not commensurate with the size or
scope of the emission source.
      3.   This subsection shall not apply to the generation of airborne
particulate matter from undisturbed land.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 3 (part), 2017: Ord. 2002-108 § 3, 2002; Ord. 1999-11 § 2,
1999; Ord. 1995-87 § 39, 1995: Ord. 1994-83 § 49, 1994: Ord. 1993-128 § 4
(part), 1993)
Article III. Emissions from Existing and New Nonpoint Sources
17.16.055   General.
17.16.060   Fugitive dust producing activities.
17.16.070   Fugitive dust emissions standards for motor vehicle operation.
17.16.080   Vacant lots and open spaces.
17.16.090   Roads and streets.
17.16.100   Particulate materials.
17.16.110   Storage piles.
17.16.120   Mineral tailings.
17.16.125    Inactive mineral tailings impoundment and slag storage area within
the Ajo PM10 Planning Area.
17.16.055   General.
   For purposes of this article, any source of air contaminants which due to a
lack of an identifiable emission point or plume cannot be considered a point
source, shall be classified as a nonpoint source. In applying this criteria,
such items as air-curtain destructors, heater-planners, and conveyor transfer
points shall be considered to have identifiable plumes. Any affected facility
subject to regulation under this chapter or A.A.C. Title 9, Chapter 3, Article
8, shall not be subject to regulation under this article.
(Ord. 1995-87 § 40, 1995)
17.16.060   Fugitive dust producing activities.
   A.   A permittee whose permit specifically allows fugitive dust producing
operations or activities is responsible for controlling windblown dust, dust
from haul roads, and dust emitted from land clearing, earthmoving, demolition,
trenching, blasting, road construction, mining, racing event, and other
activities, as applicable.
      1.   Until the area becomes permanently stabilized by paving, landscaping
or otherwise, dust emissions shall be controlled by applying adequate amounts
of water, chemical stabilizer, or other effective dust suppressant.
      2.   The permittee shall not leave land in such a state that fugitive
dust emissions (including windblown dust or dust caused by vehicular traffic on
the area) would violate Section
17.16.050.
   B.   A permittee whose permit specifically allows fugitive dust producing
operations or activities is responsible for controlling windblown dust, dust
from haul roads, and dust emitted from land clearing, earthmoving, demolition,
trenching, blasting, road construction, mining, racing event, and other
activities to ensure compliance with Section
17.16.050.
(Ord. 1995-87 § 41, 1995: Ord. 1994-83 § 50, 1994: Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part),
1993)
17.16.070   Fugitive dust emissions standards for motor vehicle operation.
   A.   No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit a vacant lot, or an
urban or suburban open area, to be driven over or used by motor vehicles,
trucks, cars, cycles, bikes, or buggies, or by animals such as horses, without
taking reasonable precautions to limit excessive amounts of particulates from
becoming airborne. Dust shall be kept to a minimum by using an approved dust
suppressant, or adhesive soil stabilizer, or by paving, or by barring access to
the property, or by other acceptable means.
   B.   No person shall operate a motor vehicle for recreational purposes in a
dry wash, riverbed or open area in such a way as to cause or contribute to
excessive amounts of particulate matter from becoming airborne into a
residential, recreational, institutional educational, retail sales, hotel or
business premises.
   C.   Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be guilty of
an offense as provided under A.R.S. 49-502.
   D.   In accordance with the provisions of A.R.S. 49-502, peace officers are
authorized to issue a notice to appear for any violation of this section. In
lieu of issuing a notice to appear, peace officers may file a violation report
with the control officer, requesting him to file a complaint alleging a
violation of this section pursuant to A.R.S. 49-502.
(Ord. 1995-87 § 42, 1995: Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.080   Vacant lots and open spaces.
   A.   No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit a building or its
appurtenances, or a building or subdivision site, or a driveway, or a parking
area, or a vacant lot or sales lot, or an urban or suburban open area to be
constructed, used, altered, repaired, demolished, cleared, or leveled, or the
earth to be moved or excavated, without taking reasonable precautions to limit
excessive amounts of particulate matter from becoming airborne. Dust and other
types of air contaminants shall be kept to a minimum by good modern practices
such as using an approved dust suppressant or adhesive soil stabilizer, paving,
covering, landscaping, continuous wetting, detouring, barring access, or other
acceptable means.
   B.   No vacant lot, housing plot, building site, parking area, sales lot,
playground, livestock feedlot, or other open area—other than those used solely
for soil-cultivation or vegetative crop-producing and harvesting agricultural
purposes—shall be used or left in such a state after construction, alteration,
clearing, leveling, or excavation that naturally induced wind blowing over the
area causes a violation of Section
17.16.050. Dust emissions must be permanently suppressed by landscaping,
covering with gravel or vegetation, paving, or applying equivalently effective
controls.
   C.   No vacant lot, parking area, sales lot, or other open urban area shall
be used by motor vehicles in such a manner that visible dust emissions induced
by vehicular traffic on the area cause a violation of Section
17.16.050.
(Ord. 1995-87 § 43, 1995: Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.090   Roads and streets.
   A.   No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the use, repair,
construction or reconstruction of a roadway or alley without taking reasonable
precautions to prevent excessive amounts of particulate matter from becoming
airborne. Dust and other particulates shall be kept to a minimum by employing
temporary paving, dust suppressants, wetting down, detouring or by other
reasonable means.
   B.   Dust emissions from the construction phase of a new road must be
minimized by applying the same measures specified in subsection A of this
section.
   C.   No new unpaved private driveway shall be constructed unless the road
will not be used by more vehicular traffic than that associated with a one- or
two-family private residence, and the road will not be adjacent to any
recreational, institutional, educational, or retail sales facility.
   D.   No new unpaved service road or unpaved haul road shall be constructed
unless dust will be suppressed after construction by intermittently watering,
limiting access, or applying chemical dust suppressants to the road, in such a
way that visible dust emissions caused by vehicular traffic on the road do not
violate Section
17.16.050.
   E.   No new road other than a private driveway shall be constructed unless
the paving specifications are those defined by, or equivalent to those of, the
planning department and/or highway department of the jurisdictional agency.
   F.   The surfacing of roadways with asbestos tailings is prohibited.
   G.   No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit transportation of
materials likely to give rise to airborne dust without taking reasonable
precautions, such as wetting, applying dust suppressants, or covering the load,
to prevent particulate matter from becoming airborne. Earth or other material
that is deposited by trucking or earth moving equipment shall be removed from
paved streets by the person responsible for such deposits.
(Ord. 1995-87 § 44, 1995: Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.100   Particulate materials.
   A.   No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit crushing, screening,
handling, transporting or conveying of materials or other operations likely to
result in significant amounts of airborne dust without taking reasonable
precautions, such as the use of spray bars, wetting agents, dust suppressants,
covering the load, and hoods to prevent excessive amounts of particulate matter
from becoming airborne.
   B.   Dust emissions from construction activity shall be effectively
controlled by applying adequate amounts of water or other equivalently
effective dust controls.
   C.   Dust emissions from the transportation of materials shall be
effectively controlled by covering stock loads in open-bodied trucks, limiting
vehicular speeds, or other equivalently effective controls.
   D.   Emissions from a sandblasting or other abrasive blasting operation
shall be effectively controlled by applying water to suppress visible emissions
(wet blasting), enclosing the operation, or use of other equivalently effective
controls.
(Ord. 1995-87 § 45, 1995: Ord. 1994-83 § 51, 1994: Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part),
1993)
17.16.110   Storage piles.
   A.   No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit organic or inorganic
dust producing material to be stacked, piled or otherwise stored without taking
reasonable precautions such as chemical stabilization, wetting, or covering to
prevent excessive amounts of particulate matter from becoming airborne.
   B.   Stacking and reclaiming machinery utilized at storage piles shall be
operated at all times with a minimum fall of material and in such manner, or
with the use of spray bars and wetting agents, as to minimize and control to
ensure compliance with Section
17.16.050.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.120   Mineral tailings.
   A.   No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit construction of, or
otherwise own or operate, mineral tailing piles without taking reasonable
precautions to prevent excessive amounts of particulate matter from becoming
airborne. Reasonable precautions shall mean wetting, chemical stabilization,
revegetation or such other measures as are approved by the control officer.
   B.   No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit construction of, or
otherwise own or operate, mineral tailings piles without taking reasonable
precautions (i.e., wetting, chemical stabilization and revegetation) to
minimize and control to ensure compliance with Section
17.16.050.
(Ord. 2016-42 § 4 (part), 2016: Ord. 1995-87 § 46, 1995: Ord. 1993-128 § 4
(part), 1993)
17.16.125   Inactive mineral tailings impoundment and slag storage area within
the Ajo PM10 Planning Area.
   A.   Applicability. This Section applies to the owner or operator of the
inactive mineral tailings impoundment and slag storage area within the Ajo PM10
Planning Area.
   B.   Definitions. The following definitions apply for the purposes of this
Section:
      1.   "Affected area" means the Ajo PM10 Planning Area.
      2.   "Ajo PM10 Planning Area" means the area designated in 40 C.F.R.
§81.303, adopted as of June 30, 2017 with no future editions or amendments.
      3.   "Chemical or organic soil stabilizer" means hygroscopic material,
solution of water and chemical surfactant foam, non-toxic chemical stabilizer
or any other chemical or organic dust palliative that is not prohibited by the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the Arizona Department of Environmental
Quality, the Pima County Department of Environmental Quality or any applicable
law, rule, or regulation, as a treatment material for reducing PM10 emissions.
      4.   "Coarse" with respect to copper smelter slag material means no less
than 3/8 inches in diameter.
      5.   "Copper smelter slag" means the waste material consisting primarily
of iron sulfides separated from copper matte during the smelting and refining
of copper ore concentrates.
      6.   "Crushed rock" means crushed stone or angular rock of a size 2
inches or greater in diameter.
      7.   "Department" means the Pima County Department of Environmental
Quality.
      8.   "Gravel" means a loose aggregation of rock fragments of low silt
content (5% or less) and less than 2 inches in diameter.
      9.   "High wind event" means an hourly average wind speed of 25 miles per
hour or more or an instantaneous wind gust of 40 miles per hour or more as
measured in the affected area by a meteorological monitoring station.
      10.   "Inactive" with respect to the mineral tailings impoundment and
slag storage area means that activities in support of ongoing mining operations
or for any commercial purpose no longer occur.
      11.   "Meteorological monitoring station" means one of the following:
         a.   A Pima County Department of Environmental Quality meteorological
monitoring station;
         b.   A station operated by the National Weather Service;
         c.   A Remote Automated Weather Station operated by the United States
Forest Service, or United States Bureau of Land Management;
         d.   An Automated Weather Observing System or Automated Surface
Observing System station, located at an airport, and either operated or
certified by the Federal Aviation Administration; or
         e.   Any other meteorological equipment or wind instrument that is
installed, calibrated, operated, and maintained by the owner or operator in
accordance with the requirements for SLAMS/SPM (non-NCore) instruments in
Quality Assurance Handbook for Air Pollution Measurement Systems, Volume IV:
Meteorological Measurements Version 2.0 (Final), publication number EPA-454/B-
08-002, March 2008, and no future editions or amendments, and manufacturer's
specifications, as applicable.
      12.   "Mineral tailings impoundment" means the earth-fill embankment dams
used to store byproducts of prior mining operations that separated mineral ore
from other unused material.
      13.   "Opacity" means the degree to which emissions reduce the
transmission of light and obscure the view of an object in the background.
      14.   "Particulate matter" means any airborne finely divided solid or
liquid material with an aerodynamic diameter smaller than one hundred
micrometers.
      15.   "PM10" means particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter less
than or equal to a nominal 10 micrometers as measured by a reference method
contained within 40 C.F.R. Part 50, Appendix J or by an equivalent method
designated in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 53, both sections adopted as of
June 30, 2017 with no future editions or amendments.
      16.   "Slag storage area" means the area used to store copper smelter
slag.
      17.   "Vegetative cover" means rooted vegetation or unattached vegetative
debris lying on the surface that is not susceptible to movement by wind.
   C.   Control measures.
      1.   The owner or operator shall implement and maintain at least one of
the following reasonably available control measures to reduce PM10 emissions
from the inactive mineral tailings impoundment to ensure compliance with
subsection D.1 below:
         a.   Application of crushed rock or gravel;
         b.   Application of chemical or organic soil stabilizers;
         c.   Application of water;
         d.   Establishment of vegetative cover; or
         e.   Any other equivalent methods or techniques approved by the
Department and EPA Region IX.
      2.   The owner or operator shall implement and maintain at least one of
the following reasonably available control measures to reduce PM10 emissions
from the inactive slag storage area:
         a.   Application of a cap consisting of coarse copper smelter slag
material; or
         b.   Any other equivalent methods or techniques approved by the
Department and EPA Region IX.
      3.   To prevent trespass in the inactive mineral tailings impoundment and
slag storage area, the owner or operator shall install and maintain the
following:
         a.   No trespassing signs; and
         b.   Physical barriers such as fences, gates, posts, shrubs, trees, or
other measures to effectively restrict access from the general public.
   D.   Opacity standard.
      1.   The owner or operator shall not cause or allow visible emissions to
exceed twenty percent opacity from the mineral tailings impoundment. Opacity
shall be determined in accordance with subsection E.1 below.
      2.   The opacity standard in subsection D.1 above shall not apply during
high wind events if the owner or operator has implemented and maintained
reasonably available control measures required in subsections C.1 and C.3 above
for the mineral tailings impoundment, as documented by subsection F.1.a below.
   E.   Monitoring.
      1.   To demonstrate compliance with subsections C.1 and D.1 above, the
owner or operator shall conduct weekly visible emission observations of the
mineral tailings impoundment.
         a.   All observations shall be conducted in accordance with 40 C.F.R.
Part 60, Appendix A, Reference Method 9.
         b.   As an alternative to subsection E.1.a, the owner or operator may
elect to conduct observation in accordance with ASTM D7520-16. If so, the owner
or operator must have standard operating procedures in place to ensure that
equipment is operated and maintained in accordance with manufacturer's
specifications per Section 8.1 of ASTM D7520-16.
      2.   To demonstrate compliance with subsection C.2 above, the owner or
operator shall conduct monthly inspections of the slag storage area to assess
the effectiveness of control measures. Inspection reports shall, at a minimum,
include identification of inspector; inspection date and time; findings of
inspection, and any corrective action or preventive measures to be taken.
      3.   To demonstrate compliance with subsection C.3 above, the owner or
operator shall conduct monthly inspections of trespassing signs and physical
constraints. Inspection reports shall, at a minimum, include identification of
inspector; inspection date and time; findings of inspection, and any corrective
action or preventive measures to be taken.
   F.   Recordkeeping.
      1.   The owner or operator shall maintain and make available to the
Department or EPA Region IX the following records upon request:
         a.   Records of reasonably available control measures implemented and
maintained as required by subsection C above;
         b.   Records of visible emission observations required by subsection
E.1 above;
         c.   Records of inspections required by subsections E.2 and E.3 above;
         d.   Records of observer EPA Reference Method 9 or ASTM D7520-16
certifications;
         e.   Records of the owner or operator's installation, calibration,
certification, operation, and maintenance of any meteorological equipment or
wind instrument used for purposes of identifying high wind events; and
         f.   Records of meteorological monitoring station data used for
purposes of identifying high wind events.
      2.   If the owner or operator elects to conduct weekly visual
observations in accordance with subsection E.1.b, the following records shall
be maintained:
         a.   ASTM D7520-16 certification documentation, data sheets, and all
raw unaltered JPEGs used for opacity and certification determination, recorded
in a form suitable and readily available for expeditious inspection and review.
         b.   Standard operating procedures used to ensure that equipment is
operated and maintained in accordance with manufacturer's specifications per
Section 8.1 of ASTM D7520-16.
      3.   All records required by this section shall be maintained by the
owner or operator for a minimum of 5 years.
   G.   Notification.
      1.   The owner or operator shall provide written notification to the
Department at least 30 days prior to initiating weekly visual observations in
accordance with subsection E.1. The notification shall identify proposed
observation points/locations and provide justification for the selection of
those points/ locations.
      2.   The owner or operator shall provide written notification to the
Department at least 30 days prior to using any meteorological monitoring
station as described in subsection B.11.e.
   H.   Reporting.
      1.   The owner or operator shall report to the Department any visible
emissions in excess of opacity limit established by subsection D.1. The report
shall be in two parts as specified below:
         a.   Notification by telephone or facsimile within 24 hours of the
time the owner or operator first learned of the occurrence of excess opacity
that includes all available information from subsection H.2.
         b.   Detailed written notification by submission of an excess opacity
report within 72 hours of the notification under subsection H.1.a.
      2.   The excess opacity report shall contain the following information:
         a.   The approximate location at the mineral tailing impoundment where
the excess opacity occurred;
         b.   The level of excess opacity as measured in accordance with
subsection F;
         c.   The time and duration or expected duration of the excess opacity;
         d.   The nature and cause or suspected cause of the excess opacity;
         e.   The steps that were or are being taken to limit the excess
opacity; and
         f.   Any corrective action or preventative measures taken.
      3.   In the case of continuous or recurring excess opacity events, the
notification requirements of this subsection shall be satisfied if the owner or
operator provides the required notification after excess opacity events are
first detected and includes in the notification an estimate of the time the
excess opacity events will continue. Excess opacity occurring after the
estimated time period or changes in the nature of the excess opacity as
originally reported shall require additional notification pursuant to
subsections H.1 and H.2.
(Ord. 2019-7 § 1, 2019)
Article IV. New and Existing Stationary Source Performance Standards
17.16.130   Applicability.
17.16.140   Compilation of mass rates and concentrations.
17.16.150   Hazardous waste, hazardous waste fuel, used oil, and used oil fuel
burning equipment.
17.16.160   Standards of performance for fossil-fuel fired steam generators and
general fuel burning equipment.
17.16.165   Standards of performance for fossil-fuel fired industrial and
commercial equipment.
17.16.170   Incinerators.
17.16.180   Standards of Performance for Existing Hospital/Medical/ Infectious
Waste Incinerators.
17.16.190   Standards of performance for nitric acid plants.
17.16.200   Standards of performance for sulfuric acid plants.
17.16.210   Standards of performance for asphalt concrete plants.
17.16.230   Standards of performance for storage vessels for petroleum liquids.
17.16.240   Standards of performance for secondary lead smelters.
17.16.250   Standards of performance for secondary brass and bronze ingot
production plants.
17.16.260   Standards of performance for iron and steel plants.
17.16.270   Standards of performance for sewage treatment plants.
17.16.310   Standards of performance for coal preparation plants.
17.16.320   Standards of performance for steel plants—Electric arc furnaces
(EAF).
17.16.340   Standards of performance for stationary rotating machinery.
17.16.350   Standards of performance for lime manufacturing plants.
17.16.360   Standards of performance for nonferrous metals industry sources.
17.16.370   Standards of performance for gravel or crushed stone processing
plants.
17.16.380   Standards of performance for concrete batch plants.
17.16.390   Standards of performance for existing municipal solid waste
landfills.
17.16.400   Organic solvents and other organic materials.
17.16.410   Standards of performance for cotton gins.
17.16.420   Standards of performance for ammonium sulfide manufacturing plants.
17.16.430   Standards of performance for unclassified sources.
17.16.130   Applicability.
   A.   This article shall apply only to a source that is all of the following:
      1.   An existing source, as defined in [Section]
17.04.340;
      2.   A point source. For the purposes of this section, "point source"
means a source of air contaminants that has an identifiable plume or emissions
point; and
      3.   A stationary source, as defined in [Section]
17.04.340.
   B.   Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter relating to specific types
of sources, the opacity of any plume or effluent, from a source described in
subsection (a), as determined by Reference Method 9 in 40 CFR 60, Appendix A,
shall not be:
      1.   Greater than twenty percent in an area that is nonattainment or
maintenance for any particulate matter standard, unless an alternative opacity
limit is approved by the control officer as provided in subsection (D) and (E),
after the effective date of this rule;
      2.   Greater than forty percent in an area that is attainment or
unclassifiable for each particulate matter standard; and
      3.   After April 23, 2006, greater than twenty percent in any area that
is attainment or unclassifiable for each particulate matter standard except as
provided in subsections D and E.
   C.   If the presence of uncombined water is the only reason for an
exceedance of any visible emissions requirement in this article, the exceedance
shall not constitute a violation of the applicable opacity limit.
   D.   A person owning or operating a source may petition the control officer
for an alternative applicable opacity limit. The petition shall be submitted to
PDEQ within three months after the effective date of this rule.
      1.   The petition shall contain:
         a.   Documentation that the affected facility and any associated air
pollution control equipment are incapable of being adjusted or operated to meet
the applicable opacity standard. This includes:
            i.   Relevant information on the process operating conditions and
the control devices operating conditions during the opacity or stack tests;
            ii.   A detailed statement or report demonstrating that the source
investigated all practicable means of reducing opacity and utilized control
technology that is reasonably available considering technical and economic
feasibility; and
            iii.   An explanation why the source cannot meet the present
opacity limit although it is in compliance with the applicable particulate mass
emission rule.
         b.   If there is an opacity monitor, any certification and audit
reports required by all applicable subparts in 40 CFR 60 and in Appendix B,
Performance Specification 1.
         c.   A verification by a responsible official of the source of the
truth, accuracy, and completeness of the petition. This certification shall
state that, based on information and belief formed after reasonable inquiry,
the statements and information in the document are true, accurate, and
complete.
      2.   If the unit for which the alternative opacity standard is being
applied is subject to a stack test, the petition shall also include:
         a.   Documentation that the source conducted concurrent EPA Reference
Method stack testing and visible emissions readings or is utilizing a
continuous opacity monitor. The particulate mass emission test results shall
clearly demonstrate compliance with the applicable particulate mass emission
limitation by being at least ten percent below that limit. For multiple units
that are normally operated together and whose emissions vent through a single
stack, the source shall conduct simultaneous particulate testing of each unit.
Each control device shall be in good operating condition and operated
consistent with good practices for minimizing emissions.
         b.   Evidence that the source conducted the stack tests according to
Section
17.11.210, and that they were witnessed by the control officer or the control
officer's agent or representative.
         c.   Evidence that the affected facility and any associated air
pollution control equipment were operated and maintained to the maximum extent
practicable to minimize the opacity of emissions during the stack tests.
      3.   If the source for which the alternative opacity standard is being
applied is located in a nonattainment area, the petitioner shall include all
the information listed in subsections (D)(1) and (D)(2), and in addition:
         a.   In subsection (D)(1)(a)(ii), the detailed statement or report
shall demonstrate that the alternative opacity limit fulfills the Clean Air Act
requirement for reasonably available control technology; and
         b.   In subsection (D)(2)(b), the stack tests shall be conducted with
an opportunity for the administrator or the administrator's agent or
representative to be present.
   E.   If the control officer receives a petition under subsection D the
control officer shall approve or deny the petition as provided below by October
15, 2004:
      1.   If the petition is approved under subsection (D)(1) or (D)(2), the
control officer shall include an alternative opacity limit in a proposed
significant permit revision for the source under Sections
17.12.120, 17.13.140, 17.12.190, and 17.13.210. The proposed alternative
opacity limit shall be set at a value that has been demonstrated during, and
not extrapolated from, testing, except that an alternative opacity limit under
this section shall not be greater than forty percent. For multiple units that
are normally operated together and whose emissions vent through a single stack,
any new alternative opacity limit shall reflect the opacity level at the common
stack exit, and not individual in-duct opacity levels. 
      2.   If the petition is approved under subsection (D)(3), the control
officer shall include an alternative opacity limit in a proposed revision to
the applicable implementation plan, and submit the proposed revision to EPA for
review and approval. The proposed alternative opacity limit shall be set at a
value that has been demonstrated during, and not extrapolated from, testing,
except that the alternative opacity limit shall not be greater than forty
percent.
      3.   If the petition is denied, the source shall either comply with the
twenty percent opacity limit or apply for a significant permit revision to
incorporate a compliance schedule under Section
17.12.080(A)(5)(c)(iii) by April 23, 2006.
      4.   A source does not have to petition for an alternative opacity limit
under subsection D to enter into a revised compliance schedule under Section
17.12.080(A)(5)(c).
   F.   The control officer, administrator, source owner or operator, inspector
or other interested party shall determine the process weight rate, as used in
this article, as follows:
      1.   For continuous or long run, steady-state process sources, the
process weight rate is the total process weight for the entire period of
continuous operation, or for a typical portion of that period, divided by the
number of hours of the period, or portion of hours of that period.
      2.   For cyclical or batch process sources, the process weight rate is
the total process weight for a period which covers a complete operation or an
integral number of cycles, divided by the hours of actual process operation
during the period.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 3 (part), 2017: Ord. 2005-43 § 3 (part), 2005; Ord. 2004-97 § 4
(part), 2004; Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.140   Compilation of mass rates and concentrations.
   The maximum allowable emissions discharge rate (in terms of mass per unit
time) and mass concentration (in terms of mass per unit volume of gas) for a
regulated air pollutant to which this article applies shall be those standards
established in this article.
   The use of air or other gaseous diluents solely for the purpose of achieving
compliance with specified mass-concentration standard is prohibited.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.150   Hazardous waste, hazardous waste fuel, used oil, and used oil fuel
burning equipment.
   A.   Except as provided in A.R.S. 49-808(E), 49-426(B), and 49-480(A), any
person burning hazardous waste, hazardous waste fuel, used oil, or used oil
fuel shall first obtain a permit from the control officer.
   B.   Any permit issued by the control officer under this section shall
contain, at minimum, conditions governing:
      1.   Limitations on the types, amounts, and feed rates of used oil, used
oil fuel, hazardous waste or hazardous waste fuel which may be burned.
      2.   The frequency and types of fuel testing to be conducted by the
person.
      3.   The frequency and type of emissions testing or monitoring to be
conducted by the person.
      4.   Requirements for recordkeeping and reporting.
      5.   Numeric emission limitations expressed in pounds per hour and tons
per year for air contaminants to be emitted from the facility burning the
hazardous waste, hazardous waste fuel, used oil, or used oil fuel.
(Ord. 1995-87 § 47, 1995: Ord. 1994-83 § 52, 1994: Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part),
1993)
17.16.160   Standards of performance for fossil-fuel fired steam generators and
general fuel burning equipment.
   A.   This section applies to the following:
      1.   Sources in which fuel is burned for the primary purpose of producing
power, steam, hot water, hot air or other liquids, gases or solids and in the
course of doing so the products of combustion do not come into direct contact
with process materials. When any products or by-products of a manufacturing
process are burned for the same purpose or in conjunction with any fuel, the
same maximum emission limitation shall apply, except for wood waste burners as
regulated under Section
17.16.170.
      2.   All fossil-fuel fired steam generating units or general fuel burning
equipment which are greater than or equal to seventy-three megawatts capacity.
   B.   For purposes of this section, the heat input shall be the aggregate
heat content of all fuels whose products of combustion pass through a stack or
other outlet. The heat content of solid fuel shall be determined in accordance
with Section
17.11.160. Compliance tests shall be conducted during operation at the nominal
rated capacity of each unit.
   C.   No person shall cause, allow or permit the emission of particulate
matter in excess of the amounts calculated by one of the following equations:
      1.   For equipment having a heat input rate of four thousand two hundred
million BTU per hour or less, the maximum allowable emissions shall be
determined by the following equation:
         E = 1.02Q 0.769
      where:
         E = The maximum allowable particulate emissions rate in pounds-mass
per hour.
         Q = The heat input in million BTU per hour.
      2.   For equipment having a heat input rate greater than four thousand
two hundred million BTU per hour, the maximum allowable emissions shall be
determined by the following equation:
         E = 17.0Q 0.432
      where "E" and "Q" have the same meaning as in paragraph 1 of this
subsection.
   D.   When low sulfur oil is fired:
      1.   Existing fuel burning equipment or steam power generating
installations which commenced construction or a major alteration prior to May
30, 1972 shall not emit more than 1.0 pound of sulfur dioxide maximum three
hour average, per million BTU (four hundred thirty nanograms per joule) heat
input.
      2.   Existing fuel burning equipment or steam power generating
installations which commenced construction or a major alteration after May 30,
1972 shall not emit more than 0.80 pounds of sulfur dioxide maximum three hour
average per million BTU (three hundred forty nanograms per joule) heat input.
   E.   When high sulfur oil is fired all existing steam power generating and
general fuel burning installations which are subject to the provisions of this
section shall not emit more than 2.2 pounds of sulfur dioxide maximum three-
hour average per million BTU (nine hundred forty-six nanograms per joule) heat
input.
   F.   When solid fuel is fired:
      1.   Existing general fuel burning equipment and steam power generating
installations which commenced construction or a major alteration prior to May
30, 1972 shall not emit more than 1.0 pound of sulfur dioxide maximum three-
hour average, per million BTU (four hundred thirty nanograms per joule) heat
input.
      2.   Existing general fuel burning equipment and steam power generating
installations which commenced construction or a major alteration after May 30,
1972 shall not emit more than 0.80 pounds, maximum three-hour average, per
million BTU (three hundred forty nanograms per joule) heat input.
   G.   Any permit issued for the operation of an existing source, or any
renewal or modification of such a permit, shall include a condition prohibiting
the use of high sulfur oil by the permittee, unless the applicant demonstrates
to the satisfaction of the control officer that sufficient quantities of low
sulfur oil are not available for use by the source and that it has adequate
facilities and contingency plans to insure that the sulfur dioxide ambient air
quality standards set forth in
Chapter 17.08,
Article I will not be violated.
      1.   The terms of the permit may authorize the use of high sulfur oil
under such conditions as are justified.
      2.   In cases where the permittee is authorized to use high sulfur oil it
shall submit to the control officer monthly reports detailing its efforts to
obtain low sulfur oil.
      3.   When the conditions justifying the use of high sulfur oil no longer
exist, the permit shall be modified accordingly.
      4.   Nothing in this section shall be construed as allowing the use of a
supplementary control system or other form of dispersion technology.
   H.   Existing steam power generating installations which commenced
construction or a major alteration after May 30, 1972 shall not emit nitrogen
oxides in excess of the following amounts:
      1.   0.20 pounds of nitrogen oxides, maximum three-hour average,
calculated as nitrogen dioxide, per million BTU heat input when gaseous fossil
fuel is fired;
      2.   0.30 pounds of nitrogen oxides, maximum three-hour average,
calculated as nitrogen dioxide, per million BTU heat input when liquid fossil
fuel is fired;
      3.   0.70 pounds of nitrogen oxides, maximum three-hour average,
calculated as nitrogen dioxide, per million BTU heat input when solid fossil
fuel is fired.
   I.   Emission and fuel monitoring systems, where deemed necessary by the
control officer for sources subject to the provisions of this section, shall
conform to the requirements of Section
17.11.200.
   J.   The applicable reference methods given in the Appendices to 40 CFR 60
shall be used to determine compliance with the standards as prescribed in
subsections C through G and I of this section. All tests shall be run at the
heat input calculated under subsection B of this section.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 3 (part), 2017: Ord. 2005-43 § 3 (part), 2005; Ord. 1994-83 §
53, 1994: Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.165   Standards of performance for fossil-fuel fired industrial and
commercial equipment.
   A.   This section applies to industrial and commercial installations which
are less than seventy-three megawatts capacity (two hundred fifty million
British thermal units per hour); but in the aggregate on any premises are rated
at greater than five hundred thousand British thermal units per hour (0.146
megawatts); and in which fuel is burned for the primary purpose of producing
steam, hot water, hot air or other liquids, gases or solids and in the course
of doing so the products of combustion do not come into direct contact with
process materials. When any products or by-products of a manufacturing process
are burned for the same purpose or in conjunction with any fuel, the same
maximum emission limitations shall apply.
   B.   For purposes of this section, the heat input shall be the aggregate
heat content of all fuels whose products of combustion pass through a stack or
other outlet. The heat content of solid fuel shall be determined in accordance
with Section
17.11.160. Compliance tests shall be conducted during operation at the nominal
rated capacity of each unit. The total heat input of all fuel-burning units on
a plant or premises shall be used for determining the maximum allowable amount
of particulate matter that may be emitted.
   C.   No person shall cause, allow or permit the emission of particulate
matter, caused by combustion of fuel, from any fuel-burning operation in excess
of the amounts calculated by one of the following equations:
      1.   For equipment having a heat input rate of four thousand two hundred
million BTU per hour or less, the maximum allowable emissions shall be
determined by the following equation:
         E = 1.02Q 0.769
      where:
         E = The maximum allowable particulate emissions rate in pounds-mass
per hour.
         Q = The heat input in million BTU per hour.
      2.   For equipment having a heat input rate greater than four thousand
two hundred million BTU per hour, the maximum allowable emissions shall be
determined by the following equation:
         E = 17.0Q 0.432
      where "E" and "Q" have the same meanings as in subdivision 1 of this
subsection.
   D.   The actual values shall be calculated from the applicable equations and
rounded off to two decimal places.
   E.   Fossil-fuel fired industrial and commercial equipment installations
shall not emit more than 1.0 pounds of sulfur dioxide per million BTU heat
input when low sulfur oil is fired.
   F.   Fossil-fuel fired industrial and commercial equipment installations
shall not emit more than 2.2 pounds of sulfur dioxide per million BTU heat
input when high sulfur oil is fired.
   G.   Any permit issued for the operation of an existing source, or any
renewal or modification of such a permit, shall include a condition prohibiting
the use of high sulfur oil by the permittee. This condition may be omitted from
the permit if the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the control
officer both that sufficient quantities of low sulfur oil are not available for
use by the source and that it has adequate facilities and contingency plans to
insure that the sulfur dioxide ambient air quality standards set forth in
Section
17.08.020 will not be violated.
      1.   The terms of the permit may authorize the use of high sulfur oil
under such conditions as are justified.
      2.   In cases where the permittee is authorized to use high sulfur oil it
shall submit to the control officer monthly reports detailing its efforts to
obtain low sulfur oil.
      3.   When the conditions justifying the use of high sulfur oil no longer
exist, the permit shall be modified accordingly.
      4.   Nothing in this section shall be construed as allowing the use of a
supplementary control system or other form of dispersion technology.
   H.   When coal is fired, fossil-fuel fired industrial and commercial
equipment installations shall not emit more than 1.0 pound of sulfur dioxide
per million BTU heat input.
   I.   The owner or operator subject to the provisions of this section shall
install, calibrate, maintain and operate a continuous monitoring system for
measurement of the opacity of emissions discharged into the atmosphere from the
control device.
      1.   For the purpose of reports required under excess emissions reporting
required by Sections
17.12.170,
17.13.190, and
17.12.040, the owner or operator shall report all six-minute periods in which
the opacity of any plume or effluent exceeds fifteen percent.
      2.   The format for the excess emissions report shall comply with the
requirements of Sections
17.12.170(B) and
17.13.190(B).
   J.   The test methods and procedures required by this section are as
follows:
      1.   The reference methods in 40 CFR 60, Appendix A shall be used to
determine compliance with the standards as prescribed in this section.
         a.   Method 1 for selection of sampling site and sample traverses.
         b.   Method 3 for gas analysis to be used when applying Reference
Methods 5 and 6.
         c.   Methods 4 and 5 for concentration of particulate matter and the
associated moisture content.
         d.   Method 6 for concentration of SO 2 .
      2.   For Method 5, Method 1 shall be used to select the sampling site and
the number of traverse sampling points. The sampling time for each run shall be
at least sixty minutes and the minimum sampling volume shall be 0.85 dscm (30
dscf), except that smaller sampling times or volumes, when necessitated by
process variables or other factors, may be approved by the control officer. The
probe and filter holder heating systems in the sampling train shall be set to
provide a gas temperature no greater than one hundred sixty degrees Celsius
(three hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit).
      3.   For Method 6, the sampling site shall be the same as that selected
for Method 5. The sampling point in the duct shall be at the centroid of the
cross section or at a point no closer to the walls than one meter (3.28 ft).
For Method 6, the sample shall be extracted at a rate proportional to the gas
velocity at the sampling point.
      4.   For Method 6, the minimum sampling time shall be twenty minutes and
the minimum sampling volume 0.02 dscm (0.71 dscf) for each sample. The
arithmetic mean of two samples shall constitute one run. Samples shall be taken
at approximately thirty-minute intervals.
      5.   Gross calorific value shall be determined in accordance with the
applicable ASTM methods: D-2015-91 (Test for Gross Calorific Value of Solid
Fuel by the Adiabatic Bomb Calorimeter) for solid fuels, D-240-87 (Test Method
for Heat of Combustion of Liquid Hydrocarbon Fuels by Bomb Calorimeter) for
liquid fuels, and D-1826-88 (Test Method for Calorific Value of Gases in
Natural Gas Range by Continuous Recording Calorimeter) for gaseous fuels. The
rate of fuels burned during each testing period shall be determined by suitable
methods and shall be confirmed by a material balance over the fossil-fuel fired
system.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 3 (part), 2017: Ord. 2005-43 § 3 (part), 2005; Ord. 2004-97 § 4
(part), 2004; Ord. 1994-83 § 54, 1994: Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.170   Incinerators.
   A.   An incinerator shall be operated only between the hours of official
sunrise and sunset, except when the following are conditions of the operating
permit:
      1.   The incinerator is equipped with a continuous monitoring and
recording opacity meter;
      2.   The incinerator is used solely for the destruction of materials
which would cause or contribute to air pollution if disposed of in any other
practical manner;
      3.   The incinerating process cannot be operated efficiently during only
daylight hours;
      4.   The opacity monitoring-and-recording equipment is calibrated and
maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications; and
      5.   The opacity monitoring records are kept for at least five years.
   B.   No person shall cause, allow, or permit to be emitted into the
atmosphere, from any type of incinerator, smoke, fumes, gases, particulate
matter or other gas-borne material which exceeds twenty percent opacity except
during the times specified in subsection E of this section.
   C.   No person shall cause, allow, permit the discharge of particulate
matter into the atmosphere in any one hour from any incinerator, in excess of
the following limits:
      1.   For multiple chamber incinerators, controlled atmosphere
incinerators, fume incinerators, afterburners or other unspecified types of
incinerators, emissions shall not exceed 0.08 grains per cubic foot, based on
dry flue gas at standard conditions, corrected to twelve percent carbon
dioxide.
      2.   For wood waste burners other than air curtain destructors, emissions
discharged from the stack or burner top opening shall not exceed 0.2 grain per
cubic foot, based on dry flue gas at standard conditions, corrected to twelve
percent carbon dioxide.
   D.   Air curtain destructors shall not be used within five hundred feet of
the nearest dwelling.
   E.   Incinerators shall be exempt from the opacity and emission requirements
described in subsections B and C of this section as follows:
      1.   For multiple chamber incinerators, controlled atmosphere
incinerators, fume incinerators, afterburners or other unspecified types of
incinerators, such exemption shall be for not more than thirty seconds in any
sixty-minute period.
      2.   Wood waste burners shall be exempt both:
         a.   For a period once each day for the purpose of building a new fire
but not to exceed sixty minutes, and
         b.   For an upset of operations not to exceed three minutes in any
sixty-minute period.
   F.   The owner or operator of any incinerator subject to the provisions of
this section shall record the daily charging rates and hours of operation.
   G.   The test methods and procedures required by this section are as
follows:
      1.   The reference methods in 40 CFR 60, Appendix A, shall be used to
determine compliance with the standards prescribed in subsection C of this
section as follows:
         a.   Methods 4 and 5 for the concentration of particulate matter and
the associated moisture content;
         b.   Method 1 for sample and velocity traverses;
         c.   Method 2 for velocity and volumetric flow rate;
         d.   Method 3 for gas analysis and calculation of excess air, using
the integrated sampling technique.
      2.   For Method 5, the sampling time for each run shall be at least sixty
minutes and the minimum sample volume shall be 0.85 dscm (30.0 dscf) except
that smaller sampling times or sample volumes, when necessitated by process
variables or other factors, may be approved by the control officer.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.180   Standards of Performance for Existing Hospital/Medical/ Infectious
Waste Incinerators.
   A.   This section applies to any hospital/medical/infectious waste
incinerator (HMIWI) for which construction was commenced on or before June 20,
1996. All federal regulations cited within this section are incorporated by
reference in Section
17.16.490. An incinerator subject to this section is not subject to Section
17.16.170. The following types of incinerators are not subject to this section:
      1.   An incinerator during periods when only pathological waste, low-
level radioactive waste, or chemotherapeutic waste is burned, if the owner or
operator of the incinerator does both of the following:
         a.   Notifies the control officer of an exemption claim.
         b.   Keeps records on a calendar quarter basis of the periods of time
when only pathological waste, low-level radioactive waste, or chemotherapeutic
waste is burned.
      2.   Any co-fired incinerator if the owner or operator of the incinerator
does all of the following:
         a.   Notifies the control officer of an exemption claim.
         b.   Provides an estimate of the relative weight of hospital waste,
medical/infectious waste, and other fuels or wastes to be burned.
         c.   Keeps records on a calendar quarter basis of the weight of
hospital waste and medical/infectious waste burned, and the weight of all other
fuels and wastes burned at the co-fired incinerator.
      3.   Any incinerator required to have a permit under Section 3005 of the
Solid Waste Disposal Act.
      4.   Any incinerator subject to 40 CFR 60, Subparts Cb, Ea, or Eb
(standards or guidelines for certain municipal waste incinerators).
      5.   Any pyrolysis unit, as defined in 40 CFR 60.51c.
      6.   Cement kilns firing hospital waste or medical/infectious waste.
   B.   A physical or operational change made to an existing HMIWI unit solely
for the purpose of complying with emission limitations under this section is
not considered a modification and does not result in an existing HMIWI unit
becoming subject to the provisions of 17.16.490 (16).
   C.   In addition to the definitions provided in 40 CFR 60.51c, the following
definitions apply to this section:
      1.   "Rural HMIWI" means any small HMIWI that is located more than 50
miles from the boundary of the nearest Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area
and that burns less than two thousand pounds per week of hospital waste and
medical/infectious waste. The two thousand pounds per week limitation does not
apply during performance tests.
      2.   "Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area" or "SMSA" means any area
listed in Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Bulletin 93-17 entitled
"Revised Statistical Definitions for Metropolitan Areas" dated June 30, 1993
which is incorporated by reference. This incorporation by reference does not
include any later amendments or editions. A copy of the bulletin is on file
with the Office of the Secretary of State and the Department.
      3.   "State Plan" means the plan that 40 CFR 60 subpart Ce requires
states to develop to regulate existing HMIWI built on or before June 20, 1996.
   D.   Beginning September 15, 2000, an HMIWI shall operate under a Class I
permit.
   E.   An owner or operator of an HMIWI shall comply with the following
emissions limitations:
      1.   The emissions limitations in Table 1 unless the HMIWI is a rural
HMIWI.
      2.   The emissions limitations in Table 2, if the HMIWI is a rural HMIWI.
      3.   An owner or operator of an HMIWI shall not cause to be discharged
into the atmosphere from the stack of that HMIWI any gases that exhibit greater
than 10% opacity (6-minute block average).
      4.   An owner or operator of a large existing HMIWI shall comply with the
opacity requirements in 40 CFR 60.52c (c), (d), and (e).
   F.   An owner or operator of an HMIWI shall comply with the operator
training requirements found in 40 CFR 60.53c within one year following approval
of the State Plan.
   G.   An owner or operator of an HMIWI shall comply with the waste management
requirements found in 40 CFR 60.55c.
   H.   An owner or operator of a rural HMIWI shall comply with the following
inspection requirements:
      1.   The owner or operator shall conduct or hire another party to conduct
an initial equipment inspection within one year following approval of the State
Plan.
      2.   At a minimum, an inspection shall include the following:
         a.   Inspect all burners, pilot assemblies, and pilot sensing devices
for proper operation. Clean pilot flame sensor, as necessary.
         b.   Inspect adjustment of primary and secondary chamber combustion
air, and adjust as necessary.
         c.   Inspect hinges and door latches, and lubricate as necessary.
         d.   Inspect dampers, fans, and blowers for proper operation.
         e.   Inspect HMIWI door and door gaskets for proper sealing.
         f.   Inspect motors for proper operation.
         g.   Inspect primary chamber refractory lining. Clean and repair or
replace lining as necessary.
         h.   Inspect incinerator shell for corrosion and hot spots.
         i.   Inspect secondary/tertiary chamber and stack, clean as necessary.
         j.   Inspect mechanical loader, including limit switches, for proper
operation, if applicable.
         k.   Visually inspect waste bed (grates), and repair or seal, as
appropriate.
         l.   For the burn cycle that follows the inspection, document that the
incinerator is operating properly and make any necessary adjustments.
         m.   Inspect each air pollution control device for proper operation,
if applicable.
         n.   Inspect waste heat boiler systems to ensure proper operation, if
applicable.
         o.   Inspect bypass stack components.
         p.   Ensure proper calibration of thermocouples, sorbent feed systems
and any other monitoring equipment.
         q.   Generally observe that the equipment is maintained in good
operating condition.
      3.   Within ten operating days following an equipment inspection, the
owner or operator shall complete all necessary repairs unless the owner or
operator obtains written approval from the control officer establishing a date
by which all necessary repairs of the facility shall be completed.
      4.   The owner or operator of any rural HMIWI shall conduct or hire
another party to conduct an equipment inspection annually (no more than twelve
months following the previous annual equipment inspection), as outlined in
subsections (h)(2) and (h)(3).
   I.   An owner or operator of an HMIWI shall comply with the following
compliance, performance testing, and monitoring requirements:
      1.   Except as provided in subsection (2), an existing HMIWI shall meet
the requirements for compliance and performance testing in 40 CFR 60.56c,
excluding the fugitive emissions testing requirements under 40 CFR 60.56c(b)
(12) and (c)(3).
      2.   A rural HMIWI shall meet the following compliance and performance
testing requirements:
         a.   Conduct the performance testing requirements in 40 CFR 60.56c(a),
(b)(1) through (b)(9), (b)(11) (Hg only), and (c)(1). The 2,000 lb/week
limitation under 40 CFR 60.33e(b) does not apply during performance tests.
         b.   Establish maximum charge rate and minimum secondary chamber
temperature as site-specific operating parameters during the initial
performance test to determine compliance with applicable emission limitations.
         c.   Ensure that the facility does not operate above the maximum
charge rate or below the minimum secondary chamber temperature measured as
three-hour rolling averages (calculated each hour as the average of the
previous three operating hours) at all times except during periods of startup,
shutdown, and malfunction. Operating parameter limits do not apply during
performance tests. Operation above the maximum charge rate or below the minimum
secondary chamber temperature is a violation of the established operating
parameter.
         d.   Except as provided in subsection (I)(2)(e), operating the
facility above the maximum charge rate and below the minimum secondary chamber
temperature (each measured on a three-hour rolling average) simultaneously is a
violation of the PM, CO, and dioxin/furan emission limitations.
         e.   The owner or operator may conduct a repeat performance test
within 30 days after violation of any applicable operating parameter to
demonstrate that the facility is not in violation of any applicable emission
limit. Repeat performance tests conducted under this subsection shall be
conducted using the identical operating parameters that indicated a violation
under subsection (I)(2)(d).
      3.   The owner or operator shall comply with the monitoring requirements
listed in 40 CFR 60.57c of subpart Ec, except as provided in subsection (I)(4).
      4.   A rural HMIWI shall meet the following monitoring requirements:
         a.   Install, calibrate (to manufacturer's specifications), maintain,
and operate a device for measuring and recording the temperature of the
secondary chamber on a continuous basis, the output of which shall be recorded,
at a minimum, once every minute throughout operation.
         b.   Install, calibrate (to manufacturer's specifications), maintain,
and operate a device that automatically measures and records the date, time,
and weight of each charge fed into the HMIWI.
         c.   Obtain monitoring data at all times during HMIWI operation except
during periods of monitoring equipment malfunction, calibration, or repair. At
a minimum, valid monitoring data shall be obtained for seventy-five percent of
the operating hours per day and for ninety percent of the operating hours per
calendar quarter that the facility is incinerating hospital waste or medical/
infectious waste.
   J.   An owner or operator of an HMIWI shall comply with the following
reporting and recordkeeping requirements:
      1.   An owner or operator of each HMIWI shall comply with the
requirements listed in 40 CFR 60.58c(b), (c), (d), (e), and (f), excluding 40
CFR 60.58c(b)(2)(ii) (fugitive emissions) and (b)(7) (siting).
      2.   An owner or operator of each rural HMIWI shall perform all the
following:
         a.   Maintain records of the annual equipment inspections, any
required maintenance, and any repairs not completed within ten days after an
inspection or the time-frame established by the control officer.
         b.   Submit an annual report to PDEQ, Air Quality Division, 33 N.
Stone Ave., Suite 700, Tucson, Arizona 85701. The report shall contain
information recorded under subsection (2)(a) and be submitted no later than
sixty days following the year in which data were collected. The owner or
operator shall send subsequent reports no later than twelve calendar months
following the previous report (after receiving a Class I permit, the owner or
operator shall submit these reports semiannually). The facility's manager shall
sign the report.
Table 1 
Emission Limitations for Small, Medium, and Large HMIWI 
Pollutant Units (7% oxygen, dry basis) Emission Limitation
                                       Small HMIWI Medium HMIWI Large HMIWI
                Units (7%       Emission Limitation
Pollutant       oxygen, dry     Small HMIWI     Medium HMIWI    Large HMIWI
                basis)
                Milligrams per
                dry standard
Particulate     cubic meter     115 (0.05)      69 (0.03)       34 (0.015)
matter          (grains per dry
                standard cubic
                foot).
                Parts per
Carbon monoxide million by      40              40              40
                volume
                Nanograms per
                dry standard
                cubic meter
                total dioxin/
                furans (grains
                per billion dry
                standard cubic
                feet) or
Dioxin/furans   nanograms per   125 (55) or 2.3 125 (55) or 2.3 125 (55) or 2.3
                dry standard    (1.0)           (1.0)           (1.0)
                cubic meter
                toxic
                equivalent
                quantity
                (grains per
                billion dry
                standard cubic
                feet)
                Parts per
Hydrogen        million by
chloride        volume or       100 or 93%      100 or 93%      100 or 93%
                percent
                reduction
                Parts per
Sulfur dioxide  million by      55              55              55
                volume
                Parts per
Nitrogen oxides million by      250             250             250
                volume
                Milligrams per
                dry standard
                cubic meter
                (grains per     1.2 (0.52) or   1.2 (0.52) or   1.2 (0.52) or
Lead            thousand dry    70%             70%             70%
                standard cubic
                feet) or
                percent
                reduction
                Milligrams per
                dry standard
                cubic meter
                (grains per     0.16 (0.07) or  0.16 (0.07) or  0.16 (0.07) or
Cadmium         thousand dry    65%             65%             65%
                standard cubic
                feet) or
                percent
                reduction
                Milligrams per
                dry standard
                cubic meter
                (grains per     0.55 (0.24) or  0.55 (0.24) or  0.55 (0.24) or
Mercury         thousand dry    85%             85%             85%
                standard cubic
                feet) or
                percent
                reduction
 
Table 2 
Emissions Limitations for Rural HMIWI 
Pollutant Units (7% oxygen, dry basis) Emission Limitation
Pollutant          Units (7% oxygen, dry basis)           Emission Limitation
                   Milligrams per dry standard cubic
Particulate matter meter (grains per dry standard cubic   197 (0.086)
                   foot)
Carbon monoxide    Parts per million by volume            40
                   Nanograms per dry standard cubic meter
                   total dioxin/furans (grains per
Dioxin/furans      billion dry standard cubic feet) or    800 (350) or 15 (6.6)
                   nanograms per dry standard cubic meter
                   toxic equivalent quantity (grains per
                   billion dry standard cubic feet)
Hydrogen chloride  Parts per million by volume            3100 (1.0)
Sulfur dioxide     Parts per million by volume            55
Nitrogen oxides    Parts per million by volume            250
                   Milligrams per dry standard cubic
Lead               meter (grains per thousand dry         10 (4.4)
                   standard cubic feet)
                   Milligrams per dry standard cubic
Cadmium            meter (grains per thousand dry         4 (1.7)
                   standard cubic feet)
                   Milligrams per dry standard cubic
Mercury            meter (grains per thousand dry         7.5 (3.3)
                   standard cubic feet)
 
(Ord. 2017-20 § 3 (part), 2017: Ord. 2005-43 § 3 (part), 2005)
17.16.190   Standards of performance for nitric acid plants.
   A.   No person shall cause, allow or permit discharge from any nitric acid
plant producing weak nitric acid, which is either:
      1.   Thirty to seventy percent in strength by either the increased
pressure or atmospheric pressure process; or
      2.   More than 1.5 kg of total oxides of nitrogen per metric ton (3.0
lbs/ton) of acid produced expressed as nitrogen dioxide.
   B.   The opacity of any plume subject to the provisions of this section
shall not exceed ten percent.
   C.   A continuous monitoring system for the measurement of nitrogen oxides
shall be installed, calibrated, maintained and operated by the owner or
operator, in accordance with Section
17.11.200.
   D.   The test methods and procedures required by this section are as
follows:
      1.   The reference methods in 40 CFR 60, Appendix A shall be used to
determine compliance with the standard prescribed in subsection A of this
section as follows:
         a.   Method 7 for the concentration of NOx;
         b.   Method 1 for sample and velocity traverses;
         c.   Method 2 for velocity and volumetric flow rate;
         d.   Method 3 for gas analysis.
      2.   For Method 7, the sample site shall be selected according to Method
1 and the sampling point shall be the centroid of the stack or duct or at a
point no closer to the walls than one meter (3.28 ft.). Each run shall consist
of at least four grab samples taken at approximately fifteen-minute intervals.
The arithmetic mean of the samples shall constitute the run value. A velocity
traverse shall be performed once per run.
      3.   Acid production rate, expressed in metric tons per hour of one
hundred percent nitric acid, shall be both:
         a.   Determined during each testing period by suitable methods; and
         b.   Confirmed by a material balance over the production system.
      4.   For each run, nitrogen oxides, expressed in g/metric ton of one
hundred percent nitric acid, shall be determined by dividing the emission rate
in g/hr by the acid production rate. The emission rate shall be determined by
the equation:
         g/hr = Q s × c
      where:
      Q s = Volumetric flow rate of the effluent in dscm/hr, as determined in
accordance with paragraph (1)(c) of this subsection, and
      c = NO x concentration in g/dscm, as determined in accordance with
paragraph (1)(a) of this subsection.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 3 (part), 2017: Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.200   Standards of performance for sulfuric acid plants.
   A.   Facilities that produce sulfuric acid by the contact process by burning
elemental sulfur, alkylation acid, hydrogen sulfide, organic sulfide and
mercaptans or acid sludge shall not discharge into the atmosphere:
      1.   Greater than two kg of sulfur dioxide per metric ton (four lbs/ton)
of sulfuric acid produced (calculated as one hundred percent H 2 SO 4 ); or
      2.   Greater than 0.075 kg of sulfuric acid mist per metric ton (0.15
lbs/ton) or sulfuric acid produced (calculated as one hundred percent H 2 SO 4
).
   B.   This section shall not apply to metallurgical plants or other
facilities where conversion to sulfuric acid is utilized as a means of
controlling emissions to the atmosphere of sulfur dioxide or other sulfur
compounds.
   C.   A continuous monitoring system for the measurement of sulfur dioxide
shall be installed, calibrated, maintained and operated by the owner or
operator, in accordance with Section
17.11.200.
   D.   The test methods and procedures required by this section are as
follows:
      1.   The reference methods in 40 CFR 60, Appendix A shall be used to
determine compliance with standards prescribed in subsection A of this section
as follows:
         a.   Method 8 for concentration of SO 2 and acid mist;
         b.   Method 1 for sample and velocity traverses;
         c.   Method 2 for velocity and volumetric flow rate;
         d.   Method 3 for gas analysis.
      2.   The moisture content can be considered to be zero. For Method 8 the
sampling time for each run shall be at least sixty minutes and the minimum
sample volume shall be 1.15 dscm (40.6 dscf) except that smaller sampling times
or sample volumes, when necessitated by process variables or other factors, may
be approved by the control officer.
      3.   Acid production rate, expressed in metric tons per hour of one
hundred percent H 2 SO 4 , shall be both:
         a.   Determined during each testing period by suitable methods; and
         b.   Confirmed by a material balance over the production system.
      4.   Acid mist and sulfur dioxide emissions, expressed in g/metric ton of
one hundred percent H 2 SO 4 , shall be determined by dividing the emission
rate in g/hr by the acid production rate. The emission rate shall be determined
by the equation, g/hr = Q s × c, where Q s = volumetric flow rate of the
effluent in dscm/hr as determined in accordance with paragraph (1)(c) of this
subsection, and c = acid mist and SO 2 concentrations in g/dscm as determined
in accordance with paragraph (1)(a) of this subsection.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 3 (part), 2017: Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.210   Standards of performance for asphalt concrete plants.
   A.   Fixed asphalt concrete plants and portable asphalt concrete plants
shall meet the standards set forth in this section.
   B.   No person shall cause, allow or permit the discharge of particulate
matter into the atmosphere in any one hour from any existing asphalt concrete
plant in total quantities in excess of the amounts calculated by one of the
following equations:
      1.   For process sources having a process weight rate of sixty thousand
pounds per hour (thirty tons per hour) or less, the maximum allowable emissions
shall be determined by the following equation:
         E = 3.59P 0.62
      where:
         E = The maximum allowable particulate emission rate in pounds-mass per
hour, and
         P = The process weight rate in tons-mass per hour.
      2.   For process sources having a process weight rate greater than sixty
thousand pounds per hour (thirty tons per hour), the maximum allowable
emissions shall be determined by the following equation:
         E = 17.31P 0.16
      where "E" and "P" are defined as indicated in subdivision 1 of this
subsection.
   C.   The actual values shall be calculated from the applicable equations and
rounded off to two decimal places.
   D.   For purposes of this section, the total process weight from all similar
units employing a similar type process shall be used in determining the maximum
allowable emission of particulate matter.
   E.   Liquid fuel containing greater than 0.9 percent sulfur by weight shall
not be utilized for asphalt concrete plants subject to this section.
   F.   Solid fuel containing greater than 0.5 percent sulfur by weight shall
not be utilized for asphalt concrete plants subject to this section.
   G.   The test methods and procedures required under this section are:
      1.   The reference methods given in 40 CFR 60, Appendix A shall be used
to determine compliance with the standards prescribed in subsection B.
         a.   Method 4 and 5 for the concentration of particulate matter and
the associated moisture content.
         b.   Method 1 for sample and velocity traverses.
         c.   Method 2 for velocity and volumetric flow rate.
         d.   Method 3 for gas analysis.
      2.   For Method 5, the sampling time for each run shall be at least sixty
minutes and the sampling rate shall be at least 0.9 dscm/hr (0.53 dscf/min),
except that shorter sampling times, when necessitated by process variables or
other factors, may be approved by the control officer.
      3.   Percent sulfur in liquid fuel shall be determined by ASTM method D-
129-91 (Test Method for Sulfur in Petroleum Products) (General Bomb Method),
and the percent sulfur in solid fuel shall be determined by ASTM method D-3177-
89 (Test Method for Total Sulfur in the Analysis Sample of Coal and Coke).
(Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.230   Standards of performance for storage vessels for petroleum liquids.
   A.   No person shall place, store or hold in any reservoir, stationary tank
or other container having a capacity of forty thousand gallons (one hundred
fifty-one thousand four hundred liters) or more any petroleum liquid having a
vapor pressure of 1.5 pounds per square inch absolute or greater under actual
storage conditions, unless such tank, reservoir or other container is a
pressure tank maintaining working pressure sufficient at all times to prevent
hydrocarbon vapor or gas loss to the atmosphere or is equipped with one of the
following vapor loss control devices, properly installed, in operation, and in
good working order:
      1.   A floating roof consisting of a pontoon-type double-deck-type roof
resting on the surface of the liquid contents and equipped with a closure seal
to close the space between the roof eave and tank wall and a vapor balloon or
vapor dome, designed in accordance with accepted standards of the petroleum
industry. The control equipment shall not be used if the petroleum liquid has a
vapor pressure of twelve pounds per square inch absolute or greater under
actual conditions.
         a.   All tank gauging and sampling devices shall be gas tight except
when gauging or sampling is taking place.
         b.   There shall be no visible holes, tears or other openings in the
seal, or in any seal fabric. Where applicable, all openings except drains shall
be equipped with a cover seal or lid. The cover seal or lid shall be in a
closed position at all times, except when the device is in actual use.
         c.   Automatic bleeder vents shall be closed at all times, except when
the roof is floated off or landed on the roof leg supports.
         d.   Rim vents, if provided, shall be set to open when the roof is
being floated off the roof leg supports, or at the manufacturer's recommended
setting.
      2.   Other equipment proven to be of equal efficiency for preventing
discharge of hydrocarbon gases and vapors to the atmosphere.
   B.   Any other petroleum liquid storage tank shall be equipped with a
submerged filing device, or acceptable equivalent, for the control of
hydrocarbon emissions.
   C.   All facilities for dock loading of petroleum products, having a vapor
pressure of 1.5 pounds per square inch absolute or greater at loading pressure,
shall provide for submerged filling or acceptable equivalent for control of
hydrocarbon emissions.
   D.   All pumps and compressors which handle volatile organic compounds shall
be equipped with mechanical seals or other equipment of equal efficiency to
prevent the release of organic contaminants into the atmosphere.
   E.   The monitoring of operations required by this section is as follows:
      1.   The owner or operator of any petroleum liquid storage vessel to
which this section applies shall for each such storage vessel maintain a file
of each type of petroleum liquid stored, of the typical reid vapor pressure of
each type of petroleum liquid stored, and of dates of storage. Dates on which
the storage vessel is empty shall be shown.
      2.   The owner or operator of any petroleum liquid storage vessel to
which this section applies shall for such storage vessel determine and record
the average monthly storage temperature and true vapor pressure of the
petroleum liquid stored at such temperature if either:
         a.   The petroleum liquid has a true vapor pressure, as stored,
greater than twenty-six mm Hg (0.5 psia) but less than seventy-eight mm Hg (1.5
psia) and is stored in a storage vessel other than one equipped with a floating
roof, a vapor recovery system or their equivalents; or
         b.   The petroleum liquid has a true vapor pressure, as stored,
greater than 470 mm Hg (9.1 psia) and is stored in a storage vessel other than
one equipped with a vapor recovery system or its equivalent.
      3.   The average monthly storage temperature shall be an arithmetic
average calculated for each calendar month, or portion thereof if storage is
for less than a month, from bulk liquid storage temperatures determined at
least once every seven days.
      4.   The true vapor pressure shall be determined by the procedures in
American Petroleum Institute Bulletin 2517, amended as of February, 1980 (and
no future editions), which is incorporated herein by reference and on file with
the Office of the Secretary of State. The procedure is dependent upon
determination of the storage temperature and the Reid vapor pressure, which
requires sampling of the petroleum liquids in the storage vessels. Unless the
control officer requires in specific cases that the stored petroleum liquid be
sampled, the true vapor pressure may be determined by using the average monthly
storage temperature and the typical Reid vapor pressure. For those liquids for
which certified specifications limiting the Reid vapor pressure exist, the Reid
vapor pressure may be used. For other liquids, supporting analytical data must
be made available upon request to the control officer when typical Reid vapor
pressure is used.
(Ord. 1996-50 § 3, 1996: Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.240   Standards of performance for secondary lead smelters.
   A.   No person shall cause, allow or permit the discharge of particulate
matter into the atmosphere in any one hour from any existing secondary lead
smelter in total quantities in excess of the amounts calculated by one of the
following equations:
      1.   For process sources having a process weight rate of sixty thousand
pounds per hour (thirty tons per hour) or less, the maximum allowable emissions
shall be determined by the following equation:
         E = 3.59P 0.62
      where:
         E = The maximum allowable emission rate in pounds-mass per hour, and
         P = The process weight rate in tons-mass per hour.
      2.   For process sources having a process weight rate greater than sixty
thousand pounds per hour (thirty tons per hour), the maximum allowable
emissions shall be determined by the following equation:
         E = 17.31P 0.16
      where "E" and "P" are defined as indicated in subdivision 1 of this
subsection.
   B.   Emission values shall be calculated from the applicable equations and
rounded off to two decimal places.
   C.   For purposes of this section, the total process weight from all similar
units employing a similar type process shall be used in determining the maximum
allowable emission of particulate matter.
   D.   The opacity of emissions subject to the provisions of this section
shall not exceed twenty percent.
   E.   The test methods and procedures required by this section are as
follows:
      1.   The reference methods set forth in 40 CFR 60, Appendix A shall be
used to determine compliance with the standards prescribed in subsection A of
this section as follows:
         a.   Method 4 and 5 for the concentration of particulate matter;
         b.   Method 1 for sample and velocity traverses;
         c.   Method 2 for velocity and volumetric flow rate;
         d.   Method 3 for gas analysis.
      2.   For Method 5, the sampling time for each run shall be at least sixty
minutes and the sampling rate shall be at least 0.9 dscm/hr (0.53 dscf/min),
except that shorter sampling times, when necessitated by process variables or
other factors, may be approved by the control officer. Particulate sampling
shall be conducted during representative periods of furnace operation including
charging and tapping.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.250   Standards of performance for secondary brass and bronze ingot
production plants.
   A.   No person shall cause, allow or permit the discharge of particulate
matter into the atmosphere in any one hour from any secondary brass or bronze
ingot production plant in total quantities in excess of the amount calculated
by one of the following equations:
      1.   For process sources having a process weight rate of 60,000 pounds
per hour (30 tons per hour) or less, the maximum allowable emissions shall be
determined by the following equation:
         E = 3.59P 0.62
      where:
         E = The maximum, allowable particulate emission rate in pounds-mass
per hour, and
         P = The process weight rate in tons-mass per hour.
      2.   For process sources having a process weight rate greater than sixty
thousand pounds per hour (thirty tons per hour), the maximum allowable
emissions shall be determined by the following equation:
         E = 17.31P 0.16
      where "E" and "P" are defined as indicated in subdivision 1 of this
subsection.
   B.   Emission values shall be calculated from the applicable equations and
rounded off to two decimal places.
   C.   For purposes of this section, the total process weight from all similar
units employing a similar type process shall be used in determining the maximum
allowable emission of particulate matter.
   D.   The opacity of emissions subject to the provisions of this section
shall not exceed twenty percent.
   E.   The test methods and procedures required by this section are as
follows:
      1.   The reference methods set forth in 40 CFR 60, Appendix A shall be
used to determine compliance with the standards prescribed in subsection A of
this section as follows:
         a.   Method 4 and 5 for the concentration of particulate matter;
         b.   Method 1 for sample and velocity traverses;
         c.   Method 2 for velocity and volumetric flow rate;
         d.   Method 3 for gas analysis.
      2.   For Method 5, the sampling time for each run shall be at least 120
minutes and the sampling rate shall be at least 0.9 dscm/hr (0.53 dscf/min),
except that shorter sampling times, when necessitated by process variables or
other factors, may be approved by the control officer. Particulate sampling
shall be conducted during representative periods of charging and refining but
not during pouring of the heat.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.260   Standards of performance for iron and steel plants.
   A.   No person shall cause, allow or permit the discharge of particulate
matter into the atmosphere in any one hour from any basic oxygen process
furnace in total quantities in excess of the amount calculated by one of the
following equations:
      1.   For process sources having a process weight rate of 60,000 pounds
per hour (30 tons per hour) or less, the maximum allowable emissions shall be
determined by the following equation:
         E = 3.59P 0.62
      where:
         E = The maximum, allowable particulate emission rate in pounds-mass
per hour, and
         P = The process weight rate in tons-mass per hour.
      2.   For process sources having a process weight rate greater than sixty
thousand pounds per hour (thirty tons per hour), the maximum allowable
emissions shall be determined by the following equation:
         E = 17.31P 0.16
      where "E" and "P" are defined as indicated in subdivision 1 of this
subsection.
   B.   Emission values shall be calculated from the applicable equations and
rounded off to two decimal places.
   C.   For purposes of this section, the total process weight from all similar
units employing a similar type process shall be used in determining the maximum
allowable emission of particulate matter.
   D.   The opacity of emissions subject to the provisions of this section
shall not exceed twenty percent.
   E.   Monitoring of operations under this section is as follows:
      1.   The owner or operator of an affected facility shall maintain daily
records of the time and duration of each steel production cycle.
      2.   The owner or operator of any affected facility that uses Venturi
scrubber emission control equipment shall install, calibrate, maintain and
continuously operate the following monitoring devices:
         a.   A monitoring device for the continuous measurement of the
pressure loss through the Venturi constriction of the control equipment. The
monitoring device shall be certified by the manufacturer to be accurate within
± two hundred fifty pascals (± one inch water).
         b.   A monitoring device for the continuous measurement of the water
supply pressure to the control equipment. The monitoring device is to be
certified by the manufacturer to be accurate within ± five percent of the
design water supply pressure. The pressure sensor or tap shall be located close
to the water discharge point.
      3.   All monitoring devices required in subdivision (F)(2) of this
section shall be recalibrated annually and at other times as the control
officer may require, in accordance with the procedures in Appendix 9 of A.A.C.
Title 18, chapter 2.
   F.   The test methods and procedures required under this section are as
follows:
      1.   The reference methods set forth in 40 CFR 60, Appendix A shall be
used to determine compliance with the standards prescribed in subsection A of
this section as follows:
         a.   Method 4 and 5 for the concentration of particulate matter;
         b.   Method 1 for sample and velocity traverses;
         c.   Method 2 for velocity and volumetric flow rate;
         d.   Method 3 for gas analysis.
      2.   For Method 5, the sampling time for each run shall continue for an
integral number of cycles with total duration of at least 60 minutes. The
sampling rate shall be at least 0.9 dscm/hr (0.53 dscf/min), except that
shorter sampling times, when necessitated by process variables or other
factors, may be approved by the control officer. A cycle shall start at the
beginning of either the scrap preheat or the oxygen blow and shall terminate
immediately prior to tapping.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.270   Standards of performance for sewage treatment plants.
   A.   No person shall cause, allow or permit to be emitted into the
atmosphere, from any municipal sewage treatment plant sludge incinerator:
      1.   Smoke, fumes, gases, particulate matter or other gas-borne material
which exceeds twenty percent opacity for more than thirty seconds in any sixty-
minute period.
      2.   Particulate matter in concentrations in excess of 0.08 grains per
cubic foot, based on dry flue gas at standard conditions, corrected to twelve
percent carbon dioxide.
   B.   The owner or operator of any sludge incinerator subject to the
provisions of this section shall monitor operations by doing all of the
following:
      1.   Install, calibrate, maintain and operate a flow measuring device
which can be used to determine either the mass or volume of sludge charged to
the incinerator. The flow measuring device shall have an accuracy of ± five
percent over its operating range.
      2.   Provide access to the sludge charged so that a well-mixed
representative grab sample of the sludge can be obtained.
      3.   Install, calibrate, maintain and operate a weighing device for
determining the mass of any municipal solid waste charged to the incinerator
when sewage sludge and municipal solid wastes are incinerated together. The
weighing device shall have an accuracy of ± five percent over its operating
range.
   C.   The test methods and procedures required by this section are as
follows:
      1.   The reference methods set forth in 40 CFR 60, Appendix A shall be
used to determine compliance with the standards prescribed in subsection A of
this section as follows:
         a.   Methods 4 and 5 for the concentration of particulate matter;
         b.   Method 1 for sample and velocity traverses;
         c.   Method 2 for velocity and volumetric flow rate;
         d.   Method 3 for gas analysis.
      2.   For Method 5, the sampling time for each run shall be at least sixty
minutes and the sampling rate shall be at least 0.015 dscm/min (0.53 dscf/min),
except that shorter sampling times, when necessitated by process variables or
other factors, may be approved by the control officer.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.310   Standards of performance for coal preparation plants.
   A.   The provisions of this section are applicable to any of the following
affected facilities in coal preparation plants: thermal dryers, pneumatic coal-
cleaning equipment, coal processing and conveying equipment including breakers
and crushers, coal storage systems, and coal transfer and loading systems. For
purposes of this section, the definitions contained in 40 CFR 60.251 are
adopted by reference and incorporated herein.
   B.   No person shall cause, allow or permit the discharge of particulate
matter into the atmosphere in any one hour from any existing coal preparation
plant in total quantities in excess of the amounts calculated by one of the
following equations set forth:
      1.   For process sources having a process weight rate of sixty thousand
pounds per hour (thirty tons per hour) or less, the maximum allowable emissions
shall be determined by the following equation:
         E = 3.59P 0.62
      where:
         E = The maximum allowable particulate emissions rate in pounds-mass
per hour.
         P = The process weight rate in tons-mass per hour.
      2.   For process sources having a process weight rate greater than sixty
thousand pounds per hour (thirty tons per hour), the maximum allowable
emissions shall be determined by the following equation:
         E = 17.31P 0.16
      where "E" and "P" are defined as indicated in subdivision 1 of this
subsection.
   C.   The actual values shall be calculated from the applicable equations and
rounded off to two decimal places.
   D.   For purposes of this section, the total process weight from all similar
units employing a similar type process shall be used in determining the maximum
allowable emission of particulate matter.
   E.   Fugitive emissions from coal preparation plants shall be controlled in
accordance with Sections
17.16.070 through
17.16.110.
   F.   The test methods and procedures required by this section are as
follows:
      1.   The reference methods in 40 CFR 60, Appendix A are used to determine
compliance with standards prescribed in subsection B of this section as
follows:
         a.   Method 4 and 5 for the concentration of particulate matter and
associated moisture content.
         b.   Method 1 for sample and velocity traverses.
         c.   Method 2 for velocity and volumetric flow rate.
         d.   Method 3 for gas analysis.
      2.   For Method 5, the sampling time for each run shall be at least 60
minutes and the minimum sample volume is 0.85 dscm (30 dscf), except that short
sampling times or smaller volumes, when necessitated by process variables or
other factors, may be approved by the control officer. Sampling shall not be
started until thirty minutes after start-up and shall be terminated before
shutdown procedures commence. The owner or operator of the affected facility
shall eliminate cyclonic flow during performance tests in a manner acceptable
to the control officer.
      3.   The owner or operator shall construct the facility so that
particulate emissions from thermal dryers or pneumatic coal cleaning equipment
can be accurately determined by applicable test methods and procedures under
subdivision 1 of this subsection.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.320   Standards of performance for steel plants—Electric arc furnaces
(EAF).
   A.   No person shall cause, allow or permit the discharge of particulate
matter into the atmosphere in any one hour from electric arc furnaces or dust-
handling equipment which are affected facilities in any steel plant in total
quantities in excess of the amount calculated by one of the following
equations:
      1.   For process sources having a process weight rate of 60,000 pounds
per hour (30 tons per hour) or less, the maximum allowable emissions shall be
determined by the following equation:
         E = 3.59P 0.62
      where:
         E = The maximum, allowable particulate emission rate in pounds-mass
per hour.
         P = The process weight rate in tons-mass per hour.
      2.   For process sources having a process weight rate greater than 60,000
pounds per hour (30 tons per hour), the maximum allowable emissions shall be
determined by the following equation:
         E = 17.31P 0.16
      where "E" and "P" are defined as indicated in subdivision 1 of this
subsection.
   B.   The actual values shall be calculated from the applicable equations and
rounded off to two decimal places.
   C.   For purposes of this section, the total process weight from all similar
units employing a similar type process shall be used in determining the maximum
allowable emission of particulate matter.
   D.   The opacity standard of forty percent shall not be exceeded by existing
steel plant electric arc furnaces and their appurtenances for more than an
aggregate of three minutes in any forty-five-minute period.
   E.   A continuous monitoring system for the measurement of the opacity of
emissions discharged into the atmosphere from the control device shall be
installed, calibrated, maintained, and operated by the owner or operator
subject to the provisions of this section.
   F.   The test methods and procedures required under this section are as
follows:
      1.   Reference methods in 40 CFR 60, Appendix A shall be used to
determine compliance with the standards prescribed under subsection A of this
section as follows:
         a.   Method 4 and 5 for the concentration of particulate matter;
         b.   Method 1 for sample and velocity traverses;
         c.   Method 2 for velocity and volumetric flow rate;
         d.   Method 3 for gas analysis.
      2.   For Method 5, the sampling time for each run shall be at least four
hours. When a single EAF is sampled, the sampling time for each run shall also
include an integral number of heats. Shorter sampling times, when necessitated
by process variables or other factors, may be approved by the control officer.
The minimum sample volume shall be 4.5 dscm (160 dscf).
(Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.340   Standards of performance for stationary rotating machinery.
   A.   The provisions of this section are applicable to the following affected
facilities: all stationary gas turbines, oil-fired turbines, or internal
combustion engines. This section also applies to an installation operated for
the purpose of producing electric or mechanical power with a resulting
discharge of sulfur dioxide in the installation's effluent gases.
   B.   For purposes of this section, the heat input shall be the aggregate
heat content of all fuels whose products of combustion pass through a stack or
other outlet. Compliance tests shall be conducted during operation at the
normal rated capacity of each unit. The total heat input of all operating fuel-
burning units on a plant or premises shall be used for determining the maximum
allowable amount of particulate matter which may be emitted.
   C.   No person shall cause, allow or permit the emission of particulate
matter, caused by combustion of fuel, from any stationary rotating machinery in
excess of the amounts calculated by one of the following equations:
      1.   For equipment having a heat input rate of 4200 million BTU per hour
or less, the maximum allowable emissions shall be determined by the following
equation:
         E = 1.02Q 0.769
      where:
         E = The maximum allowable particulate emissions rate in pounds-mass
per hour.
         Q = The heat input in million BTU per hour.
      2.   For equipment having a heat input rate greater than 4200 million BTU
per hour, the maximum allowable emissions shall be determined by the following
equation:
         E = 17.0Q 0.432
      where "E" and "Q" have the same meaning as in subdivision 1 of this
subsection.
   D.   The actual values shall be calculated from the applicable equations and
rounded off to two decimal places.
   E.   No person shall cause, allow or permit to be emitted into the
atmosphere from any stationary rotating machinery, smoke for any period greater
than ten consecutive seconds which exceeds forty percent opacity. Visible
emissions when starting cold equipment shall be exempt from this requirement
for the first ten minutes.
   F.   When low sulfur oil is fired, stationary rotating machinery
installations shall burn fuel which limits the emission of sulfur dioxide to
1.0 pound per million BTU heat input.
   G.   When high sulfur oil is fired, stationary rotating machinery
installations shall not emit more than 2.2 pounds of sulfur dioxide per million
BTU heat input.
   H.   Any permit issued for the operation of an existing source, or any
renewal or modification of such a permit, shall include a condition prohibiting
the use of high sulfur oil by the permittee. This condition may not be included
in the permit if the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the control
officer both that sufficient quantities of low sulfur oil are not available for
use by the source and that it has adequate facilities and contingency plans to
insure that the sulfur dioxide ambient air quality standards set forth in
Section
17.08.020 will not be violated.
      1.   The terms of the permit may authorize the use of high sulfur oil
under such conditions as are justified.
      2.   In cases where the permittee is authorized to use high sulfur oil,
the permittee shall submit to the control officer monthly reports detailing
efforts to obtain low sulfur oil.
      3.   When the conditions justifying the use of high sulfur oil no longer
exist, the permit shall be modified accordingly.
      4.   Nothing in this section shall be construed as allowing the use of a
supplementary control system or other form of dispersion technology.
   I.   The owner or operator of any stationary rotating machinery subject to
the provisions of this section shall record daily the sulfur content and lower
heating value of the fuel being fired in the machine.
   J.   The owner or operator of any stationary rotating machinery subject to
the provisions of this section shall report to the control officer any daily
period during which the sulfur content of the fuel being fired in the machine
exceeds 0.8 percent.
   K.   The test methods and procedures required by this section are as
follows:
      1.   To determine compliance with the standards prescribed in subsections
C through H of this section, the following reference methods shall be used:
         a.   Reference Method 20 in 40 CFR 60, Appendix A for the
concentration of sulfur dioxide and oxygen.
         b.   ASTM Method D-129-91 (Test Method for Sulfur in Petroleum
Products) (General Bomb Method) for the sulfur content of liquid fuels.
         c.   ASTM Method D-1072-90 (Test Method for Total Sulfur in Fuel
Gases) for the sulfur content of gaseous fuels.
      2.   To determine compliance with the standards prescribed in subsection
J of this section, the following reference methods in the Arizona Testing
Manual shall be used:
         a.   ASTM Method D-129-91 (Test Method for Sulfur in Petroleum
Products) (General Bomb Method) for the sulfur content of liquid fuels.
         b.   ASTM Method D-1072-90 (Test Method for Total Sulfur in Fuel
Gases) for the sulfur content of gaseous fuels.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.350   Standards of performance for lime manufacturing plants.
   A.   The provisions of this section are applicable to the following affected
facilities used in the manufacture of lime: rotary lime kilns, vertical lime
kilns, lime hydrators, and limestone crushing facilities. This section is also
applicable to limestone crushing equipment which exists apart from other lime
manufacturing facilities.
   B.   No person shall cause, allow or permit the discharge of particulate
matter into the atmosphere in any one hour from any lime manufacturing or
limestone crushing facility in total quantities in excess of the amounts
calculated by one of the following equations:
      1.   For process sources having a process weight rate of 60,000 pounds
per hour (30 tons per hour) or less, the maximum allowable emissions shall be
determined by the following equation:
         E = 3.59P 0.62
      where:
         E = the maximum allowable particulate emissions rate in pounds-mass
per hour.
         P = the process weight rate in tons-mass per hour.
      2.   For process sources having a process weight rate greater than 60,000
pounds per hour (30 tons per hour), the maximum allowable emissions shall be
determined by the following equation:
         E = 17.31P 0.16
      where "E" and "P" are defined as indicated in subdivision 1 of this
subsection.
   C.   The actual values shall be calculated from the applicable equations and
rounded off to two decimal places.
   D.   For purposes of this section, the total process weight from all similar
units employing a similar type process shall be used in determining the maximum
allowable emission of particulate matter.
   E.   Fugitive emissions from lime plants shall be controlled in accordance
with Sections
17.16.070 through
17.16.110.
   F.   The owner or operator subject to the provisions of this section shall
install, calibrate, maintain, and operate a continuous monitoring system,
except as provided in subsection G of this section, to monitor and record the
opacity of the gases discharged into the atmosphere from any rotary lime kiln.
The span of this system shall be set at 70 percent opacity.
   G.   The owner or operator of any rotary lime kiln using a wet scrubbing
emission control device subject to the provisions of this section shall not be
required to monitor the opacity of the gases discharged as required in
subsection F of this section.
   H.   The test methods and procedures required by this section are as
follows:
      1.   The reference methods in the Arizona Testing Manual and 40 CFR 60,
Appendix A, shall be used to determine compliance with this section as follows:
         a.   Method 4 and 5 for the measurement of particulate matter.
         b.   Method 1 for sample and velocity traverses.
         c.   Method 2 for velocity and volumetric flow rate.
         d.   Method 3 for gas analysis.
         e.   Method 4 for stack gas moisture.
         f.   Method 9 for visible emissions.
      2.   For Method 5, the sampling time for each run shall be at least 60
minutes and the sampling rate shall be at least 0.85 dscm/hr (0.53 dscf/min),
except that shorter sampling times, when necessitated by process variables or
other factors, may be approved by the control officer.
      3.   Because of the high moisture content of the exhaust gases from the
hydrators, in the range of 40 to 85 percent by volume, the Method 5 sample
train may be modified to include a calibrated orifice immediately following the
sample nozzle when testing lime hydrators. In this configuration, the sampling
rate necessary for maintaining isokinetic conditions can be directly related to
exhaust gas velocity without a correction for moisture content.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.360   Standards of performance for nonferrous metals industry sources.
   A.   The provisions of this section are applicable to the following affected
facilities: mines, mills, concentrators, crushers, screens, material handling
facilities, fine ore storage, dryers, roasters, and loaders.
   B.   No person shall cause, allow or permit the discharge of particulate
matter into the atmosphere in any one hour from any process source subject to
the provisions of this section in total quantities in excess of the amounts
calculated by one of the following equations:
      1.   For process sources having a process weight rate of 60,000 pounds
per hour (30 tons per hour) or less, the maximum allowable emissions shall be
determined by the following equation:
         E = 3.59P 0.62
      where:
         E = the maximum, allowable particulate emission rate in pounds-mass
per hour.
         P = the process weight rate in tons-mass per hour.
      2.   For process sources having a process weight rate greater than 60,000
pounds per hour (30 tons per hour), the maximum allowable emissions shall be
determined by the following equation:
         E = 17.31P 0.16
      where "E" and "P" are defined as indicated in subdivision 1 of this
subsection.
   C.   The actual values shall be calculated from the applicable equations and
rounded off to two decimal places.
   D.   For purposes of this section, the total process weight from all similar
units employing a similar type process shall be used in determining the maximum
allowable emission of particulate matter.
   E.   No person shall cause, allow or permit to be discharged into the
atmosphere from any dryer or roaster the operating temperature of which exceeds
700ø F., reduced sulfur in excess of ten percent of the sulfur entering the
process as feed. Reduced sulfur includes sulfur equivalent from all sulfur
emissions including sulfur dioxide, sulfur trioxide, and sulfuric acid.
   F.   The owner or operator of any mining property subject to the provisions
of this section shall record the daily process rates and hours of operation of
all material handling facilities.
   G.   A continuous monitoring system for measurement sulfur dioxide emissions
shall be installed, calibrated, maintained and operated by the owner or
operator where dryers or roasters are not expected to achieve compliance with
the standard under subsection (E) of this section.
   H.   The test methods and procedures required by this section are as
follows:
      1.   The reference methods in 40 CFR 60, Appendix A shall be used to
determine compliance with the standard prescribed in this section as follows:
         a.   Method 4 and 5 for the concentration of particulate matter and
the associated moisture content;
         b.   Method 1 for sample and velocity traverses;
         c.   Method 2 for velocity and volumetric flow rate;
         d.   Method 3 for gas analysis and calculation of excess air, using
the integrated sample technique;
         e.   Method 6 for concentration of SO2;
      2.   For Method 5, Method 1 shall be used to select the sampling site and
the number of traverse sampling points. The sampling time for each run shall be
at least 60 minutes and the minimum sampling volume shall be 0.85 dscm (thirty
dscf), except that smaller sampling times or volumes, when necessitated by
process variables of other factors, may be approved by the control officer. The
probe and filter holder heating systems in the sampling train shall be set to
provide a gas temperature no greater than one hundred sixty degrees Celsius
(three hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit).
      3.   For Method 6, the sampling site shall be the same as that selected
for Method 5. The sampling point in the duct shall be at the centroid of the
cross section or at a point no closer to the walls than one meter (3.28 ft.).
For Method 6, the sample shall be extracted at a rate proportional to the gas
velocity at the sampling point.
      4.   For Method 6, the minimum sampling time shall be twenty minutes and
the minimum sampling volume 0.02 dscm (0.71 dscf) for each sample. The
arithmetic mean of two samples shall constitute one run. Samples shall be taken
at approximately thirty-minute intervals.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.370   Standards of performance for gravel or crushed stone processing
plants.
   A.   The provisions of this section are applicable to the following affected
facilities: primary rock crushers, secondary rock crushers, tertiary rock
crushers, screens, conveyors and conveyor transfer points, stackers,
reclaimers, and all gravel or crushed stone processing plants and rock storage
piles.
   B.   No person shall cause, allow or permit the discharge of particulate
matter into the atmosphere except as fugitive emissions in any one hour from
any gravel or crushed stone processing plant in total quantities in excess of
the amounts calculated by one of the following equations:
      1.   For process sources having a process weight rate of sixty thousand
pounds per hour (thirty tons per hour) or less, the maximum allowable emissions
shall be determined by the following equation:
         E = 3.59P 0.62
      where:
         E = the maximum allowable particulate emissions rate in pounds-mass
per hour.
         P = the process weight rate in tons-mass per hour.
      2.   For process sources having a process weight rate greater than sixty
thousand pounds per hour (thirty tons per hour), the maximum allowable
emissions shall be determined by the following equation:
         E = 17.31P 0.16
      where "E" and "P" are defined as indicated in subdivision 1 of this
subsection.
   C.   The actual values shall be calculated from the applicable equations and
rounded off to two decimal places.
   D.   Spray bar pollution controls shall be utilized in accordance with "EPA
Control of Air Emissions From Process Operations in the Rock Crushing Industry"
(EPA 340/1-79-002), "Wet Suppression System" (pages 15-34), amended as of
January, 1979 (and no future amendments or editions), as incorporated herein by
reference and on file with the Office of the Secretary of State, with placement
of spray bars and nozzles as required by the control officer to minimize air
pollution.
   E.   Fugitive emissions from gravel or crushed stone processing plants shall
be controlled in accordance with Sections
17.16.070 through
17.16.110.
   F.   The owner or operator of any affected facility subject to the
provisions of this section shall install, calibrate, maintain, and operate
monitoring devices which can be used to determine daily the process weight of
gravel or crushed stone produced. The weighing devices shall have an accuracy
of ±five percent over their operating range.
   G.   The owner or operator of any affected facility shall maintain a record
of daily production rates of gravel or crushed stone produced.
   H.   The test methods and procedures required by this section are as
follows:
      1.   The reference methods in 40 CFR 60, Appendix A shall be used to
determine compliance with the standards prescribed in this section as follows:
         a.   Methods 4 and 5 for concentration of particulate matter and
moisture content;
         b.   Method 1 for sample and velocity traverses;
         c.   Method 2 for velocity and volumetric flow rate;
         d.   Method 3 for gas analysis.
      2.   For Method 5, the sampling time for each run shall be at least sixty
minutes and the minimum sample volume is 0.85 dscm (thirty dscf), except that
shorter sampling times or smaller volumes, when necessitated by process
variables or other factors, may be approved by the control officer. Sampling
shall not be started until thirty minutes after startup and shall be terminated
before shutdown procedures commence. The owner or operator of the affected
facility shall eliminate cyclonic flow during performance tests in a manner
acceptable to the control officer.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.380   Standards of performance for concrete batch plants.
   Fugitive dust emitted from concrete batch plants shall be controlled in
accordance with Sections
17.16.070 through
17.16.110.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.390   Standards of performance for existing municipal solid waste
landfills.
   A.   This section applies to each municipal solid waste landfill (MSW
landfill) at which:
      1.   Construction, reconstruction, or modification began on or before
July 17, 2014; and
      2.   Waste was accepted at any time since November 8, 1987, or additional
design capacity is available for future waste deposition.
   B.   For the purposes of this section, "Municipal Solid Waste Landfill or
MSW Landfill" means an entire disposal facility in a contiguous geographical
space where household waste is placed in or on land. An MSW landfill may also
receive other types of RCRA (Resource Conservation and Recovery Act) Subtitle D
wastes such as commercial solid waste nonhazardous sludge, conditionally exempt
small quantity generator waste, and industrial solid waste. Portions of an MSW
landfill may be separated by access roads. An MSW landfill may be publicly or
privately owned.
   C.   MSW landfills covered by this section shall comply with 40 CFR 60,
Subpart Cf, effective as of the date of EPA approval of the state plan under
section 111(d) of the Act, as modified by this subsection. 40 CFR 60, Subpart
WWW, "Standards of Performance for Municipal Solid Waste Landfills," will
remain in effect until Arizona's state plan implementing 40 CFR 60 Subpart Cf
is approved by the EPA. 40 CFR 60, Subpart Cf "Emissions Guidelines and
Compliance Times for Municipal Solid Waste Landfills," as adopted on August 29,
2016 (and no future amendments) is hereby incorporated by reference as
applicable requirements. MSW landfills may meet the requirements of Subpart Cf
by complying with 40 CFR 60, Subpart XXX. 40 CFR 60 Subpart XXX "Standards of
Performance for Municipal Solid Waste Landfills that Commenced Construction,
Reconstruction or Modification After July 17, 2014," is incorporated by
reference in Section
17.16.490.
(Ord. 2019-28 § 4 (part), 2019; Ord. 1997-79 § 8, 1997)
17.16.400   Organic solvents and other organic materials.
   A.   No person shall transport or store VOCs without taking necessary and
feasible measures to control evaporation, leakage or other discharge into the
atmosphere.
   B.   Emissions of organic solvents from dry cleaning equipment not using
perchloroethylene shall be minimized by applying the following controls:
      1.   Pipe and hose fittings, flanges, valves, seals, storage-container
covers, and other equipment must be serviced and maintained so that no liquid
solvent leaks from any portion of the equipment;
      2.   Solvents must be stored in closed containers whose vents are no
larger than the minimum diameter necessary for breathing;
      3.   Equipment, openings (e.g., washer lint traps, button traps, access
doors, and other parts) must be kept closed except as required for proper
operation and maintenance;
      4.   A dry cleaning operation which used chlorinated synthetic solvents
other than perchloroethylene shall:
         a.   Cook the residual diatomaceous earth (in the solvent filter)
sufficiently so that the wet material contains no more than twenty-five percent
solvent (by weight) before being exposed to the atmosphere,
         b.   Prevent exposure to the atmosphere of residue from the solvent
which contains more than sixty percent solvent by weight, and
         c.   Drain the cartridge filters for at least twenty-four hours in the
filter housing before disposing in accordance with applicable rules for
hazardous waste, as the case may apply;
      5.   A newly installed dry cleaning system or machine not using
perchloroethylene and having a rated capacity of at least thirty pounds must be
constructed, operated, and maintained so as to reduce emissions from the washer
and dryer exhaust by at least ninety percent; and
      6.   Dry cleaning equipment using perchloroethylene shall comply with the
provisions of 40 CFR 63, Subpart M (as amended) and
Chapter 17.16,
Article VII.
   C.   This subsection applies only to surface coating, solvent surface
cleaning, and solvent degreasing, and other operations engaged in the
employment or application of organic solvents.
      1.   No person shall conduct any spray paint operation without minimizing
organic solvent emissions. Such operations, other than architectural coating
and spot painting, shall be conducted in an enclosed area equipped with
controls containing no less than ninety-six percent of the overspray.
      2.   No person shall either:
         a.   Employ, apply, evaporate or dry any architectural coating
containing photochemically reactive solvents for industrial or commercial
purposes; or
         b.   Thin or dilute any architectural coating with a photochemically
reactive solvent.
      3.   For purposes of this subsection, a photochemically reactive solvent
shall be any solvent with an aggregate of more than twenty percent of its total
volume composed of the chemical compounds classified in subparagraphs a through
c of this paragraph, or which exceeds any of the following percentage
composition limitations, referred to the total volume of solvent:
         a.   A combination of the following types of compounds having an
olefinic or cyclo-olefinic type of unsaturation—hydrocarbons, alcohols,
aldehydes, esters, ethers, or ketones: five percent.
         b.   A combination of aromatic compounds with eight or more carbon
atoms to the molecule, except ethylbenzene: eight percent.
         c.   A combination of ethylbenzene, ketones having branched
hydrocarbon structures, trichloroethylene or toluene: twenty percent.
      4.   Whenever any organic solvent or any constituent of an organic
solvent may be classified from its chemical structure into more than one of the
groups of organic compounds described in subparagraphs (3)(a) through (3)(c) of
this section, it shall be considered to be a member of the group having the
least allowable percent of the total volume of solvents.
      5.   No owner or operator of a facility engaged in the surface coating of
miscellaneous metal parts and products may operate a coating application system
subject to this section that emits volatile organic compounds in excess of any
of the following:
         a.   4.3 pounds per gallon (0.5 kilograms per liter) of coating,
excluding water, delivered to a coating applicator that applies clear coatings.
         b.   3.5 pounds per gallon (0.42 kilograms per liter) of coating,
excluding water delivered to a coating applicator in a coating application
system that is air dried or forced warm air dried at temperatures up to one
hundred ninety-four degrees Fahrenheit (ninety degrees centigrade).
         c.   3.5 pounds per gallon (0.42 kilograms per liter) of coating,
excluding water, delivered to a coating applicator that applies extreme
performance coatings.
         d.   3.0 pounds per gallon (0.36 kilograms per liter) of coating,
excluding water, delivered to a coating applicator for all other coatings and
coating application systems.
      6.   If more than one emission limitation in subdivision 5 of this
subsection applies to a specific coating, then the least stringent emission
limitation shall be applied.
      7.   All VOC emissions from solvent washings shall be considered in the
emission limitations in subdivision 5 of this subsection, unless the solvent is
directed into containers that prevent evaporation into the atmosphere.
   D.   This rule does not apply to operations that are specifically covered in
Section
17.16.230 of this title.
(Ord. 1996-50 § 4, 1996: Ord. 1995-87 § 48, 1995: Ord. 1994-83 § 57, 1994: Ord.
1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.410   Standards of performance for cotton gins.
   A.   Fugitive dust, lint, bolls, cotton seed or other material emitted from
a cotton gin or lying loose in a yard shall be collected and disposed of in an
efficient manner or shall be treated in accordance with Sections
17.16.070 through
17.16.110.
   B.   An opacity of forty percent or less shall exempt the source from mass
emissions testing. In the event that the cotton gin does not comply with the
forty percent opacity standard, the owner or operator may request the
permission of the control officer to perform a mass emissions test observed by
a representative of the control officer. Successful completion of this test
will result in an adjustment to the simultaneous opacity standard in accordance
with Section
17.16.130E.
   C.   No person shall cause, allow, or permit the discharge of particulate
matter into the atmosphere in any one hour from any cotton gin in total
quantities in excess of the amounts calculated by one of the following
equations:
      1.   For process sources having a process weight rate of sixty thousand
pounds per hour (thirty tons per hour) or less, the maximum allowable emissions
shall be determined by the following equation:
         E = 4.10P 0.67
      where:
         E = the maximum allowable particulate emissions rate in pounds-mass
per hour.
         P = the process weight rate in tons-mass per hour.
      2.   For process sources having a process weight rate greater than sixty
thousand pounds per hour (thirty tons per hour), the maximum allowable
emissions shall be determined by the following equation:
         E = 55.0P 0.11 -40
      where "E" and "P" are defined as indicated in subdivision 1 of this
subsection.
   D.   The test methods and procedures required by this section are as
follows:
      1.   The reference methods in the Arizona Testing Manual and 40 CFR 60,
Appendix A shall be used to determine compliance with this section as follows:
         a.   Method A-2 for the measurement of particulate matter;
         b.   Method 1 for sample and velocity traverses;
         c.   Method 2 for velocity and volumetric flow rate;
         d.   Method 3 for gas analysis;
         e.   Method 9 for visible emissions.
      2.   For Method A-2, the sampling time for each run shall be at least
sixty minutes and the sampling rate shall be at least 0.85 dry standard cubic
meters per hour (0.53 dry standard cubic feet per minute), except that shorter
sampling times, when necessitated by progress variables or other factors, may
be approved by the control officer.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.420   Standards of performance for ammonium sulfide manufacturing plants.
   A.   The provisions of this section are applicable to the following affected
facilities in ammonium sulfide manufacturing plants: sulfide unloading
facilities, reactor-absorbers, bubble cap scrubbers, and fume incinerators.
   B.   No person shall cause, allow or permit to be emitted into the
atmosphere, from any type of incinerator or other outlet smoke, fumes, gases,
particulate matter or other gas-borne material, the opacity of which exceeds
twenty percent.
   C.   No person shall cause, allow or permit to be emitted into the
atmosphere from any emission point from any incinerator, or to pass a
convenient measuring point near such emission point, particulate matter of
concentrations in excess of 0.08 grain per cubic foot, based on dry flue gas at
standard conditions, corrected to twelve percent carbon dioxide.
   D.   No person shall allow hydrogen sulfide to be emitted from any location
in such manner and amount that the concentration of such emissions into the
ambient air at any occupied place beyond the premises on which the source is
located exceeds 0.03 parts per million by volume for any averaging period of
thirty minutes or more.
   E.   The owner or operator of any ammonium sulfide tailgas incinerator
subject to the provisions of this section shall do both of the following:
      1.   Install, calibrate, maintain, and operate a flow measuring device
which can be used to determine either the mass or volume of tailgas charged to
the incinerator. The flow measuring device shall have an accuracy of ±five
percent over its operating range.
      2.   Provide access to the tailgas charged so that a well-mixed
representative grab sample can be obtained.
   F.   The test methods and procedures required by this section are as
follows:
      1.   The reference methods in 40 CFR 60, Appendix A shall be used to
determine compliance with the standards prescribed in this section as follows:
         a.   Methods 4 and 5 for the concentration of particulate matter and
the associated moisture content;
         b.   Method 1 for sample and velocity traverses;
         c.   Method 2 for velocity and volumetric flow rate;
         d.   Method 3 for gas analysis and calculation of excess air, using
the integrated sample technique;
         e.   Method 11 shall be used to determine the concentration of H 2 S
and Method 6 shall be used to determine the concentration of SO 2 .
      2.   For Method 5, the sampling time for each run shall be at least sixty
minutes and the minimum sample volume shall be 0.85 dscm (30.0 dscf) except
that shorter sampling times and smaller sample volumes, when necessitated by
process variables or other factors, may be approved by the control officer.
      3.   Particulate matter emissions, expressed in g/dscm, shall be
corrected to twelve percent CO 2 by using the following formula:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4392.png]
      where:
         C 12 = the concentration of particulate matter corrected to twelve
percent CO 2 ,
         c = the concentration of particulate matter as measured by Method 5,
and
         %CO 2 = the percentage of CO 2 as measured by Method 3, or, when
applicable, the adjusted outlet CO 2 percentage.
      4.   If Method 11 is used, the gases sampled shall be introduced into the
sampling train at approximately atmospheric pressure. Where fuel gas lines are
operating at pressures substantially above atmosphere, this may be accomplished
with a flow control valve. If the line pressure is high enough to operate the
sampling train without a vacuum pump, the pump may be eliminated from the
sampling train. The sample shall be drawn from a point near the centroid of the
fuel gas line. The minimum sampling time shall be ten minutes and the minimum
sampling volume 0.01 dscm (0.35 dscf) for each sample. The arithmetic average
of two samples of equal sampling time shall constitute one run. Samples shall
be taken at approximately one-hour intervals. For most fuel gases, sample times
exceeding twenty minutes may result in depletion of the collecting solution,
although fuel gases containing low concentrations of hydrogen sulfide may
necessitate sampling for longer periods of time.
      5.   If Method 5 is used, Method 1 shall be used for velocity traverses
and Method 2 for determining velocity and volumetric flow rate. The sampling
site for determining CO 2 concentration by Method 3 shall be the same as for
determining volumetric flow rate by Method 2. The sampling point in the duct
for determining SO 2 concentration by Method 3 shall be at the centroid of the
cross section if the cross sectional area is less than five m 2 (fifty-four ft
2 ) or at a point no closer to the walls than one m (3.28 feet) if the cross
sectional area is five m 2 or more and the centroid is more than one meter from
the wall. The sample shall be extracted at a rate proportional to the gas
velocity at the sampling point. The minimum sampling time shall be ten minutes
and the minimum sampling volume 0.01 dscm (0.36 dscf) for each sample. The
arithmetic average of two samples of equal sampling time shall constitute one
run. Samples shall be taken at approximately one-hour intervals.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.430   Standards of performance for unclassified sources.
   A.   No existing source which is not otherwise subject to standards of
performance under this article or
Chapter 17.16,
Article VI or
Chapter 17.16,
Article VII shall cause or permit the emission of pollutants at rates greater
than the following:
      1.   For particulate matter discharged into the atmosphere in any one
hour from any unclassified process source in total quantities in excess of the
amounts calculated by one of the following equations:
         a.   For process sources having a process weight rate of sixty
thousand pounds per hour (thirty tons per hour) or less, the maximum allowable
emissions shall be determined by the following equation:
            E = 3.59P 0.62
         where:
            E = the maximum allowable particulate emissions rate in pounds-mass
per hour.
            P = the process weight in tons-mass per hour.
         b.   For process weight rate greater than sixty thousand pounds per
hour (thirty tons per hour), the maximum allowable emissions shall be
determined by the following equation:
            E = 17.31P 0.16
         where "E" and "P" are defined as indicated in paragraph a of this
subdivision.
      2.   Sulfur dioxide—six hundred parts per million.
      3.   Nitrogen oxides expressed as NO(2)—five hundred parts per million.
   B.   For purposes of this section, the total process weight from all similar
units employing a similar type process shall be used in determining the maximum
allowable emission of particulate matter.
   C.   The actual values shall be calculated from the applicable equations and
rounded off to two decimal places.
   D.   No person shall emit gaseous or odorous materials from equipment,
operations or premises under his control in such quantities or concentrations
as to cause air pollution.
   E.   No person shall operate or use any machine, equipment or other
contrivance for the treatment or processing of animal or vegetable matter,
separately or in combination, unless all gaseous vapors and gas entrained
effluents from such operations, equipment or contrivance have been either:
      1.   Incinerated to destruction, as indicated by a temperature measuring
device, at not less than one thousand two hundred degrees Fahrenheit if
constructed or reconstructed prior to January 1, 1989, or one thousand six
hundred degrees Fahrenheit with a minimum residence time of 0.5 seconds if
constructed or reconstructed thereafter; or
      2.   Passed through such other device which is designed, installed and
maintained to prevent the emission of odors or other air contaminants and which
is approved by the control officer.
   F.   Materials including solvents or other volatile compounds, paints,
acids, alkalies, pesticides, fertilizers and manure shall be processed, stored,
used and transported in such a manner and by such means that they will not
evaporate, leak, escape or be otherwise discharged into the ambient air so as
to cause or contribute to air pollution. Where means are available to reduce
effectively the contribution to air pollution from evaporation, leakage or
discharge, the installation and use of such control methods, devices, or
equipment shall be mandatory.
   G.   Where a stack, vent or other outlet is at such a level that fumes, gas,
mist, odor, smoke, vapor or any combination thereof constituting air pollution
are discharged to adjoining property, the control officer may require the
installation of abatement equipment or the alteration of such stack, vent or
other outlet by the owner or operator thereof to a degree that will adequately
dilute, reduce or eliminate the discharge of air pollution to adjoining
property.
   H.   No person shall allow hydrogen sulfide to be emitted from any location
in such manner and amount that the concentration of such emissions into the
ambient air at any occupied place beyond the premises on which the source is
located exceeds 0.03 parts per million by volume for any averaging period of
thirty minutes or more.
   I.   No person shall cause, allow or permit discharge from any stationary
source carbon monoxide emissions without the use of complete secondary
combustion of waste gases generated by any process source.
   J.   No person shall allow hydrogen cyanide to be emitted from any location
in such manner and amount that the concentration of such emissions into the
ambient air at any occupied place beyond the premises on which the source is
located exceeds 0.3 parts per million by volume for any averaging period of
eight hours.
   K.   No person shall allow sodium cyanide dust or dust from any other solid
cyanide to be emitted from any location in such manner and amount that the
concentration of such emissions into the ambient air at any occupied place
beyond the premises on which the source is located exceeds one hundred forty
micrograms per cubic meter for any averaging period of eight hours.
(Ord. 2004-97 § 4 (part), 2004; Ord. 1994-83 § 58, 1994: Ord. 1993-128 § 4
(part), 1993)
Article V. Emissions from New and Existing Portable Sources
17.16.450   Off-road machinery.
17.16.460   Heater-planer units.
17.16.470   Roadway and site cleaning machinery.
17.16.480   Asphalt or tar kettles.
17.16.450   Off-road machinery.
   A.   No person shall cause, allow or permit to be emitted into the
atmosphere from any off-road machinery, visible emissions for any period
greater than ten consecutive seconds, the opacity of which exceeds forty
percent. Visible emissions when starting cold equipment shall be exempt from
this requirement for the first ten minutes.
   B.   Off-road machinery shall include trucks, graders, scrapers, rollers,
locomotives and other construction and mining machinery not normally driven on
a completed public roadway.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.460   Heater-planer units.
   No person shall cause, allow or permit to be emitted into the atmosphere
from any heater-planer operated for the purpose of reconstructing asphalt
pavements smoke the opacity of which exceeds twenty percent. However three
minutes' upset time in any one hour shall not constitute a violation of this
section.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.470   Roadway and site cleaning machinery.
   A.   No person shall cause, allow or permit to be emitted into the
atmosphere from any roadway and site cleaning machinery smoke or dust for any
period greater than ten consecutive seconds, the opacity of which exceeds forty
percent. Visible emissions when starting cold equipment shall be exempt from
this requirement for the first ten minutes.
   B.   In addition to complying with subsection A of this section, no person
shall cause, allow or permit the cleaning of any site, roadway, or alley
without taking reasonable precautions to prevent particulate matter from
becoming airborne. Reasonable precautions may include applying dust
suppressants. Earth or other material shall be removed from paved streets onto
which earth or other material has been transported by trucking or earth moving
equipment, erosion by water or by other means.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.480   Asphalt or tar kettles.
   A.   No person shall cause, allow or permit to be emitted into the
atmosphere from any asphalt or tar kettle smoke for any period greater than ten
consecutive seconds, the opacity of which exceeds forty percent.
   B.   In addition to complying with subsection A of this section, no person
shall cause, allow or permit the operation of an asphalt or tar kettle without
minimizing air contaminant emissions by utilizing all of the following control
measures:
      1.   The control of temperature recommended by the asphalt or tar
manufacturer;
      2.   The operation of the kettle with lid closed except when charging;
      3.   The pumping of asphalt from the kettle or the drawing of asphalt
through cocks with no dripping;
      4.   The dipping of tar in an approved manner;
      5.   The maintaining of the kettle in clean, properly adjusted, and good
operating condition;
      6.   The firing of the kettle with liquid petroleum gas or other fuels
acceptable to the control officer.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993; Ord. 1979-93 (part), 1979)
Article VI. New Source Performance Standards
17.16.490   Standards of performance for new stationary sources (NSPS).
17.16.500   Standards of performance for fossil-fuel fired steam generators.
17.16.510   Standards of performance for incinerators.
17.16.520   Standards of performance for storage vessels for petroleum liquids.
17.16.490   Standards of performance for new stationary sources (NSPS).
   A.   Except as provided in subsections B, C and D of this section, and
Sections
17.16.500 through
17.16.520, the following subparts of 40 CFR 60, New Source Performance
Standards (NSPS), and all accompanying appendices, adopted as of July 1, 2019,
unless otherwise specified, and no future editions or amendments are
incorporated by reference as applicable requirements. These standards are on
file with the department and shall be applied by the department. These
standards can be obtained from the U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Superintendent of Documents, Mail Stop SSOP, Washington D.C. 20402-9328.
      1.   Subpart A—General Provisions.
      2.   Subpart D—Fossil-Fuel-Fired Steam Generators for Which Construction
is Commenced after August 17, 1971.
      3.   Subpart Da—Electric Utility Steam Generating Units for Which
Construction is Commenced after September 18, 1978.
      4.   Subpart Db—Industrial-Commercial-Institutional Steam Generating
Units.
      5.   Subpart Dc—Small Industrial-Commercial-Institutional Steam
Generating Units.
      6.   Subpart E—Incinerators.
      7.   Subpart Ea—Municipal Waste Combustors for Which Construction is
Commenced after December 20, 1989, and on or before September 20, 1994.
      8.   Subpart Eb—Large Municipal Waste Combustors for Which Construction
is Commenced after September 20, 1994 or for Which Modification or
Reconstruction is Commenced after June 19, 1996.
      9.   Subpart Ec—Hospital/Medical/Infectious Waste Incinerators for Which
Construction is Commenced after June 20, 1996.
      10.   Subpart F—Portland Cement Plants.
      11.   Subpart G—Nitric Acid Plants.
      12.   Subpart Ga—Nitric Acid Plants for Which Construction,
Reconstruction, or Modification Commenced After October 14, 2011.
      13.   Subpart H—Sulfuric Acid Plants.
      14.   Subpart I—Hot Mix Asphalt Facilities.
      15.   Subpart J—Petroleum Refineries.
      16.   Subpart Ja—Petroleum Refineries for Which Construction,
Reconstruction, or Modification Commenced After May 14, 2007.
      17.   Subpart K—Storage Vessels for Petroleum Liquids for Which
Construction, Reconstruction, or Modification Commenced after June 11, 1973,
and Prior to May 19, 1978.
      18.   Subpart Ka—Storage Vessels for Petroleum Liquids for Which
Construction, Reconstruction, or Modification Commenced after May 18, 1978, and
Prior to July 23, 1984.
      19.   Subpart Kb—Volatile Organic Liquid Storage Vessels (Including
Petroleum Liquid Storage Vessels) for Which Construction, Reconstruction, or
Modification Commenced after July 23, 1984.
      20.   Subpart L—Secondary Lead Smelters.
      21.   Subpart M—Secondary Brass and Bronze Production Plants.
      22.   Subpart N—Primary Emissions from Basic Oxygen Process Furnaces for
Which Construction is Commenced after June 11, 1973.
      23.   Subpart Na—Secondary Emissions from Basic Oxygen Process
Steelmaking Facilities for Which Construction is Commenced after January 20,
1983.
      24.   Subpart O—Sewage Treatment Plants.
      25.   Subpart P—Primary Copper Smelters.
      26.   Subpart Q—Primary Zinc Smelters.
      27.   Subpart R—Primary Lead Smelters.
      28.   Subpart S—Primary Aluminum Reduction Plants.
      29.   Subpart T—Phosphate Fertilizer Industry: Wet-Process Phosphoric
Acid Plants.
      30.   Subpart U—Phosphate Fertilizer Industry: Superphosphoric Acid
Plants.
      31.   Subpart V—Phosphate Fertilizer Industry: Diammonium Phosphate
Plants.
      32.   Subpart W—Phosphate Fertilizer Industry: Triple Superphosphate
Plants.
      33.   Subpart X—Phosphate Fertilizer Industry: Granular Triple
Superphosphate Storage Facilities.
      34.   Subpart Y—Coal Preparation and Processing Plants.
      35.   Subpart Z—Ferroalloy Production Facilities.
      36.   Subpart AA—Steel Plants: Electric Arc Furnaces Constructed after
November 21, 1974, and on or before August 17, 1983.
      37.   Subpart AAa—Steel Plants: Electric Arc Furnaces and Argon-Oxygen
Decarburization Vessels Constructed after August 7, 1983.
      38.   Subpart BB—Kraft Pulp Mills.
      39.   Subpart BBa—Kraft Pulp Mill Affected Sources for Which
Construction, Reconstruction, or Modification Commenced After May 23, 2013.
      40.   Subpart CC—Glass Manufacturing Plants.
      41.   Subpart DD—Grain Elevators.
      42.   Subpart EE—Surface Coating of Metal Furniture.
      43.   Subpart GG—Stationary Gas Turbines.
      44.   Subpart HH—Lime Manufacturing Plants.
      45.   Subpart KK—Lead-Acid Battery Manufacturing Plants.
      46.   Subpart LL—Metallic Mineral Processing Plants.
      47.   Subpart MM—Automobile and Light Duty Truck Surface Coating
Operations.
      48.   Subpart NN—Phosphate Rock Plants.
      49.   Subpart PP—Ammonium Sulfate Manufacture.
      50.   Subpart QQ—Graphic Arts Industry: Publication Rotogravure Printing.
      51.   Subpart RR—Pressure Sensitive Tape and Label Surface Coating
Operations.
      52.   Subpart SS—Industrial Surface Coating: Large Appliances.
      53.   Subpart TT—Metal Coil Surface Coating.
      54.   Subpart UU—Asphalt Processing and Asphalt Roofing Manufacture.
      55.   Subpart VV—Equipment Leaks of VOC in the Synthetic Organic
Chemicals Manufacturing Industry.
      56.   Subpart VVa—Equipment Leaks of VOC in the Synthetic Organic
Chemicals Manufacturing Industry for Which Construction, Reconstruction, or
Modification Commenced after November 7, 2006.
      57.   Subpart WW—Beverage Can Surface Coating Industry.
      58.   Subpart XX—Bulk Gasoline Terminals.
      59.   Subpart AAA—New Residential Wood Heaters.
      60.   Subpart BBB—Rubber Tire Manufacturing Industry.
      61.   Subpart DDD—Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) Emissions from the
Polymer Manufacturing Industry.
      62.   Subpart FFF—Flexible Vinyl and Urethane Coating and Printing.
      63.   Subpart GGG—Equipment Leaks of VOC in Petroleum Refineries.
      64.   Subpart GGGa—Equipment Leaks for VOC in Petroleum Refineries for
Which Construction, Reconstruction, or Modification Commenced after November 7,
2006.
      65.   Subpart HHH—Synthetic Fiber Production Facilities.
      66.   Subpart III—Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) Emissions from the
Synthetic Organic Chemical Manufacturing Industry (SOCMI) Air Oxidation Unit
Processes.
      67.   Subpart JJJ—Petroleum Dry Cleaners.
      68.   Subpart KKK—Equipment Leaks of VOC from Onshore Natural Gas
Processing Plants.
      69.   Subpart LLL—Onshore Natural Gas Processing; SO2 Emissions.
      70.   Subpart NNN—Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) Emissions from
Synthetic Organic Chemical Manufacturing Industry (SOCMI) Distillation
Operations.
      71.   Subpart OOO—Nonmetallic Mineral Processing Plants.
      72.   Subpart PPP—Wool Fiberglass Insulation Manufacturing Plants.
      73.   Subpart QQQ—VOC Emissions from Petroleum Refinery Wastewater
Systems.
      74.   Subpart RRR—Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) Emissions from
Synthetic Organic Chemical Manufacturing Industry (SOCMI) Reactor Processes.
      75.   Subpart SSS—Magnetic Tape Coating Facilities.
      76.   Subpart TTT—Industrial Surface Coating: Surface Coating of Plastic
Parts for Business Machines.
      77.   Subpart UUU—Calciners and Dryers in Mineral Industries.
      78.   Subpart VVV—Polymeric Coating of Supporting Substrates Facilities.
      79.   Subpart WWW—Municipal Solid Waste Landfills.
      80.   Subpart XXX—Municipal Solid Waste Landfills That Commenced
Construction, Reconstruction, or Modification After July 17, 2014.
      81.   Subpart AAAA—Small Municipal Waste Combustion Units for Which
Construction is Commenced after August 30, 1999 or for Which Modification or
Reconstruction is Commenced after June 6, 2001.
      82. Subpart CCCC—ommercial and Industrial Solid Waste Incineration Units
for Which Construction is Commenced after November 30, 1999, or for Which
Modification or Reconstruction is Commenced on or after June 1, 2001.
      83.   Subpart EEEE—Other Solid Waste Incineration Units for Which
Construction is Commenced after December 9, 2004, or for Which Modification or
Reconstruction is Commenced on or after June 16, 2006.
      84.   Subpart IIII—Stationary Compression Ignition Internal Combustion
Engines.
      85.   Subpart JJJJ—Stationary Spark Ignition Internal Combustion Engines.
      86.   Subpart KKKK—Stationary Combustion Turbines.
      87.   Subpart LLLL—New Sewage Sludge Incineration Units.
      88.   Subpart OOOO—Crude Oil and Natural Gas Production, Transmission and
Distribution.
      89.   Subpart OOOOa—Crude Oil and Natural Gas Facilities for which
Construction, Modification or Reconstruction Commenced After September 18,
2015.
      90.   Subpart QQQQ—New Residential Hydronic Heaters and Forced-Air
Furnaces.
      91.   Subpart TTTT—Greenhouse Gas Emissions for Electric Generating
Units.
(Ord. 2019-28 § 4 (part), 2019; Ord. 2016-42 § 4 (part), 2016; Ord. 2008-55 § 3
(part), 2008: Ord. 2004-97 § 4 (part), 2004; Ord. 1997-79 § 9, 1997; Ord. 1994-
83 § 59, 1994: Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.500   Standards of performance for fossil-fuel fired steam generators.
   As exceptions to 40 CFR 60.40 through 60.47:
      1.   In place of 40 CFR 60.43(a)(2) the following language shall be
substituted:
         Three hundred forty nanograms per joule heat input (0.8 pounds per
million BTU) derived from solid fossil fuel or solid fossil fuel and wood
residue.
      2.   Delete 40 CFR 60.43(b).
      3.   For those persons who obtained an installation permit prior to May
14, 1979 for two or more fuel burning equipment or steam power generating
installations, which permitted such persons to comply with the sulfur dioxide
emission standards specified in Section
17.16.490 and this section as if such equipment or installations constituted
one emission discharge point:
         a.   Those persons shall comply with the applicable sulfur dioxide
emission standards in the manner specified in their installation permit.
         b.   The control officer shall incorporate such emission standards
into each person's operating permit as an enforceable permit condition.
         c.   In no event shall any one fuel burning equipment or steam power
generating installation emit sulfur dioxide in excess of:
            i.   Five hundred twenty nanograms per joule heat input (1.2 pounds
per million BTU) for solid fossil fuel or solid fossil fuel and wood residue.
            ii.   Three hundred forty nanograms per joule heat input (0.8
pounds per million BTU) for liquid fossil fuel or liquid fossil fuel and wood
residue.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.510   Standards of performance for incinerators.
   A.   Incinerators with a charging rate of more than forty-five metric tons
or 49.6 tons per day shall conform to the requirements of 40 CFR 60.50 through
60.54.
   B.   Incinerators with a charging rate of forty-five metric tons or 49.6
tons per day or less, that commence construction or modification after May 14,
1979, shall conform to the requirements of 40 CFR 60.52 through 60.54 and of
Section
17.16.170.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.520   Standards of performance for storage vessels for petroleum liquids.
   In addition to 40 CFR 60.110 through 60.113:
      1.   Any petroleum liquid storage tank of less than forty thousand
gallons (one hundred fifty-one thousand four hundred twelve liters) capacity
shall be equipped with a submerged filling device or acceptable equivalent as
determined by the control officer for the control of hydrocarbon emissions.
      2.   All facilities for dock loading of petroleum products having a vapor
pressure of 2.0 pounds per square inch absolute, or greater, at loading
pressure shall provide for submerged filling or other acceptable equivalent for
control of hydrocarbon emissions.
      3.   All pumps and compressors which handle volatile organic compounds
shall be equipped with mechanical seals or other equipment of equal efficiency
to prevent the release of organic contaminants into the atmosphere.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
Article VII. National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants
17.16.530   National Emissions Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants (NESHAP).
17.16.530   National Emissions Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants (NESHAP).
   A.   Except as provided in subsections B, C, and D of this section, the
following subparts of 40 CFR 61, National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants (NESHAP), and all accompanying appendices, adopted as of July 1,
2019, and no future editions or amendments, are incorporated by reference as
applicable requirements. These standards are on file with the department and
shall be applied by the department. These standards can be obtained from the
U.S. Government Publishing Office, Superintendent of Documents, Mail Stop SSOP,
Washington D.C. 20402-9328.
      1.   Subpart A—General Provisions.
      2.   Subpart C—Beryllium.
      3.   Subpart D—Beryllium Rocket Motor Firing.
      4.   Subpart E—Mercury.
      5.   Subpart F—Vinyl Chloride.
      6.   Subpart J—Equipment Leaks (Fugitive Emission Sources) of Benzene.
      7.   Subpart L—Benzene Emissions from Coke By-Product Recovery Plants.
      8.   Subpart M—Asbestos.
      9.   Subpart N—Inorganic Arsenic Emissions from Glass Manufacturing
Plants.
      10.   Subpart O—Inorganic Arsenic Emissions from Primary Copper Smelters.
      11.   Subpart P—Inorganic Arsenic Emissions from Arsenic Trioxide and
Metallic Arsenic Production.
      12.   Subpart V—Equipment Leaks (Fugitive Emission Sources).
      13.   Subpart Y—Benzene Emissions from Benzene Storage Vessels.
      14.   Subpart BB—Benzene Emissions from Benzene Transfer Operations.
      15.   Subpart FF—Benzene Waste Operations.
   B.   Except as provided in subsection A of this section, the following
subparts of 40 CFR 63, NESHAP for Source Categories, and all accompanying
appendices, adopted as of July 1, 2019, and no future editions or amendments,
are incorporated by reference as applicable requirements. These standards are
on file with the department and shall be applied by the department. These
standards can be obtained from the U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Superintendent of Documents, Mail Stop SSOP, Washington D.C. 20402-9328. 
      1.   Subpart A—General Provisions.
      2.   Subpart B—Requirements for Control Technology Determinations for
Major Sources in Accordance with Clean Air Act Sections 112(g) and 112(j).
      3.   Subpart D—Regulations Governing Compliance Extensions for Early
Reductions of Hazardous Air Pollutants.
      4.   Subpart F—National Emission Standards for Organic Hazardous Air
Pollutants from the Synthetic Organic Chemical Manufacturing Industry.
      5.   Subpart G—National Emission Standards for Organic Hazardous Air
Pollutants from the Synthetic Organic Chemical Manufacturing Industry for
Process Vents, Storage Vessels, Transfer Operations, and Wastewater.
      6.   Subpart H—National Emission Standards for Organic Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Equipment Leaks.
      7.   Subpart I—National Emission Standards for Organic Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Certain Processes Subject to the Negotiated Regulation for
Equipment Leaks.
      8.   Subpart J—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants
for Polyvinyl Chloride and Copolymers Production.
      9.   Subpart L—National Emission Standards for Coke Oven Batteries.
      10.   Subpart M—National Perchloroethylene Air Emission Standards for Dry
Cleaning Facilities.
      11.   Subpart N—National Emission Standards for Chromium Emissions from
Hard and Decorative Chromium Electroplating and Chromium Anodizing Tanks.
      12.   Subpart O—Ethylene Oxide Emissions Standards for Sterilization
Facilities.
      13.   Subpart Q—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants
for Industrial Process Cooling Towers.
      14.   Subpart R—National Emission Standards for Gasoline Distribution
Facilities (Bulk Gasoline Terminals and Pipeline Breakout Stations).
      15.   Subpart S—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants
from the Pulp and Paper Industry.
      16.   Subpart T—National Emission Standards for Halogenated Solvent
Cleaning.
      17.   Subpart U—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutant
Emissions: Group I Polymers and Resins.
      18.   Subpart W—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants
for Epoxy Resins Production and Non-Nylon Polyamides Production.
      19.   Subpart X—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants
from Secondary Lead Smelting.
      20.   Subpart Y—National Emission Standards for Marine Tank Vessel
Loading Operations.
      21. Subpart AA—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants
from Phosphoric Acid Manufacturing Plants.
      22.   Subpart BB—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants
from Phosphate Fertilizers Production Plants.
      23.   Subpart CC—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants
from Petroleum Refineries.
      24.   Subpart DD—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants
from Off-Site Waste and Recovery Operations.
      25.   Subpart EE—National Emission Standards for Magnetic Tape
Manufacturing Operations.
      26.   Subpart GG—National Emission Standards for Aerospace Manufacturing
and Rework Facilities.
      27.   Subpart HH—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants
from Oil and Natural Gas Production Facilities.
      28.   Subpart JJ—National Emission Standards for Wood Furniture
Manufacturing Operations.
      29.   Subpart KK—National Emission Standards for the Printing and
Publishing Industry.
      30.   Subpart LL—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants
for Primary Aluminum Reduction Plants.
      31.   Subpart MM—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants
for Chemical Recovery Combustion Sources at Kraft, Soda, Sulfite, and Stand-
Alone Semichemical Pulp Mills.
      32.   Subpart NN—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants
for Wool Fiberglass Manufacturing at Area Sources.
      33.   Subpart OO—National Emission Standards for Tanks-Level 1.
      34. Subpart PP-National Emission Standards for Containers.
      35.   Subpart QQ—National Emission Standards for Surface Impoundments.
      36.   Subpart RR—National Emission Standards for Individual Drain
Systems.
      37.   Subpart SS—National Emission Standards for Closed Vent Systems,
Control Devices, Recovery Devices and Routing to a Fuel Gas System or a
Process.
      38.   Subpart TT—National Emission Standards for Equipment Leaks-Control
Level 1.
      39.   Subpart UU—National Emission Standards for Equipment Leaks-Control
Level 2 Standards.
      40.   Subpart VV—National Emission Standards for Oil-Water Separators and
Organic-Water Separators.
      41.   Subpart WW—National Emission Standards for Storage Vessels (Tanks)-
Control Level 2.
      42.   Subpart XX—National Emission Standards for Ethylene Manufacturing
Process Units: Heat Exchange Systems and Waste Operations.
      43.   Subpart YY—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants
for Source Categories: Generic Maximum Achievable Control Technology Standards.
      44.   Subpart CCC—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Steel Pickling-HCl Process Facilities and Hydrochloric Acid
Regeneration Plants.
      45.   Subpart DDD—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Mineral Wool Production.
      46.   Subpart EEE—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants from Hazardous Waste Combustors.
      47.   Subpart GGG—National Emission Standards for Pharmaceuticals
Production.
      48.   Subpart HHH—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants from Natural Gas Transmission and Storage Facilities.
      49.   Subpart III—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Flexible Polyurethane Foam Production.
      50.   Subpart JJJ—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutant
Emissions: Group IV Polymers and Resins.
      51.   Subpart LLL—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants from the Portland Cement Manufacturing Industry.
      52.   Subpart MMM—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Pesticide Active Ingredient Production.
      53.   Subpart NNN—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Wool Fiberglass Manufacturing.
      54.   Subpart OOO—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutant
Emissions: Manufacture of Amino/Phenolic Resins.
      55.   Subpart PPP—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutant
Emissions for Polyether Polyols Production.
      56.   Subpart QQQ—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Primary Copper Smelting.
      57.   Subpart RRR—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Secondary Aluminum Production.
      58.   Subpart TTT—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Primary Lead Smelting.
      59.   Subpart UUU—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Petroleum Refineries: Catalytic Cracking Units, Catalytic
Reforming Units, and Sulfur Recovery Units.
      60.   Subpart VVV—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Publicly Owned Treatment Works.
      61.   Subpart XXX—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Ferroalloys Production: Ferromanganese and Silicomanganese.
      62.   Subpart AAAA—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Municipal Solid Waste Landfills.
      63.   Subpart CCCC—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Manufacturing of Nutritional Yeast.
      64.   Subpart DDDD—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Plywood and Composite Wood Products.
      65.   Subpart EEEE—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Organic Liquids Distribution (Non-Gasoline).
      66.   Subpart FFFF—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Miscellaneous Organic Chemical Manufacturing.
      67.   Subpart GGGG—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Solvent Extraction for Vegetable Oil Production.
      68.   Subpart HHHH—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Wet-Formed Fiberglass Mat Production.
      69.   Subpart IIII—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Surface Coating of Automobiles and Light-Duty Trucks.
      70.   Subpart JJJJ—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Paper and Other Web Coating.
      71.   Subpart KKKK—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Surface Coating of Metal Cans.
   72.   Subpart MMMM—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants
for Surface Coating of Miscellaneous Metal Parts and Products.
      73.   Subpart NNNN—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Surface Coating of Large Appliances.
      74.   Subpart OOOO—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Printing, Coating, and Dyeing of Fabrics and Other Textiles.
      75.   Subpart PPPP—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Surface Coating of Plastic Parts and Products.
      76.   Subpart QQQQ—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Surface Coating of Wood Building Products.
      77.   Subpart RRRR—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Surface Coating of Metal Furniture.
      78.   Subpart SSSS—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Surface Coating of Metal Coil.
      79.   Subpart TTTT—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Leather Finishing Operations.
      80.   Subpart UUUU—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Cellulose Products Manufacturing.
      81.   Subpart VVVV—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Boat Manufacturing.
      82.   Subpart WWWW—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Reinforced Plastics Composites Production.
      83.   Subpart XXXX—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Rubber Tire Manufacturing.
      84.   Subpart YYYY—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Stationary Combustion Turbines.
      85.   Subpart ZZZZ—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Stationary Reciprocating Internal Combustion Engines.
      86.   Subpart AAAAA—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Lime Manufacturing Plants.
      87.   Subpart BBBBB—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Semiconductor Manufacturing.
      88.   Subpart CCCCC—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Coke Ovens: Pushing, Quenching and Battery Stacks.
      89.   Subpart DDDDD—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Industrial, Commercial, and Institutional Boilers and Process
Heaters.
      90.   Subpart EEEEE—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Iron and Steel Foundries.
      91.   Subpart FFFFF—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Integrated Iron and Steel Manufacturing Facilities.
      92.   Subpart GGGGG—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Site Remediation.
      93.   Subpart HHHHH—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Miscellaneous Coating Manufacturing.
      94.   Subpart IIIII—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Mercury Emissions from Mercury Cell Chlor-Alkali Plants.
      95.   Subpart JJJJJ—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Brick and Structural Clay Products Manufacturing.
      96.   Subpart KKKKK—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Clay Ceramics Manufacturing.
      97.   Subpart LLLLL—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Asphalt Processing and Asphalt Roofing Manufacturing.
      98.   Subpart MMMMM—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Flexible Polyurethane Foam Fabrication Operations.
      99.   Subpart NNNNN—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Hydrochloric Acid Production.
      100.   Subpart PPPPP—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Engine Test Cells/Stands.
      101.   Subpart QQQQQ—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Friction Materials Manufacturing Facilities.
      102.   Subpart RRRRR—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Taconite Iron Ore Processing.
      103.   Subpart SSSSS—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Refractory Products Manufacturing.
      104.   Subpart TTTTT—National Emissions Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Primary Magnesium Refining.
      105.   Subpart UUUUU—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Coal- and Oil-Fired Electric Utility Steam Generating Units.
      106.   Subpart WWWWW—National Emission Standards for Hospital Ethylene
Oxide Sterilizer.
      107.   Subpart YYYYY—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Area Sources: Electric Arc Furnace Steelmaking Facilities.
      108.   Subpart ZZZZZ—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Iron and Steel Foundries Area Sources.
      109.   Subpart BBBBBB—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Source Category: Gasoline Distribution Bulk Terminals, Bulk
Plants, and Pipeline Facilities.
      110.   Subpart CCCCCC—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Source Category: Gasoline Dispensing Facilities.
      111.   Subpart DDDDDD—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Polyvinyl Chloride and Copolymers Production Area Sources.
      112.   Subpart EEEEEE—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Primary Copper Smelting Area Sources.
      113.   Subpart FFFFFF—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Secondary Copper Smelting Area Sources.
      114.   Subpart GGGGGG—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Primary Nonferrous Metals Area Sources-Zinc, Cadmium, and
Beryllium.
      115.   Subpart HHHHHH—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Paint Stripping and Miscellaneous Surface Coating Operations at
Area Sources.
      116.   Subpart JJJJJJ—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Industrial, Commercial, and Institutional Boilers Area Sources.
      117.   Subpart LLLLLL—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Acrylic and Modacrylic Fibers Production Area Sources.
      118.   Subpart MMMMMM—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Carbon Black Production Area Sources.
      119.   Subpart NNNNNN—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Chemical Manufacturing Area Sources: Chromium Compounds.
      120.   Subpart OOOOOO—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Flexible Polyurethane Foam Production and Fabrication Area
Sources.
      121.   Subpart PPPPPP—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Lead Acid Battery Manufacturing Area Sources.
      122.   Subpart QQQQQQ—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Wood Preserving Area Sources.
      123.   Subpart RRRRRR—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Clay Ceramics Manufacturing Area Sources.
      124.   Subpart SSSSSS—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Glass Manufacturing Area Sources.
      125.   Subpart TTTTTT—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Secondary Nonferrous Metals Processing Area Sources.
      126.   Subpart VVVVVV—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Chemical Manufacturing Area Sources.
      127.   Subpart WWWWWW—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Plating and Polishing Operations.
      128.   Subpart XXXXXX—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants Area Source Standards for Nine Metal Fabrication and Finishing
Source Categories.
      129.   Subpart YYYYYY—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Area Sources: Ferroalloys Production Facilities.
      130.   Subpart ZZZZZZ—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Area Source Standards for Aluminum, Copper, and Other Nonferrous
Foundries.
      131.   Subpart AAAAAAA—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Area Sources: Asphalt Processing and Asphalt Roofing
Manufacturing.
      132.   Subpart BBBBBBB—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Area Sources: Chemical Preparations Industry.
      133.   Subpart CCCCCCC—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Area Sources: Paints and Allied Products Manufacturing.
      134.   Subpart DDDDDDD—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants for Area Sources: Prepared Feeds Manufacturing.
      135.   Subpart EEEEEEE—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutants: Gold Mine Ore Processing and Production Area Source Category.
      136.   Subpart HHHHHHH—National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
Pollutant Emissions for Polyvinyl Chloride and Copolymers Production.
   C.   When used in 40 CFR 61 or 63, "Administrator" means the control officer
except that the control officer shall not be authorized to approve alternate or
equivalent test methods or alternate standards or work practices, except as
specifically provided in 40 CFR 63 Subpart B.
   D.   From the general standards identified in subsection A of this section
delete 40 CFR 61.04. All requests, reports, applications, submittals and other
communications to the control officer pursuant to this article shall be
submitted to the Pima County Department of Environmental Quality, 150 W.
Congress, Tucson, AZ 85701.
   E.   The control officer shall not be delegated authority to deal with
equivalency determinations that are nontransferable through Section 112(h)(3)
of the Act.
(Ord. 2019-28 § 4 (part), 2019; Ord. 2016-42 § 4 (part), 2016; Ord. 2008-55 § 3
(part), 2008: Ord. 2005-43 § 3 (part), 2005; Ord. 2004-97 § 4 (part), 2004;
Ord. 1998-27 § 15, 1998; Ord. 1997-79 § 10, 1997; Ord. 1995-87 § 49, 1995: Ord.
1994-83 § 60, 1994: Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
Article VIII. New Major Sources and Major Modifications to Existing Major
Sources
17.16.550   General.
17.16.560   Permits for sources located in nonattainment areas.
17.16.570   Offset and net air quality benefit standards.
17.16.580   Special rule for sources of VOC or oxides of nitrogen in ozone
nonattainment areas classified as serious or severe.
17.16.590   Permit requirements for sources located in attainment and
unclassifiable areas.
17.16.600   Air quality impact analysis and monitoring requirements.
17.16.610   Innovative control technology.
17.16.620   Air quality models.
17.16.630   Visibility protection.
17.16.640   Special rule for non-operating sources of sulfur dioxide in sulfur
dioxide nonattainment areas.
17.16.550   General.
   A.   No person shall commence construction of a new major source or the
major modification of a source without first obtaining a permit or a permit
revision from the control officer. For purposes of this article, "major source"
shall have the same meaning as defined in A.A.C. R18-2-401.
   B.   An application for a permit or permit revision under this article shall
not be considered complete unless the application demonstrates that:
      1.   The requirements in subsection C of this section are met.
      2.   The more stringent of the applicable new source performance
standards in
Article VI or the existing source performance standards in
Article IV are applied to the proposed new major source or major modification
of a major source.
      3.   The visibility requirements contained in Section
17.16.630 are satisfied.
      4.   All applicable provisions of
Chapters 17.11,
17.12, and
17.13 are met.
      5.   The new major source or major modification will be in compliance
with whatever emission limitation, design, equipment, work practice or
operational standard, or combination thereof is applicable to the source or
modification.
         a.   The degree of emission limitation required for control of any
pollutant under this article shall not be affected in any manner by:
         i.   Stack height in excess of GEP stack height except as provided in
Section
17.11.150, or
         ii.   Any other dispersion technique, unless implemented prior to
December 31, 1970.
      6.   The new major source or major modification will not exceed the
applicable standards for hazardous air pollutants contained in this title.
      7.   The new major source or major modification will not exceed the
limitations, if applicable, on emission from nonpoint sources contained in
Article III of this chapter.
      8.   A stationary source that will emit five or more tons of lead per
year will not violate the ambient air quality standards for lead as contained
in Section
17.08.070.
      9.   The new major source or major modification will not have an adverse
impact on visibility, as determined according to Section
17.16.630.
   C.   Except for assessing air quality impacts within Class I areas, the air
impact analysis required to be conducted in connection with the filing for a
permit shall initially consider only the geographical area located within a
fifty kilometer radius from the point of greatest emissions for the new major
source or major modification. The control officer (on his own initiative or
upon receipt of written notice from any person) shall have the right at any
time to request an enlargement of the geographical area for which an air
quality impact analysis is to be performed by giving the person applying for
the permit or permit revision written notice thereof, specifying the enlarged
radius to be so considered. In performing an air impact analysis for any
geographical area with a radius of more than fifty kilometers, the person
applying for the permit or permit revision may use monitoring or modeling data
obtained from major sources having comparable emissions or having emissions
which are capable of being accurately used in such demonstration, and which are
subjected to terrain and atmospheric stability conditions which are comparable
or which may be extrapolated with reasonable accuracy for use in such
demonstration.
   D.   Unless the requirements have been satisfied pursuant to
Chapters 17.11,
17.12, and
17.13, the control officer shall comply with following requirements:
      1.   Within sixty days after receipt of an application for a permit or
permit revision subject to this article, or any addition to such application,
the control officer shall advise the applicant of any deficiency, the date of
receipt of the application shall be, for the purpose of this section, the date
on which the control officer received all required information. The permit
application shall not be deemed complete if the control officer fails to meet
the requirements of this subdivision.
      2.   A copy of any notice required by Sections
17.12.190 and
17.13.210 shall be sent to the permit applicant, to the administrator, and to
the following officials and agencies having cognizance over the location where
the proposed major source or major modification would occur:
         a.   The air pollution control officer, if one exists, for the county
wherein the proposed or existing source that is the subject of the permit or
permit revision application is located;
         b.   The county manager for the county wherein the proposed or
existing source that is the subject of the permit or permit revision
application is located;
         c.   The city or town managers of the city or town which contains, and
any city or town the boundaries of which are within five miles of, the location
of the proposed or existing source that is the subject of the permit or permit
revision;
         d.   Any regional land use planning agency with authority for land use
planning in the area where the proposed or existing source that is the subject
of the permit or permit revision application is located; and
         e.   Any state, federal land manager, or Indian governing body whose
lands may be affected by emissions from the proposed source or modification.
      3.   The control officer shall take final action on the application
within one year of the proper filing of the completed application. The control
officer shall notify the applicant in writing of his approval or denial.
      4.   The control officer shall cancel a permit or permit revision under
this article if the proposed construction or major modification is not begun
within eighteen months of issuance, or if during the construction or major
modification, work is suspended for more than eighteen months.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 3 (part), 2017: Ord. 1996-50 § 6, 1996: Ord. 1994-83 § 62,
1994: Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.560   Permits for sources located in nonattainment areas.
   A.   Except as provided in subsections C through G of this section, no
permit or permit revision shall be issued to a person proposing to construct a
new major source or make a major modification to a source located in any
nonattainment area for the pollutant(s) for which the source is classified as a
major source or the modification is classified as a major modification unless:
      1.   The person demonstrates that the new major source or the major
modification will meet an emission limitation which is the lowest achievable
emission rate (LAER) for that source for that specific pollutant(s). In
determining lowest achievable emission rate for a reconstructed stationary
source, the provisions of 40 CFR 60.15(f)(4) shall be taken into account in
assessing whether a new source performance standard is applicable to such
stationary source;
      2.   The person demonstrates that all existing major sources owned or
operated by that person (or any entity controlling, controlled by, or under
common control with that person) in the state are in compliance or on a
schedule of compliance with all conditions contained in permits of each of the
sources and all other applicable emission limitations and standards under the
Act and this title;
      3.   The person demonstrates that emission reductions for the specific
pollutant(s) from source(s) in existence in the allowable offset area of the
new major source or major modification (whether or not under the same
ownership) meet the offset and net air quality benefit requirements of Section
17.16.570.
   B.   No permit or permit revision under this article shall be issued to a
person proposing to construct a new major source or make a major modification
to a major source located in a nonattainment area unless:
      1.   The person performs an analysis of alternative sites, sizes,
production processes and environmental control techniques for such new major
source or major modification; and
      2.   The control officer determines that the analysis demonstrates that
the benefits of the new major source or major modification outweigh the
environmental and social costs imposed as a result of its location,
construction or modification.
   C.   At such time that a particular source or modification becomes a major
stationary source or major modification solely by virtue of a relaxation in any
enforceable limitation which was established after August 7, 1980, on the
capacity of the source or modification otherwise to emit a pollutant, such as
restriction on hours of operation, then the requirements of this section shall
apply to the source or modification as though construction had not yet
commenced on the source or modification.
   D.   Secondary emissions shall not be considered in determining the
potential to emit of a new source or modification and therefore whether the new
source or modification is major. However, if a new source or modification is
subject to this section on the basis of its direct emissions, permit or permit
revision under this article to construct the new source or modification shall
be denied unless the conditions specified in subdivisions 1 and 2 of subsection
A of this section are met for reasonably quantifiable secondary emissions
caused by the new source or modification.
   E.   A permit to construct a new source or modification shall be denied
unless the conditions specified in subdivisions 1, 2, and 3 of subsection A of
this section are met for fugitive emissions caused by the new source or
modification. However, these conditions shall not apply to a new major source
or major modification that would be a major source or major modification only
if fugitive emissions, to the extent quantifiable, are considered in
calculating the potential emissions of the source or modification, and the
source is not either a categorical source or belongs to the category of sources
for which New Source Performance Standards under 40 CFR Part 60 or National
Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants under 40 CFR Part 61 were
promulgated by the administrator prior to August 7, 1980.
   F.   The requirements of (A)(3) of this section shall not apply to temporary
emission sources, such as pilot plants and portable sources, which are only
temporarily located in the nonattainment area, are otherwise regulated by a
permit, and are in compliance with the conditions of that permit.
   G.   A decrease in actual emissions shall be considered in determining the
potential of a new source or modification to emit only to the extent that the
control officer has not relied on it in issuing any permit or permit revision
under this article or the state has not relied on it in demonstrating
attainment or reasonable further progress.
   H.   Within thirty days of the issuance of any permit under this section,
the control officer shall submit control technology information from the permit
to the administrator for the purposes listed in Section 173(d) of the Act.
(Ord. 1994-83 § 63, 1994: Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.570   Offset and net air quality benefit standards.
   A.   Increased emissions by a major source or major modification subject to
this article shall be offset by reductions in the emissions of each pollutant
for which the area has been designated as nonattainment and for which the
source or modification is classified as major. Such offset may be obtained by
reductions in emissions from the source or modification, or from any other
source in existence within the allowable offset area, on the startup date of
the new major source or major modification.
      1.   Credit for an emissions offset can be used only if it has not been
relied upon in demonstrating attainment or reasonable further progress, and if
it has not been relied upon previously in issuing a permit or permit revision
under this article pursuant to Sections
17.16.550 and
17.16.560 or not otherwise required under this chapter or under any provision
of the SIP.
   B.   An offset shall not be sufficient unless reductions of total emissions
for the particular pollutant for which the offset is required will be:
      1.   Obtained from sources within the allowable offset area;
      2.   Contemporary with the operation of the new major source or major
modification;
      3.   Less than the baseline of the total emissions for that pollutant,
except in ozone nonattainment areas classified as moderate, serious or severe;
and
      4.   Sufficient to demonstrate that emissions from the new major source
or major modification, together with the offset, will result in reasonable
further progress for that pollutant.
   C.   In ozone nonattainment areas classified as marginal, total emissions of
VOC and oxides of nitrogen from other sources shall offset those proposed or
permitted from the major source or major modification by a ratio of at least
1.10 to 1. In ozone nonattainment areas classified as moderate, total emissions
of VOC and oxides of nitrogen from other sources shall offset those proposed or
permitted from the major source or major modification by a ratio of at least
1.15 to 1. New major sources and major modifications in serious and severe
ozone nonattainment areas shall conform to the requirements of this section and
Section
17.16.580.
   D.   Only intrapollutant emission offsets shall be allowed. Intrapollutant
emission offsets for precursors of ozone shall include offset reductions in
emissions of volatile organic compounds. Intrapollutant emission offsets for
precursors of nitrogen dioxide shall include offset reductions in emissions of
oxides of nitrogen.
   E.   For purposes of this section, "reasonable further progress" means
compliance with the schedule of annual incremental reductions in emissions of
the applicable air pollutant prescribed by the control officer based on air
quality modeling under Section
17.16.620, to provide for attainment of the applicable air quality standards by
the deadlines set under Part D of Title I of the Act, or in an applicable
implementation plan.
   F.   For purposes of this section, "net air quality benefit" shall mean that
during similar time periods either 1 or 2 below, is applicable:
      1.   A reduction in the number of violations of the applicable Arizona
ambient air quality standard within the allowable offset area has occurred and
the following mathematical expression is satisfied:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4394.png]
         C = The applicable Arizona ambient air quality standard.
         x i = The concentration level of the violation at the i th receptor
for such pollutant after offsets.
         N = The number of violations for such pollutant after offsets (N < K).
         xj = The concentration level of the violation at the j th receptor
from such pollutant before offsets.
         K = The number of violations for such pollutant before offsets.
      2.   The average of the ambient concentrations within the allowable
offset area following the implementation of the contemplated offsets will be
less than the average of the ambient concentrations within the allowable offset
area without the offsets.
   G.   Baseline Further Defined:
      1.   For the purpose of this section, the baseline of total emissions
from any sources in existence or sources which have obtained a permit or permit
revision under this article (regardless of whether or not such sources are in
actual operation at the time of filing of the permit or permit revision) shall
be the total emissions allowed by the regulatory emission limitations in effect
at the time the application is filed. In addition, the baseline of total
emissions shall consist of all emission limitations included as conditions on
federally enforceable permits except that the offset baseline shall be the
actual emissions of the source from which offset credit is obtained where:
         a.   No emission limitations are applicable to a source from which
offsets are being sought; or
         b.   The demonstration of reasonable further progress and attainment
of ambient air quality standards is based upon the actual emissions of sources
located within a designated nonattainment area.
      2.   Where the emission limitations for a particular pollutant allow
greater emissions than the actual emission rate of the source for that
pollutant, the baseline shall be the actual emission rate at the time the
permit or permit revision application under this article is filed and emissions
offset credit shall be allowed only for control below the actual emission rate.
   H.   For an existing fuel combustion source, offset credit shall be based on
the allowable emissions under the regulations or permit conditions applicable
to the source for the type of fuel being burned at the time the permit or
permit revision application under this article is filed. If an existing source
commits to switch to a cleaner fuel at some future date, emissions offset
credit based on the actual emissions for the fuels involved shall not be
acceptable unless:
      1.   The permit or permit revision under this article for the source
specifically requires the use of a specified alternative control measure which
would achieve the same degree of emissions reduction should the source switch
back to a dirtier fuel at some later date; and
      2.   The source demonstrates to the satisfaction of the control officer
that it has secured an adequate long-term supply of the cleaner fuel.
   I.   Offsets shall be made on either a pounds-per-hour, pounds-per-day, or
tons-per-year basis, whichever is applicable, when all facilities involved in
the emission offset calculations are operating at their maximum expected or
allowed production rate and, except as otherwise provided in subsection H of
this section, utilizing the type of fuel burned at the time the permit or
permit revision application under this article is filed. A tons-per-year basis
shall not be used if the new or modified source or the source offsets is not
expected to operate throughout the entire year. No emissions credit may be
allowed for replacing one VOC with another VOC of lesser reactivity.
   J.   Emissions reductions achieved by shutting down an existing source or
permanently curtailing production or operating hours below baseline levels may
be credited, provided that the work force to be affected has been notified of
the proposed shutdown or curtailment. No offset credit for shutdowns or
curtailments shall be provided for emissions reductions that are necessary to
bring a source into compliance with RACT or any other standard under an
applicable implementation plan. Source shutdowns and curtailments in production
or operating hours occurring prior to the date the new major source or major
modification application is filed generally may not be used for emissions
offset credit except as follows: where an applicant can establish that it shut
down or curtailed production after August 7, 1977, or less than one year prior
to the date of application for the permit or permit revision under this
article, whichever is earlier, and the proposed new major source or major
modification is a replacement for the shutdown or curtailment, credit for such
shutdown or curtailment may be applied to offset emissions from the new source
or modification.
   K.   The allowable offset area shall refer to the geographical area in which
the sources whose emissions are being sought for purposes of offsetting
emissions from a new major source or major modification are located. For the
pollutants sulfur dioxide, particulate matter and carbon monoxide, the
allowable offset area shall be determined by atmospheric dispersion modeling.
If the emission offsets are obtained from a source on the same premises or in
the immediate vicinity of the new major source or major modification, and the
pollutants disperse from substantially the same effective stack height,
atmospheric dispersion modeling shall not be required. The allowable offset
area for all other pollutants shall be the nonattainment areas for those
pollutants within which the new major source or major modification is to be
located.
   L.   An emission reduction may only be used to offset emissions if the
reduced level of emissions will continue for the life of the new source or
modification and if the reduced level of emissions is federally and legally
enforceable. It shall be considered legally enforceable if the following
conditions are met by the time such source or modification commences operation:
      1.   The emission reduction is included as a condition in the permit of
the source relied upon to offset the emissions from the new major source or
major modification, or in the case of reductions from sources controlled by the
applicant, is included as a condition of the permit or permit revision under
this article for the new major source or major modification, or is adopted as a
part of these rules or comparable rules and regulations of any other
governmental entity or is contractually enforceable by the Department.
      2.   The permit conditions, regulations, or contractual conditions
containing, governing or otherwise describing the emission reduction have been
approved by the administrator for inclusion in the State Implementation Plan
adopted pursuant to Section 110 of the Act (Implementation Plans).
(Ord. 1994-83 § 64, 1994: Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.580   Special rule for sources of VOC or oxides of nitrogen in ozone
nonattainment areas classified as serious or severe.
   A.   Applicability. The provisions of this section only apply to stationary
sources of VOC or oxides of nitrogen in ozone nonattainment areas classified as
serious or severe. Unless otherwise provided in this section, all requirements
of
Chapters 17.11,
17.12, and
17.13 and
Articles III and
IV of this chapter apply.
   B.   "Significant" means, for the purposes of a major modification of any
stationary source of VOC or oxides of nitrogen, any physical changes or changes
in the method of operations that results in net increases in emissions of
either pollutant by more than twenty-five tons when aggregated with all other
creditable increases in emissions from the source over the prior five
consecutive calendar years, including the calendar year in which the increase
is proposed. Emissions decreases shall only be creditable if they are
simultaneous with the proposed modification.
   C.   For any stationary source that emits or has the potential to emit less
than one hundred tons VOC or oxides of nitrogen per year, a significant
increase in VOC or oxides of nitrogen from any discrete emitting unit,
operation, or other pollutant emitting activity shall constitute a major
modification unless the increase in emissions is offset from other units,
operations or activities at the source at a ratio of 1.3 to one for the
increase in VOC or oxides of nitrogen emissions from such unit, operation or
activity within the facility only. If such a change qualifies as a major
modification under this section, BACT shall be substituted for LAER. Net
emissions increases in VOC or oxides of nitrogen above the internal offset
described herein shall be subject to the offset requirements in subsections E
and F of this section.
   D.   For any stationary source that emits or has the potential to emit one
hundred tons or more of VOC or oxides of nitrogen per year, any significant
increase in VOC or oxides of nitrogen emissions from any discrete emitting
unit, operation, or other pollutant emitting activity shall constitute a major
modification. If the increase in emissions from such modification is offset
from other units, operations or activities at the source at a ratio of 1.3 to
one for the increase in VOC or oxides of nitrogen emissions from such unit,
operation or activity, BACT shall be substituted for LAER. Net emissions
increases in VOC or oxides of nitrogen above the internal offset described
herein shall be subject to the offset requirements in subsections E and F of
this section.
   E.   For any new major source or major modification which is classified as
such because of emissions or potential to emit VOC or oxides of nitrogen in an
ozone nonattainment area classified as serious, the increase in emissions of
these pollutants from such source or modification shall be offset at a ratio of
1.2 to one. Such offset shall be made in accordance with the provisions of
Section
17.16.570.
   F.   For any new major source or major modification which is classified as
such because of emissions or potential to emit VOC or oxides of nitrogen in an
ozone nonattainment area classified as severe, the increase in emissions of
these pollutants from such source or modification shall be offset at a ratio of
1.3 to one. If the SIP requires all existing major sources of these pollutants
in the nonattainment area to apply BACT, then the offset ratio shall be 1.2 to
one. All such offsets shall be made in accordance with the provisions of
Section
17.16.570.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 3 (part), 2017: Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.590   Permit requirements for sources located in attainment and
unclassifiable areas.
   A.   Except as provided in subsections B through G of this section and
Section
17.16.610, Innovative control technology, no permit or permit revision under
this article shall be issued to a person proposing to construct a new major
source or make a major modification to a major source that would be constructed
in an area designated as attainment or unclassifiable for any pollutant unless
the source or modification meets the following conditions:
      1.   A new major source shall apply best available control technology
(BACT) for each pollutant listed in Section
17.04.340(A)(212)(a) for which the potential to emit is significant.
      2.   A major modification shall apply BACT for each pollutant listed in
Section
17.04.340(A)(212)(a) for which the modification would result in a significant
net emissions increase at the source. This requirement applies to each proposed
emissions unit at which a net emissions increase in the pollutant would occur
as a result of a physical change or change in the method of operation in the
unit.
      3.   For phased construction projects, the determination of BACT shall be
reviewed and modified as appropriate at the latest reasonable time which occurs
no later than eighteen months prior to commencement of construction of each
independent phase of the project. At such time the owner or operator of the
applicable stationary source may be required to demonstrate the adequacy of any
previous determination of BACT for the source.
      4.   BACT shall be determined on a case-by-case basis and may constitute
application of production processes or available methods, systems, and
techniques, including fuel cleaning or treatment or innovative fuel combustion
techniques, for control of such pollutant. In no event shall such application
of BACT result in emissions of any pollutant, which would exceed the emissions
allowed by any applicable new source performance standard or national emission
standard for hazardous air pollutants under
Article VI of this chapter. If the control officer determines that
technological or economic limitations on the application of measurement
methodology to a particular emissions unit would make the imposition of an
emissions standard infeasible, a design, equipment, work practice, operational
standard or combination thereof, may be prescribed instead to satisfy the
requirement for the application of BACT. Such standard shall, to the degree
possible, set forth the emissions reduction achievable by implementation of
such design, equipment, work practice or operation, and shall provide for
compliance by means which achieve equivalent results.
      5.   The person applying for the permit or permit revision under this
article performs an air impact analysis and monitoring as specified in Section
17.16.600 and such analysis demonstrates that allowable emission increases from
the proposed new major source or major modification, in conjunction with all
other applicable emission increases or reductions, including secondary
emissions, for all pollutants listed in
Table 17.08.150, and minor and mobile sources for oxides of nitrogen:
         a.   Would not cause or contribute to an increase in concentrations of
any pollutant by an amount in excess of any applicable baseline concentration
in
Table 17.08.150 for any attainment or unclassified area; or
         b.   Would not contribute to an increase in ambient concentrations for
a pollutant by an amount in excess of the significance level for such pollutant
in any area in which Arizona primary or secondary ambient air quality standards
for that pollutant are being violated. A new major source of volatile organic
compounds or oxides of nitrogen, or a major modification to a major source of
volatile organic compounds or oxides of nitrogen shall be presumed to
contribute to violations of the Arizona ambient air quality standards for ozone
if it will be located within fifty kilometers of a nonattainment area for
ozone. The presumption may be rebutted for a new major source or major
modification if it can be satisfactorily demonstrated to the control officer
that emissions of volatile organic compounds or oxides of nitrogen from the new
major source or major modification will not contribute to violations of the
Arizona ambient air quality standards for ozone in adjacent nonattainment areas
for ozone. Such a demonstration shall include a showing that topographical,
meteorological or other physical factors in the vicinity of the new major
source or major modification are such that transport of volatile organic
compounds emitted from the source are not expected to contribute to violations
of the ozone standards in the adjacent nonattainment areas.
      6.   Air Quality Models.
         a.   All estimates of ambient concentrations required under this
section shall be based on the applicable air quality models, data basis, and
other requirements specified in 40 CFR 51, Appendix W, "Guideline On Air
Quality Models," as of July 1, 2004 (and no future amendments or editions),
which shall be referred to hereinafter as "Guideline", and is adopted by
reference and is on file with PDEQ.
         b.   Where an air quality impact model specified in the "Guideline" is
inappropriate, the model may be modified or another model substituted. Such a
change shall be subject to notice and opportunity for public comment. Written
approval of the EPA administrator shall be obtained for any modification or
substitution.
   B.   The requirements of this section shall not apply to a new major source
or major modification to a source with respect to a particular pollutant if the
person applying for the permit or permit revision under this article
demonstrates that, as to that pollutant, the source or modification is located
in an area designated as nonattainment for the pollutant.
   C.   The requirements of this section shall not apply to a new major source
or major modification of a source if such source or modification would be a
major source or major modification only if fugitive emissions, to the extent
quantifiable, are considered in calculating the potential emissions of the
source or modification, and the source is not either among the Categorical
Sources listed in
Chapter 17.04,
Article IX or belongs to the category of sources for which New Source
Performance Standards under 40 CFR Part 60 or National Emission Standards for
Hazardous Air Pollutants under 40 CFR Part 61 promulgated by the administrator
prior to August 7, 1980.
   D.   The requirements of this section shall not apply to a new major source
or major modification to a source when the owner of such source is a nonprofit
health or educational institution.
   E.   The requirements of this section shall not apply to a portable source
which would otherwise be a new major source or major modification to an
existing source if such portable source is temporary, is under a permit or
permit revision under this article, is in compliance with the conditions of
that permit or permit revision under this article, the emissions from the
source will not impact a Class I area nor an area where an applicable increment
is known to be violated, and reasonable notice is given to the control officer
prior to the relocation identifying the proposed new location and the probable
duration of operation at the new location. Such notice shall be given to the
control officer not less than ten calendar days in advance of the proposed
relocation unless a different time duration is previously approved by the
control officer.
   F.   Special Rules Applicable to Federal Land Managers.
      1.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a federal land
manager may present to the control officer a demonstration that the emissions
attributed to such new major source or major modification to a source will have
significant adverse impact on visibility or other specifically defined air
quality related values of any federal mandatory area designated in Section
17.08.100(B) regardless of the fact that the change in air quality resulting
from emissions attributable to such new major source or major modification to a
source in existence will not cause or contribute to concentrations which exceed
the maximum allowable increases for a Class I area specified in
Table 17.08.150. If the control officer concurs with such demonstrations, the
permit or permit revision under this article shall be denied.
      2.   If the owner or operator of a proposed new major source or a source
for which major modification is proposed demonstrates to the federal land
manager that the emissions attributable to such major source or major
modification will have no significant adverse impact on the visibility or other
specifically defined air quality related values of such areas and the federal
land manager so certifies to the control officer, the control officer may issue
a permit or permit revision under this article notwithstanding the fact that
the change in air quality resulting from emissions attributable to such new
major source or major modification will cause or contribute to concentrations
which exceed the maximum allowable increases for a Class I area. Such a permit
or permit revision under this article shall require that such new major source
or major modification comply with such emission limitations as may be necessary
to assure that emissions will not cause increases in ambient concentrations
greater than the following maximum allowable increases over baseline
concentrations for such pollutants:
 
Sulfur Oxide Period of exposure Maximum Allowable Increase (Micrograms per
                                cubic meter)
Low terrain areas:
24-hour maximum                 36
3-hour maximum                  130
High terrain areas:
24-hour maximum                 62
4-hour maximum                  221
 
   G.   The issuance of a permit or permit revision under this article in
accordance with this section shall not relieve the owner or operator of the
responsibility to comply fully with applicable provisions of the SIP and any
other requirements under local, state, or federal law.
   H.   At such time that a particular source or modification becomes a major
source or major modification solely by virtue of a relaxation in any
enforceable limitation which was established after August 7, 1980, on the
capacity of the source or modification otherwise to emit a pollutant, such as a
restriction on hours of operation, then the requirements of this section shall
apply to the source or modification as though construction had not yet
commenced on the source or modification.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 3 (part), 2017: Ord. 2007-104 § 3, 2007; Ord. 2007-54 § 4
(part), 2007; Ord. 1994-83 § 65, 1994: Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.600   Air quality impact analysis and monitoring requirements.
   A.   Any application for a permit or permit revision under this article to
construct a new major source or major modification to a major source shall
contain an analysis of ambient air quality in the area that the new major
source or major modification would affect for each of the following pollutants:
      1.   For the new source, each pollutant that it would have the potential
to emit in a significant amount;
      2.   For the modification, each pollutant for which it would result in a
significant net emissions increase.
   B.   With respect to any such pollutant for which no Arizona ambient air
quality standard exists, the analysis shall contain all air quality monitoring
data as the control officer determines is necessary to assess ambient air
quality for that pollutant in any area that the emissions of the pollutant
would affect.
   C.   With respect to any such pollutant (other than nonmethane hydrocarbons)
for which such a standard does exist, the analysis shall contain continuous air
quality monitoring data gathered for purposes of determining whether emissions
of that pollutant would cause or contribute to a violation of the standard or
any maximum allowable increase.
   D.   In general, the continuous air quality monitoring data that is required
shall have been gathered over a period of at least one year and shall represent
at least the year preceding receipt of the application, except that, if the
control officer determines that a complete and adequate analysis can be
accomplished with monitoring data gathered over a period shorter than one year
(but not to be less than four months), the data that is required shall have
been gathered over at least that shorter period.
   E.   The owner or operator of a proposed stationary source or modification
to a source of volatile organic compounds who satisfies all conditions of 40
CFR 51, Section IV of Appendix S, may provide post-approval monitoring data for
ozone in lieu of providing preconstruction data as required under subsections
B, C, and D of this section.
   F.   Post-Construction Monitoring. The owner or operator of a new major
source or major modification shall, after construction of the source or
modification, conduct such ambient monitoring as the control officer determines
is necessary to determine the effect emissions from the new source or
modification may have, or are having, on air quality in any area.
   G.   Operations of Monitoring Stations. The owner or operator of a new major
source or major modification shall meet the requirements of 40 CFR 58, Appendix
B, during the operation of monitoring stations for purposes of satisfying
subsections B through F of this section.
   H.   The requirements of subsections B through G of this section shall not
apply to a new major source or major modification to an existing source with
respect to monitoring for a particular pollutant if:
      1.   The emissions increase of the pollutant from the new source or the
net emissions increase of the pollutant from the modification would cause, in
any area, air quality impacts less than the following amounts:
Pollutant Concentration Averaging Time
Pollutant                Concentration Averaging Time
Carbon monoxide          575 ìg/m 3   8 hour average
Nitrogen dioxide         14 ìg/m 3    annual average
PM 10                    10 ìg/m 3    24 hour average
Sulfur dioxide           13 ìg/m 3    24 hour average
Lead                     0.1 ìg/m 3   24 hour average
Fluorides                0.25 ìg/m 3  24 hour average
Total reduced sulfur     10 ìg/m 3    1 hour average
Hydrogen sulfide         0.04 ìg/m 3  1 hour average
Reduced sulfur compounds 10 ìg/m 3    1 hour average
Ozone                    increased emissions of less than 100 tons per year of
                         volatile organic compounds or oxides of nitrogen;
 
or,
      2.   The concentrations of the pollutant in the area that the new source
or modification would affect are less than the concentrations listed in
subdivision 1 of this subsection.
   I.   Any application for permit or permit revision under this article to
construct a new major source or major modification to a source shall contain:
      1.   An analysis of the impairment to visibility, soils and vegetation
that would occur as a result of the new source or modification and general
commercial, residential, industrial and other growth associated with the new
source or modification. The applicant need not provide an analysis of the
impact on vegetation having no significant commercial or recreational value.
      2.   An analysis of the air quality impact projected for the area as a
result of general commercial, residential, industrial and other growth
associated with the new source or modification.
(Ord. 2008-55 § 3 (part), 2008; Ord. 1994-83 § 66, 1994: Ord. 1993-128 § 4
(part), 1993)
17.16.610   Innovative control technology.
   A.   Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections
17.16.590(A)(1), (2) and (3), the owner or operator of a proposed new major
source or major modification may request that the control officer approve a
system of innovative control technology rather than the best available control
technology requirements otherwise applicable to the new source or modification.
   B.   The control officer shall approve the installation of a system of
innovative control technology if the following conditions are met:
      1.   The owner or operator of the proposed source or modification
satisfactorily demonstrates that the proposed control system would not cause or
contribute to an unreasonable risk to public health, welfare, or safety in its
operation or function;
      2.   The owner or operator agrees to achieve a level of continuous
emissions reduction equivalent to that which would have been required under
Section
17.16.590(A)(2) by a date specified in the permit or permit revision for the
source. Such date shall not be later than four years from the time of startup
or seven years from permit or permit revision issuance;
      3.   The source or modification would meet requirements equivalent to
those in Section
17.16.590(A) based on the emissions rate that the stationary source employing
the system of innovative control technology would be required to meet on the
date specified in the permit or permit revision under this article;
      4.   Before the date specified in the permit or permit revision under
this article, the source or modification would not:
         a.   Cause or contribute to any violation of an applicable state
ambient air quality standard, or
         b.   Impact any area where an applicable increment is known to be
violated;
      5.   All other applicable requirements, including those for public
participation contained in Sections
17.12.190 and
17.13.210, have been met;
      6.   The control officer receives the consent of the governors of other
affected states;
      7.   The limits on pollutants contained in Section
17.08.150 for Class I areas will be met for all periods during the life of the
source or modification.
   C.   The control officer shall withdraw any approval to employ a system of
innovative control technology made under this section if:
      1.   The proposed system fails by the specified date to achieve the
required continuous emissions reduction rate; or
      2.   The proposed system fails before the specified date so as to
contribute to an unreasonable risk to public health, welfare, or safety; or
      3.   The control officer decides at any time that the proposed system is
unlikely to achieve the required level of control or to protect the public
health, welfare, or safety.
   D.   If the new source or major modification fails to meet the required
level of continuous emissions reduction within the specified time period, or if
the approval is withdrawn in accordance with subsection C of this section, the
control officer may allow the owner or operator of the source or modification
up to an additional three years to meet the requirement for the application of
best available control technology through use of a demonstrated system of
control.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 3 (part), 2017: Ord. 1994-83 § 67, 1994: Ord. 1993-128 § 4
(part), 1993)
17.16.620   Air quality models.
   A.   Where the control officer requires a person requesting a permit or
permit revision under this article to perform air quality impact modeling to
obtain such permit or permit revision under this article, the modeling shall be
performed in a manner consistent with the "Guideline on Air Quality Models
(Revised)".
   B.   Where the person requesting a permit or permit revision under this
article can demonstrate that an air quality impact model specified in the
"Guideline" is inappropriate, the model may be modified or another model
substituted. However, before such modification or substitution can occur the
control officer shall make a written finding that:
      1.   No model in the Guideline is appropriate for a particular permit or
permit revision under this article under consideration; or
      2.   The data base required for the appropriate model in the Guideline is
not available; and
      3.   The model proposed as a substitute or modification is likely to
produce results equal or superior to those obtained by models in the Guideline;
and
      4.   The model proposed as a substitute or modification has been approved
by the administrator.
   C.   Use of a modified or substituted model shall be subject to notice and
opportunity for public comment pursuant to Sections
17.12.190 and
17.13.210.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 3 (part), 2017: Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
17.16.630   Visibility protection.
   A.   For any new major source or major modification subject to the
provisions of this title, no permit or permit revision under this article shall
be issued to a person proposing to construct or modify the source unless the
applicant has provided:
      1.   An analysis of the anticipated impacts of the proposed source on
visibility in any Class I areas which may be affected by the emissions from
that source; and
      2.   Results of monitoring of visibility in any area near the proposed
source for such purposes and by such means as the control officer determines
are necessary and appropriate.
   B.   A determination of an adverse impact on visibility shall be made based
on consideration of all of the following factors:
      1.   The times of visitor use of the area;
      2.   The frequency and timing of natural conditions in the area that
reduce visibility;
      3.   All of the following visibility impairment characteristics:
         a.   Geographic extent,
         b.   Intensity,
         c.   Duration,
         d.   Frequency,
         e.   Time of day;
      4.   The correlation between the characteristics listed in subdivision 3
of this subsection and the factors described in subdivisions 1 and 2 of this
subsection.
   C.   The control officer shall not issue a permit or permit revision
pursuant to this chapter or
Chapters 17.11,
17.12, and
17.13 for any new major source or major modification subject to this title
unless the following requirements have been met:
      1.   The control officer shall notify the individuals identified in
subdivision 2 of this subsection within thirty days of receipt of any advance
notification of any such permit or permit revision application under this
article.
      2.   Within thirty days after receipt of the permit or permit revision
application under this article for a source whose emissions may affect a Class
I area, the control officer shall provide written notification of the
application to the federal land manager and the federal official charged with
direct responsibility for management of any lands within any such area. The
notice shall:
         a.   Include a copy of all information relevant to the permit or
permit revision application under this article,
         b.   Include an analysis of the anticipated impacts of the proposed
source on visibility in any area which may be affected by emissions from the
source, and
         c.   Provide for no less than a thirty-day period within which written
comments may be submitted.
      3.   The control officer shall consider any analysis provided by the
federal land manager that is received within the comment period provided in
subdivision 2 of this subsection.
         a.   Where the control officer finds that the analysis provided by the
federal land manager does not demonstrate to the satisfaction of the control
officer that an adverse impact on visibility will result in the area, the
control officer shall, within the public notice required under Sections
17.12.190 and
17.13.210, either explain the decision or specify where the explanation can be
obtained.
         b.   When the control officer finds that the analysis provided by the
federal land manager demonstrates to the satisfaction of the control officer
that an adverse impact on visibility will result in the area, the control
officer shall not issue a permit or permit revision under this article for the
proposed major new source or major modification.
      4.   When the proposed permit decision is made, pursuant to Section
17.12.010(J)(8), and available for public review, the control officer shall
provide the individuals identified in subdivision 2 of this subsection with a
copy of the proposed permit decision and shall make available to them any
materials used in making that determination.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 3 (part), 2017: Ord. 1994-83 § 68, 1994: Ord. 1993-128 § 4
(part), 1993)
17.16.640   Special rule for non-operating sources of sulfur dioxide in sulfur
dioxide nonattainment areas.
   A.   If an emissions unit that is a major source of sulfur dioxide located
in a sulfur dioxide nonattainment area has not operated for more than twenty-
four consecutive calendar months, it may only be restarted if the owner or
operator of such source does all of the following:
      1.   Demonstrates, according to the air quality impact analysis
requirements of Sections
17.16.590(A)(5) and (6) that emissions from that unit, including fugitive
emissions, will not cause or contribute to a violation of the ambient standard
for sulfur dioxide in Section
17.08.020;
      2.   Demonstrates that startup of that unit will not require
reconstruction; and
      3.   Submits a startup plan that includes a source testing plan.
   B.   The demonstration and plan shall be submitted at least one hundred
eighty days prior to the expected day when the restarting of the non-operating
unit will commence. The control officer may request additional information, as
necessary to evaluate the submittals. The unit shall not be restarted unless
the control officer approves the submittal.
   C.   If the control officer disapproves a demonstration or plan required in
subsection A of this section, or such demonstration or plan, including
additional information requested by the control officer, is not submitted in a
timely manner, the source shall be required to obtain a permit pursuant to the
requirements for a new major source or major modification as contained in this
chapter.
   D.   The conduct of performance tests that comply with the requirements of
Section
17.11.210 and demonstrate compliance with emission limits prescribed in a
permit for that source or an applicable rule shall constitute operation of an
emitting unit for the purposes of this section.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 3 (part), 2017: Ord. 1994-83 § 69, 1994: Ord. 1993-128 § 4
(part), 1993)
Article IX. Ozone Depleting Substances [2] 
17.16.710   Sale and use of refrigerant substitutes.
17.16.710   Sale and use of refrigerant substitutes.
   No person shall use, sell, or offer for sale any fluid as a substitute
material for use in any motor vehicle, residential, commercial, or industrial
air conditioning system, refrigerator or freezer unit, or other cooling or
heating device designed to use a chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) or
hydrochlorofluorocarbon (HCFC) compound as a working fluid, unless such fluid
has been approved for sale and such use by the administrator.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 4 (part), 1993)
   FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-20, § 3, adopted July 11, 2017, repealed the
former article IX, §§ 17.16.650—17.16.685, and redesignated article X as
article IX. The former article IX pertained to emissions of hazardous air
pollutants (HAPS) and derived from Ord. No. 1993-128, 1993; Ord. No. 1994-83,
1994 and Ord. No. 2007-54, 2007. (Back)
Chapter 17.20
EMISSION SOURCE TESTING AND MONITORING
Sections: 
   
Article I. - General Provisions
   
Article II. - Concealment of Emissions
   
Article III. - Inspections
   
Article IV. - Periodic Testing
   
Article V. - Continuous Monitoring
Article I. General Provisions
17.20.010   Source sampling, monitoring, and testing.
17.20.020   Notification—Fees.
17.20.030   Waiver of test requirements.
17.20.010   Source sampling, monitoring, and testing.
   A.   The control officer may require, by permit or order, any source of air
contaminants to monitor, sample, or perform other studies to quantify emissions
of air contaminants or levels of air pollution that may reasonably be
attributable to that source if the control officer makes the written
determinations required by either subsection B or subsection C of this section
and if the control officer either:
      1.   Determines that monitoring, sampling, or other studies are necessary
to determine the effects of the facility on levels of air pollution.
      2.   Has reasonable cause to believe a violation of this title or a
permit issued pursuant to this title has been committed.
      3.   Determines that those studies or data are necessary to accomplish
the purposes of this title, and that the monitoring, sampling, or other studies
by the source are necessary in order to assess the impact of the source on the
emissions of air contaminants.
   B.   The control officer shall, by permit or order, require sources of air
contaminants for which ambient air quality standards or emission standards or
design, equipment, work practice or operational standards have been adopted
pursuant to A.R.S. 49-424 or A.R.S. 49-425, subsection A to monitor, sample, or
otherwise quantify their emissions or air pollution which may reasonably be
attributed to sources of such air contaminants if the control officer
determines in writing that all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The actual or potential emissions of air pollution may adversely
affect public health or the environment; and
      2.   An adequate scientific basis for the monitoring, sampling, or
quantification method exists; and
      3.   The monitoring, sampling, or quantification method is technically
feasible for the subject contaminant and source; and
      4.   The monitoring, sampling, or quantification method is reasonably
accurate; and
      5.   The cost of the method is reasonable in light of the use to be made
of the data.
   C.   The Control Officer may, by permit or order, require sources of air
contaminants not described by subsection B of this section to perform
monitoring, sampling or other quantification of its emissions or air pollution
that may reasonably be attributed to such source if the control officer
determines in writing that all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The actual or potential emissions of air pollution may adversely
affect public health or the environment; and
      2.   An adequate scientific basis for the monitoring, sampling, or
quantification method exists; and
      3.   The monitoring, sampling, or quantification method is technically
feasible for the subject contaminant and source; and
      4.   The monitoring, sampling, or quantification method is reasonably
accurate; and
      5.   The cost of the method is reasonable in light of the use to be made
of the data.
   D.   Before requiring such monitoring, sampling, or other quantification by
permit or order, the control officer shall consider the relative cost and
accuracy of any alternatives which may be reasonable under the circumstances
such as emission factors, modeling, mass balance analyses, or emissions
projections.
   E.   Orders issued or permit conditions imposed pursuant to this section
shall be appealable to the hearing board in the same manner as that prescribed
for orders of abatement and permit conditions.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 5 (part), 1993)
17.20.020   Notification—Fees.
   A.   In any case requiring mass-emissions discharge or ambient-air testing
other than opacity measurements, the control officer shall give a source
operator at least a thirty-day written notice of a requirement for a mass-
emissions discharge or ambient-air test, other than an opacity test.
   B.   If the control officer performs the necessary tests, any expenses he
incurs in collecting samples, making the analyses, and preparing the necessary
reports shall be charged to the source operator, in addition to permit fees
assessed according to this title.
   C.   The source operator shall pay the testing fee within thirty days of
invoicing.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 5 (part), 1993)
17.20.030   Waiver of test requirements.
   A.   If a source operator is required to operate continuous monitoring
equipment for one or more air pollutants, periodic testing for the monitored
pollutants is not required, provided the source operator operates and maintains
the continuous monitoring equipment in conformity with applicable requirements.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 5 (part), 1993)
Article II. Concealment of Emissions
17.20.040   Concealment of emissions.
17.20.040   Concealment of emissions.
   No person shall construct, install, erect, use, replace, modify, or operate
an emission source so as to conceal an emission which would otherwise be a
violation of a control standard established herein. Concealment shall include:
      1.   The use of gaseous diluents to achieve compliance with an opacity
standard or with a standard which is based on the concentration of a pollutant
in the gases discharged to the atmosphere;
      2.   Operating in a piecemeal fashion to avoid compliance with a standard
that would otherwise apply to the source on the basis of its size; and
      3.   Operating in a manner, under conditions, or during such times that
emissions cannot be observed.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 5 (part), 1993)
Article III. Inspections
17.20.050   Compliance inspections.
17.20.050   Compliance inspections.
   A.   The control officer shall make such inspections as are necessary to
assure compliance with or enforcement of this title, any provision of the
Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 49, Chapter 3, Article 3, or the provisions of
any permit issued pursuant to this title or statutes.
   B.   The control officer shall make such inspections as are necessary for
issuance or reissuance of any permit authorized or allowed by this title or the
Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 49, Chapter 3, Article 3.
   C.   The Control Officer may obtain a special inspection warrant pursuant to
the provisions of A.R.S. 49-488.
(Ord. 1995-87 § 51, 1995: Ord. 1993-128 § 5 (part), 1993)
Article IV. Periodic Testing
17.20.060   Applicability of methodology.
17.20.070   Testing frequencies.
17.20.080   Sampling and testing facilities.
17.20.090   Stack sampling.
17.20.060   Applicability of methodology.
   A.   The methods used to measure, test, analyze, and evaluate a quantity or
quality associated with a performance standard shall be consistent with, and
equivalent to EPA test methods.
   B.   This section shall apply to the determination, measurement, and
evaluation of ambient air quality, emissions opacities, mass concentrations of
emissions, dispersion modeling of air quality, mass-emissions discharge rates,
and heat contents of fuels.
   C.   If measurement of emissions or ambient-air quality is required and an
applicable test method is not specified herein, the control officer must
approve an appropriate method in advance of the test in order for the results
of the test to be acceptable.
   D.   When the control officer determines that compliance with quantitative
mass-emissions limitations may be demonstrated more practically by long-term
process usage rates and material-balance methods, the analyses shall be made on
an average weight per unit-time basis or other basis specified by the control
officer.
   E.   If more than one emissions limit is specified for a given pollutant for
the source, the material-balance or other average emissions rate analysis must
demonstrate compliance with the limitation yielding the lowest emissions.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 5 (part), 1993)
17.20.070   Testing frequencies.
   A.   Prior to issuing or renewing an operating permit, or when the control
officer has reasonable cause to believe that any permit condition, mass
limiting emissions discharge standard or any ambient air standard is being
violated, measurement of the quantity of regulated air pollutant being emitted
from the source or in the ambient air in the vicinity of the source may be
required.
   B.   The control officer may have the necessary tests performed by qualified
personnel under his direction, or the source operator may opt (with the
approval of the control officer) to perform the tests and submit to the control
officer a report of the tests within thirty days of completion of the time
period approved for sampling.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 5 (part), 1993)
17.20.080   Sampling and testing facilities.
   A.   For sampling, monitoring and testing required by the control officer
pursuant to Section
17.20.010, the control officer may require the source operator to provide and
maintain sampling and testing facilities. When requested in writing by the
control officer, a source operator shall provide and maintain performance
testing facilities and conditions as follows:
      1.   Sampling ports adequate for the applicable test method, including
(if necessary) extensions of stacks needed for obtaining representative
samples;
      2.   Sampling platforms and access thereto sufficient to assure sampling
operator safety and the acquisition of representative samples;
      3.   Electrical power adequate to perform a test in accordance with the
applicable method; and
      4.   Operation of the source during testing so that representative
samples can be obtained.
   B.   If source operating conditions must be adjusted during a test, the
control officer shall notify the source operator in writing at least ten days
prior to the test.
(Ord. 1994-83 § 71, 1994: Ord. 1993-128 § 5 (part), 1993)
17.20.090   Stack sampling.
   A.   Each mass-emissions discharge test for determining compliance with a
standard shall consist of at least three runs (or an alternate number specified
by the control officer) using the applicable test method as specified by EPA.
   B.   The arithmetic mean of the results of the three runs shall apply.
   C.   If a sample is accidentally lost or if one of the three runs must be
discontinued due to forced shutdown, failure of an irreplaceable portion of the
sampling train, extreme meteorological conditions, or other circumstances
beyond the control of the source operator, the control officer may approve the
use of the remaining test runs.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 5 (part), 1993)
Article V. Continuous Monitoring
17.20.100   General specifications.
17.20.100   General specifications.
   A.   A source operator who is required to install and operate continuous
monitoring equipment (
Article I of
Chapter 17.20) shall comply with the performance specifications established in
this article and
Article VI of
Chapter 17.16.
   B.   Calibration Gases.
      1.   For nitrogen oxides monitoring systems installed on fossil-fuel
fired steam generators, the pollutant gas used to prepare calibration gas
mixtures (Section 2.1, Performance Specification 2) shall be nitric oxide (NO).
For nitrogen oxides monitoring systems installed on nitric acid plants, the
pollutant gas used to prepare calibration gas mixtures (Section 2.1,
Performance Specification 2) shall be nitrogen dioxide (NO 2 ). These gases
shall also be used for daily checks under paragraph 3.7 of the Arizona Testing
Manual as applicable.
      2.   For sulfur dioxide monitoring systems installed on fossil-fuel fired
steam generators or sulfuric acid plants, the pollutant gas used to prepare
calibration gas mixtures (Section 2.1, Performance Specification 2) shall be
sulfur dioxide (SO 2 ). Span and zero gases should be traceable to National
Bureau of Standards reference gases whenever these reference gases are
available. Every six months from date of manufacture, span and zero gases shall
be reanalyzed by conducting triplicate analyses using the reference methods as
follows:
         a.   For sulfur dioxide, use EPA Reference Method 6;
         b.   For nitrogen oxides, use EPA Reference Method 7; and
         c.   For carbon dioxide or oxygen, use EPA Reference Method 3.
   The gases may be analyzed at less frequent intervals if longer shelf lives
are guaranteed by the manufacturer.
   C.   Cycling Times. Cycling times include the total time a monitoring system
requires to sample, analyze, and record an emission measurement.
      1.   Continuous monitoring systems for measuring opacity shall complete a
minimum of one cycle of operation (sampling, analyzing, and data recording) for
each successive ten-second period.
      2.   Continuous monitoring systems for measuring oxides of nitrogen,
carbon dioxide, oxygen, or sulfur dioxide shall complete a minimum of one cycle
of operation (sampling, analyzing, and data recording) for each successive
fifteen-minute period.
   D.   Monitor Location. The control officer shall specify conditions such
that each continuous monitoring system or monitoring device is installed in
such a manner that representative measurements of emissions or process
parameters (i.e., oxygen, or carbon dioxide) from the affected facility are
obtained. Additional guidance for location of continuous monitoring systems to
obtain representative samples are contained in the applicable performance
specifications.
   E.   Combined Effluents. When the effluents from two or more affected
facilities of similar design and operating characteristics are combined before
being released to the atmosphere, the same monitoring system may be installed
on the combined effluent. When the affected facilities are not of similar
design and operating characteristics, or when the effluent from one affected
facility is released to the atmosphere through more than one point, the control
officer shall specify alternative procedures to implement the intent of these
requirements.
   F.   Zero and Drift. Any owner, lessee, or operator of any continuous
monitoring system shall record the zero and span drift in accordance with the
method prescribed by the manufacturer of such instruments; shall subject the
instrument(s) to the manufacturer's recommended zero and span check at least
once daily unless the manufacturer has recommended adjustments at shorter
intervals, in which case such recommendations shall be followed; to adjust the
zero and span whenever the twenty-four-hour zero drift or twenty-four-hour
calibration drift limits of the applicable performance specifications herein
are exceeded;
and shall adjust continuous monitoring systems whenever the twenty-four-hour
zero drift or twenty-four-hour calibration drift exceed ten percent of the
emission standard.
   G.   Span. Instrument span shall be approximately two hundred percent of the
expected instrument data display output corresponding to the emission standard
for the source.
   H.   Alternative Procedures and Requirements. In cases where source
operators wish to utilize different, but equivalent, procedures and
requirements for continuous monitoring systems, the operator shall provide a
description of such alternative procedures for approval by the control officer.
Some examples of situations that may require alternatives follow:
      1.   Alternative monitoring requirements to accommodate continuous
monitoring systems that require corrections for stack moisture conditions
(e.g., an instrument measuring steam generator SO 2 emissions on a wet basis
could be used with an instrument measuring oxygen concentration on a dry basis
if acceptable methods of measuring stack moisture conditions are used to allow
accurate adjustment of the measured SO 2 concentration to dry basis);
      2.   Alternative locations for installing continuous monitoring systems
or monitoring devices when the owner or operator can demonstrate that
installation at alternative locations will enable accurate and representative
measurements;
      3.   Alternative procedures for performing calibration checks (e.g., some
instruments may demonstrate superior drift characteristics that require
checking at less frequent intervals).
      4.   Alternative monitoring requirements when the effluent from one
affected facility or the combined effluent from two or more identical affected
facilities is released to the atmosphere through more than one point (e.g., an
extractive, gaseous monitoring system used at several points may be approved if
the procedures recommended are suitable for generating accurate emission
averages);
      5.   Alternative continuous monitoring systems that do not meet the
special response requirements in Performance Specification 1, but adequately
demonstrate a definite and consistent relationship between their measurements
and the opacity measurements of a system complying with requirements in
Performance Specification 1. Such demonstration must be performed for each
affected facility.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 5 (part), 1993)
Chapter 17.24
EMISSION SOURCE RECORDKEEPING AND REPORTING
Sections: 
   
Article I. - Availability of Information
   
Article II. - Recordkeeping Requirements
   
Article III. - Reporting Requirements
   
Article IV. - Penalty for Noncompliance
Article I. Availability of Information
17.24.010   Confidentiality of trade secrets, sales data, and proprietary
information.
17.24.010   Confidentiality of trade secrets, sales data, and proprietary
information.
   A.   Any records, reports or information obtained from any person under this
chapter, including records, reports or information obtained or prepared by the
control officer or a county employee, shall be available to the public, except
that the information or any part of the information shall be considered
confidential on either of the following:
      1.   A showing, satisfactory to the control officer, by any person that
the information or a part of the information if made public would divulge the
trade secrets of the person.
      2.   A determination by the county attorney that disclosure of the
information or a particular part of the information would be detrimental to an
ongoing criminal investigation or to an ongoing or contemplated civil
enforcement action under this chapter in superior court.
   B.   Notwithstanding subsection C of this section, the following information
shall be available to the public:
      1.   The name and address of any permit applicant or permittee.
      2.   The chemical constituents, concentrations and amounts of any
emission of any air contaminant.
      3.   The existence or level of a concentration of an air pollutant in the
environment.
   C.   A claim of confidentiality shall not excuse a person from providing any
and all information specifically required by the title.
   D.   A claim of confidentiality shall not be a defense for failure to
provide any and all information required by the control officer.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 6 (part), 1993)
Article II. Recordkeeping Requirements
17.24.020   Recordkeeping for compliance determinations.
17.24.030   Recordkeeping for emission inventories.
17.24.020   Recordkeeping for compliance determinations.
   A.   The operator of a source of air pollution shall periodically collect,
record, and maintain sufficient information on his emissions operation or
activity to assure that the compliance status of the operation or activity with
this title can be readily ascertained at any time. The information shall be
retained for at least five years.
   B.   Data which may be needed for compliance determinations on continuous-
flow processes or operations include the chemical composition and rates of raw
material feedstocks, products, waste products, and emissions; hours of
operation; emissions-control device variables such as differential pressures,
temperature, and/or electrical power supplied or energy consumed; narrative
descriptions of abnormal startup conditions, process upsets, and malfunctions;
and prevailing meteorological conditions.
   C.   Data which may be needed for compliance determinations on batch-
operated processes include chemical composition, quantity, time and duration of
each charge of raw material feedstocks, types of product and/or waste product,
and each burst or continuous flow of emissions; hours of operation, emissions-
control device variables such as differential pressures, temperatures, and/or
electrical power supplied or energy consumed; narrative description of abnormal
process condition, process upsets, and malfunctions; and prevailing
meteorological conditions.
   D.   A source operator subject to continuous emissions monitoring
requirements or continuous process-variables monitoring requirements (
Chapter 17.20) shall collect, evaluate, and record data regarding performance
testing of the systems, calibration checks, adjustments and maintenance of the
systems, and any other information necessary to demonstrate and maintain the
accuracy of the system as required by the control officer. The control officer
shall be guided by the requirements for reporting and recordkeeping published
in the applicable portions of the Code of Federal Regulations.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 6 (part), 1993)
17.24.030   Recordkeeping for emission inventories.
   A.   In order that the control officer may accurately estimate emissions
from a specific source or compile a total inventory of emissions in Pima
County, the source operator may be required to collect certain information
which will allow the control officer to estimate the types, quantities, and
frequencies of emissions.
   B.   Such data shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      1.   Source location, type, and frequency of operation;
      2.   Design capacity and normal or average operating rates, including
process feedstocks, products, and by-products or waste products; and
      3.   Sizes of individual equipment and/or rated capacities, e.g., fuel
burning equipment in BTU. per hour, capacities of storage vessels in gallons,
and electrical energy equipment in horsepower.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 6 (part), 1993)
Article III. Reporting Requirements
17.24.040   Reporting for compliance evaluations.
17.24.050   Reporting as a permit requirement.
17.24.060   Reporting for emission inventories.
17.24.040   Reporting for compliance evaluations.
   When the control officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person is
emitting or capable of emitting an air contaminant to the air or is violating a
provision of the Title, a permit condition, or a requirement of a conditional
order issued according to this title, he may require in writing that such
person produce all existing books, records, or other documents which might
reasonably contain evidence needed to determine compliance or noncompliance
with this title. Such information shall be supplied to the control officer
promptly upon request or in accordance with other conditions stated herein.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 6 (part), 1993)
17.24.050   Reporting as a permit requirement.
   As established in other sections herein, the control officer may require
special reporting provisions as a condition of permit. Such reporting
requirements shall be fulfilled by the permittee according to the written
conditions of the permit.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 6 (part), 1993)
17.24.060   Reporting for emission inventories.
   A.   When the control officer has need for emission data (areawide or
source-specific) to compile emission inventories or control to design plans, he
shall notify source operators of interest in writing, stating with specificity
the type of information needed.
   B.   A source operator receiving such a request shall furnish the
information to the control officer in writing, within forty-five days of
receipt of the request, or shall ask for additional time to obtain the
information. The length of an extension shall be commensurate with the
magnitude of the task of gathering the required information.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 6 (part), 1993)
Article IV. Penalty for Noncompliance
17.24.070   Suppression—False information.
17.24.070   Suppression—False information.
   Any person who fails to respond to a request for information, or who
knowingly reports false information, is subject to prosecution under A.R.S. 13-
2407 and the provisions of
Chapter 17.28.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 6 (part), 1993)
Chapter 17.28
VIOLATIONS AND CONDITIONAL ORDERS
Sections: 
   
Article I. - Violations
   
Article II. - Conditional Orders
   
Article III. - Circumvention
Article I. Violations
17.28.010   Violations and order of abatement.
17.28.020   Production of records.
17.28.030   Injunctive relief.
17.28.040   Precedence of actions.
17.28.050   Preservation of rights.
17.28.070   Civil penalties.
17.28.080   Criminal penalties.
17.28.090   Hearings on orders of abatement.
17.28.010   Violations and order of abatement.
   When the control officer has reasonable cause to believe that any person has
violated or is in violation of any provision of this title or any requirement
of a permit issued pursuant to this title, he may serve upon such person by
certified mail or in person an order of abatement or may file a complaint in
superior court alleging a violation pursuant to A.R.S. 49-513. The order shall
state with particularity the act constituting the violation, shall state in its
entirety the certain requirement, provision or rule violated, shall state the
duration of the order and shall state that the alleged violator is entitled to
a hearing, if such hearing is requested in writing within thirty days after the
date of issuance of the order. The order may be conditional and require a
person to refrain from particular acts unless certain conditions are met. An
order issued under this section shall require the persons to whom it is issued
to comply with the requirement, provision or rule as expeditiously as
practicable. In the case of a source required to obtain a permit pursuant to
this title and Title V of the Clean Air Act (Permits), the order shall require
compliance no later than one year after the date the order was issued, and
shall be nonrenewable.
(Ord. 1997-79 § 12, 1997; Ord. 1993-128 § 7 (part), 1993)
17.28.020   Production of records.
   When the control officer has reasonable cause to believe that any person has
violated or is in violation of any provision of this title or any requirement
of a permit issued pursuant to this title, he may request, in writing, that
such person produce all existing books, records and other documents evidencing
tests, inspections or studies which may reasonably relate to compliance or
noncompliance with provisions of this title within the time period specified in
the written request.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 7 (part), 1993)
17.28.030   Injunctive relief.
   A.   The county attorney, at the request of the control officer, shall file
an action for a temporary restraining order, a preliminary injunction, a
permanent injunction or any other relief provided by law, if the control
officer has reasonable cause to believe that any of the following is occurring:
      1.   A person has violated or is in violation of any provision of this
title or any provision of a permit issued pursuant to this title.
      2.   A person has violated or in violation of an effective order of
abatement.
      3.   A person is creating an imminent and substantial endangerment to the
public health or the environment because of a release of a harmful air
contaminant, unless that release is subject to enforcement under A.R.S. Title
3, Chapter 2, Article 6.
   B.   In the preliminary hearing in an action for an injunction or
restraining order brought pursuant to this article, any findings of the hearing
board shall be prima facie evidence of the fact or facts found therein until
rebutted.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 7 (part), 1993)
17.28.040   Precedence of actions.
   For the benefit of the people of the state, court actions and proceedings
brought under this title shall be given precedence and brought to trial ahead
of other litigation concerning private interests and other matters that do not
affect public health and welfare.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 7 (part), 1993)
17.28.050   Preservation of rights.
   It is the purpose of this title to provide additional and cumulative
remedies to prevent, abate, and control air pollution in the state. Nothing
contained in this title shall be construed to abridge or alter rights of action
or remedies in equity under the common law or statutory law, criminal or civil,
nor shall any provisions of this title, or any act done by virtue thereof, be
construed as estopping the state or any municipality, or owners of land from
the exercise of their rights in equity or under the common law or statutory law
to suppress nuisances or to abate pollution.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 7 (part), 1993; Ord. 1990-113 § 8, 1990: Ord. 1989-165 § 24
(part), 1989: Ord 1979-93 (part), 1979)
17.28.070   Civil penalties.
   A.   A person who violates any provision of this title, any permit or permit
condition issued pursuant to this title, any fee or filing requirement, an
effective order of abatement issued pursuant to this title or any duty to allow
or carry out inspection, entry or monitoring activities, is subject to a civil
penalty of not more than ten thousand dollars per day per violation. The county
attorney at the request of the control officer shall file an action in superior
court to recover penalties provided for in this section.
   B.   For purposes of determining the number of days of violation for which a
civil penalty may be assessed under this section, if the control officer has
notified the source of the violation and makes a prima facie showing that the
conduct or events giving rise to the violation are likely to have continued or
recurred past the date of notice, the days of violations shall be presumed to
include the date of such notice and each day thereafter until the violator
establishes that continuous compliance has been achieved, except to the extent
that the violator can prove by a preponderance of the evidence that there were
intervening days during which no violation occurred or that the violation was
not continuing in nature. Notice under this section is accomplished by the
issuance of a notice of violation or order of abatement or by filing a
complaint in superior court that alleges any violation described in subsection
A of this section.
   C.   In determining the amount of a civil penalty under this section, the
court shall consider all of the following:
      1.   The seriousness of the violation.
      2.   As an aggravating factor only, the economic benefit, if any,
resulting from the violation.
      3.   Any history of that violation.
      4.   Any good faith efforts to comply with the applicable requirements.
      5.   The economic impact of the penalty on the violator.
      6.   The duration of the violation as established by credible evidence
including evidence other than the applicable test method.
      7.   Payment by the violator of penalties previously assessed for the
same violation.
      8.   Other factors as the court deems relevant.
   D.   All penalties collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in
the special public health fund prescribed in A.R.S. 49-480.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 7 (part), 1993)
17.28.080   Criminal penalties.
   Text of section effective after October 31, 1994:
   A.   A person who knowingly releases into the ambient air any extremely
hazardous substance listed pursuant to 42 U.S.C. Section 11002(a)(2) or any
hazardous air pollutant, and who knows at the time that he thereby places
another person in imminent danger of death or serious bodily injury shall be
guilty of a Class 2 felony. For any air pollutant for which the administrator,
director or control officer has established a standard by regulation or in a
permit, a release of such pollutant in accordance with that standard shall not
constitute a violation of this subsection. For purposes of determining whether
a defendant who is an individual knew that the violation placed another in
imminent danger of serious bodily injury both of the following shall apply:
      1.   The defendant is responsible only for actual awareness or actual
belief possessed.
      2.   Knowledge possessed by another person but not by the defendant may
not be attributed to the defendant. Notwithstanding subdivisions 1 and 2 of
this subsection, circumstantial evidence, including evidence that the defendant
took affirmative steps to be shielded from relevant information, may be used to
prove knowledge.
   B.   A person who operates a source that is required to have a permit both
under this title and under Title V of the Clean Air Act (Permits) and who
knowingly operates such source without a permit issued by the control officer
and without having filed a complete application for renewal of an existing
permit in accordance with Title V of the Clean Air Act (Permits) and this title
is guilty of a Class 5 felony.
   C.   A person who operates a source that is subject to an emission standard
that is required to be imposed in the source's permit both under this title and
under Title V of the Clear Air Act (Permits), and who knowingly violates such
emission standard is guilty of a Class 5 felony.
   D.   A person who is subject to an effective order of abatement issued under
this title and who knowingly violates such order is guilty of a Class 5 felony.
   E.   A person who is required by the control officer pursuant to this title
to conduct performance tests, and who knowingly alters or modifies any such
performance test in order to render the results inaccurate is guilty of a Class
5 felony.
   F.   A person who is required by the control officer to maintain any
monitoring device pursuant to this title, and who knowingly alters, modifies or
destroys such monitoring device in order to render the results inaccurate is
guilty of a Class 5 felony.
   G.   A person who operates a source that is required to have a permit issued
pursuant to this title and that is subject to a material permit condition other
than an emission standard identified in subsection C of this section, and who
knowingly violates such permit condition is guilty of a Class 6 felony. For
purposes of this subsection a material permit condition means a permit
condition determined by the control officer to be material pursuant to A.R.S.
49-464, Subsection G.
   H.   A person who is required to obtain a permit before commencing
construction of a source both under this title and under Title V of the Clean
Air Act (Permits), and who knowingly commences construction of such source
without a permit issued by the control officer is guilty of a Class 6 felony.
   I.   A person who operates a source that is not identified in subsection B
of this section and that requires a permit under this title, and who knowingly
operates such source without a permit issued by the control officer and without
having filed a complete application for renewal of an existing permit in
accordance with this title is guilty of a Class 6 felony.
   J.   A person who is required by the control officer pursuant to this title
to operate a monitoring device, and who knowingly fails to maintain, operate or
repair such monitoring device in order to render the device inaccurate is
guilty of a Class 6 felony.
   K.   A person who is required to obtain a permit to commence construction of
a source under this title but not under Title V of the Clean Air Act (Permits),
and who acting with criminal negligence commences construction of such source
without a permit issued by the control officer is guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor.
   L.   A person who acting with criminal negligence does any of the following
is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
      1.   Violates a permit condition not described in subsection C or G of
this section.
      2.   Violates an opacity standard, unless the opacity standard is
required by Section 111 or Title I, Part C or D, of the Clean Air Act
(Prevention of Significant Deterioration of Air Quality or Plan Requirements
for Nonattainment Areas).
      3.   Violates a fee or filing requirement established both under this
title and under Title V of the Clean Air Act (Permits).
      4.   Violates any other provision of this title for which a penalty is
not otherwise prescribed.
   M.   Under this section, a knowing violation that continues for more than
one day, but that results from a single act or series of related acts,
constitutes the commission of a single offense.
   N.   In determining the amount of a fine under this section, the court shall
consider all of the following:
      1.   The seriousness of the violation.
      2.   As an aggravating factor only, the economic benefit, if any,
resulting from the violation.
      3.   Any history of that violation.
      4.   Any good faith efforts to comply with the applicable requirements.
      5.   The economic impact of the penalty on the violator.
      6.   The duration of the violation as established by credible evidence
including evidence other than the applicable test method.
      7.   Payment by the violator of penalties previously assessed for the
same violation.
      8.   Other factors as the court deems relevant.
   O.   It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution under subsection
A of this section that the conduct charged was freely consented to by the
person endangered and that the danger and conduct charged were reasonably
foreseeable hazards of either of the following:
      1.   An occupation, business or profession.
      2.   Medical treatment or medical or scientific experimentation conducted
by professionally approved methods provided that the person endangered was made
aware of the risk involved in the treatment or experimentation prior to giving
consent.
   P.   It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution for violation of
an emission standard or opacity standard under subsection C or G or subsection
L, paragraph 1, 2 or 4 of this section that both of the following conditions
were satisfied:
      1.   The violation was reported by verbal or facsimile notification to
the control officer within twenty-four hours after the source first learned of
the violation.
      2.   The owner or operator of the source provided written notification to
the control officer containing all of the following information within seventy-
two hours following the verbal or facsimile notification:
         a.   Confirmation of the violation for which verbal or facsimile
notification was provided.
         b.   Identification of the practicable corrective measures that have
been undertaken or will be undertaken to control and minimize emissions until
compliance with the applicable standard is achieved.
         c.   In the case of continuous or recurring violations, the
notification requirement shall be satisfied if the source provides the required
notification after violations are first detected and includes in such
notification an estimate of the time the violations will continue. Violations
occurring after the estimated time period shall require additional notification
pursuant to subdivision 1 of this subsection.
   Q.   It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution under subsection
B, H, I or K of this section for operating a source or commencing construction
without a permit that, after accurately disclosing in writing all relevant
information that is necessary to assess the requirement to obtain a permit and
that is requested by a permitting authority, the defendant obtained and relied
upon the written advice of a permitting authority that no permit was necessary.
Failure of a permitting authority to respond in writing to a request for a
determination under this subsection within fourteen days after receiving the
information described above shall be deemed to be advice that no permit was
necessary for purposes of this subsection.
   R.   The defendant may establish an affirmative defense provided by this
section by a preponderance of the evidence.
   S.   For purposes of this section, the term "emission standard" means a
numeric limitation on the volume or concentration of air pollutants in
emissions from a source or a specific design, equipment or work practice
standard, the purpose of which is to eliminate or reduce the volume or
concentration of pollutants emitted by a source. The term "emission standard"
does not include opacity standards. Violations of emission standards shall be
determined in the manner prescribed by the applicable regulations issued by the
administrator or the director or control officer.
   T.   Under this section, to prove a knowing violation the county shall prove
actual knowledge of circumstances constituting each element of the offense
which, as defined, requires proof of a culpable mental state. Actual knowledge
may by proved by either direct or circumstantial evidence, including evidence
that the person deliberately avoided acquiring such knowledge. A person's
knowledge may not be inferred merely by his or her position within an
enterprise.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 7 (part), 1993)
17.28.090   Hearings on orders of abatement.
   A.   An order of abatement issued by the control officer shall become
effective immediately upon the expiration of the time during which a request
for a hearing may be made pursuant to A.R.S. 49-511 unless the person or
persons named in such order shall have made a timely request for a hearing
before the hearing board. If a hearing is requested, the hearing board shall
hold the hearing within thirty days from receipt of the request unless such
time is extended by the hearing board. Written notice of the time and place of
the hearing shall be sent by the hearing board to the person or persons
requesting the hearing and to the control officer at least fifteen days before
the hearing.
   B.   If the board, after the hearing, determines that the act or acts set
forth in the order constitute a violation of any provision of this title or any
requirement of a permit or conditional order issued pursuant to this title and
that no conditional order is justified, the board shall affirm or modify the
order of abatement. The order may be conditional and require a person to
refrain from the particular act or acts unless certain conditions are met.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 7 (part), 1993)
Article II. Conditional Orders
17.28.100   Conditional orders.
17.28.100   Conditional orders.
   A.   The control officer may grant to any person a conditional order for
each air pollution source which allows such person to vary from any provision
of A.R.S. Title 49, Chapter 3, Article 3, this title, or any nonfederally
enforceable requirement of a permit issued pursuant to this title if the
control officer makes each of the following findings:
      1.   Issuance of the conditional order will not endanger public health or
the environment, impede attainment or maintenance of the national ambient air
quality standards, or constitute a violation of the Clean Air Act, and
      2.   Either of the following is true:
         a.   There has been a breakdown of equipment or upset of operations
beyond the control of the petitioner which causes the source to be out of
compliance with the requirements of this title, the source was in compliance
with the requirements of this title before the breakdown or upset, and the
breakdown or upset may be corrected within a reasonable time.
         b.   There is no reasonable relationship between the economic and
social cost of, and benefits to be obtained from, achieving compliance.
   B.   The control officer may not issue a conditional order which allows a
source to vary from the requirement to obtain a permit issued pursuant to
Section
17.11.090.
   C.   The following procedures shall apply to a person seeking a conditional
order:
      1.   The person shall file a petition for a conditional order with the
control officer. The petition shall contain at a minimum:
         a.   A description of the breakdown or upset.
         b.   A description of corrective action being undertaken to bring the
source back into compliance.
         c.   An estimate of emissions related to the breakdown or upset.
         d.   A compliance schedule with a date of final compliance and interim
dates as appropriate.
         e.   A detailed analysis of the economic and social costs and benefits
of achieving compliance with the requirement for which the variance is sought,
if the petition is based on subsection (A)(2)(b) of this section.
      2.   If the issuance of the conditional order requires a public hearing
pursuant to Sections
17.12.190(E) and
17.13.210(E), the control officer shall set the hearing date within thirty days
after the filing of the petition and the hearing shall be held within sixty
days after the filing of the petition.
      3.   Notice of the filing of a petition for a conditional order and of
the hearing date on said petition shall be published in the manner provided in
A.R.S. § 49-498 and Sections
17.12.190(C) and (D) and Sections
17.13.210(C) and (D).
      4.   At the time the control officer publishes the first notice, the
applicant shall post a notice containing the information required in Sections
17.12.190(D) and
17.13.210(D) at the site where the source is or may be located. Consistent with
federal, state, and local law, the posting shall be prominently placed at a
location under the applicant's legal control, adjacent to the nearest public
roadway, and visible to the public using the public roadway. The applicant
shall place an additional posting providing notice of the hearing. Any posting
shall be maintained until the public comment period is closed.
      5.   The control officer shall provide at least thirty days from the date
of its first notice for public comment. The control officer shall keep a record
of the commenters and of the issues raised during the public participation
process and shall prepare written responses to all comments received. At the
time a final decision is made, the record and copies of the control officer's
responses shall be made available to the applicant and all commenters.
   D.   Decisions on petitions for a conditional order shall be made as
follows:
      1.   For any conditional order that requires a revision to the SIP, the
control officer shall comply with the requirements contained in 40 CFR 51,
Subpart F.
      2.   For any other conditional order, the control officer shall grant or
deny the petition on such terms and conditions as the control officer deems
appropriate within thirty days after the conclusion of any required hearing,
or, if no hearing is held, within sixty days after the filing of the petition.
   E.   A fee to cover the costs of processing conditional orders may be
charged by the control officer prior to issuance of the conditional order
according to Section
17.12.220(I) or (J) and shall be deposited in the Air Quality Revenue Fund.
   F.   The terms of a conditional order or its renewal shall conform to the
following:
      1.   A conditional order issued by the control officer shall be valid for
such period as the control officer prescribes but in no event for more than one
year in the case of a source that is required to obtain a permit pursuant to
this title and Title V of the Act (Permits), and three years in the case of any
other source that is required to obtain a permit pursuant to this title.
      2.   The terms and conditions which are imposed as a condition to the
granting or the continued existence of a conditional order shall include:
         a.   A detailed plan for completion of corrective steps needed to
conform to the provisions of A.R.S. Title 49, Chapter 3, Article 3, this title
and the requirements of any permit issued pursuant to this title.
         b.   A requirement that necessary construction shall begin as
specified in the compliance schedule.
         c.   Written reports, at least quarterly, of the status of the source
and construction progress.
         d.   The right of the control officer to make periodic inspection of
the facilities for which the conditional order is granted.
         e.   Such additional terms and conditions as the control officer finds
necessary to meet the requirements of this section and A.R.S. § 49-437.
      3.   A holder of a conditional order may petition the control officer to
renew the order. The total term of the initial period and all renewals shall
not exceed three years from the date of initial issuance of the order.
Petitions for renewal may be filed at any time not more than sixty days nor
less than thirty days prior to the expiration of the order. The control
officer, within thirty days of receipt of a petition, shall renew the
conditional order for one year if the petitioner is in compliance and
conforming with the terms and conditions imposed. The control officer may
refuse to renew the conditional order if, after a public hearing held within
thirty days of receipt of a petition, the control officer finds that the
petitioner is not in compliance and conforming with the terms and conditions of
the conditional order. If, after a period of three years from the date of
original issuance the petitioner is not in compliance and conforming with the
terms and conditions, the control officer may renew a conditional order for a
total term of two additional years only if the control officer finds that
failure to comply and conform is due to conditions beyond the control of such
petitioner.
      4.   If the control officer amends or adopts any rule imposing conditions
on the operation of an air pollution source which have become effective as to
the source by reason of the action of the control officer or otherwise, and
which require the implementation of control strategies necessitating the
installation of additional or different air pollution control equipment, the
control officer may renew a conditional order for an additional term. The term
of the renewal shall be governed by the preceding subsections of this section,
except that the total term of the renewal shall not exceed two years.
      5.   A conditional order issued by the control officer shall be effective
when issued unless:
         a.   The conditional order varies from the requirements of the
applicable implementation plan, in which case the conditional order shall be
submitted to the administrator as a revision to the applicable implementation
plan pursuant to Section 110(L) of the Act (Implementation Plans), and shall
become effective upon approval by the administrator.
         b.   The conditional order varies from the requirements of a permit
issued for a facility that is required to obtain a permit pursuant to Title V
of the Act (Permits), in which case the conditional order shall be submitted to
the administrator if required by Section 505 of the Act (Notification to
administrator and Contiguous States), and shall be effective at the end of the
review period specified in such section, unless objected to within such period
by the administrator.
   G.   If the terms and conditions of the conditional order are being
violated, the control officer may seek to revoke or suspend the conditional
order. In such event, the control officer shall serve notice of such violation
on the holder of the conditional order in the manner provided in A.R.S. § 49-
498. The notice shall specify the nature of such violation and the date on
which a hearing will be held to determine if a violation has occurred and
whether the conditional order should be suspended or revoked. The date of the
hearing shall be within thirty days from the date the notice is served upon the
holder of the conditional order.
(Ord. 2017-20 § 3 (part), 2017: Ord. 1995-87 § 52, 1995: Ord. 1994-83 § 72,
1994: Ord. 1993-128 § 7 (part), 1993)
Article III. Circumvention
17.28.110   Evasion of basic requirements.
17.28.110   Evasion of basic requirements.
   No provision, rule, or regulation herein shall authorize any practice or
combination of practices designed to circumvent the requirements of this title.
An intent, design, or act to circumvent the requirements of this title shall be
a violation of this title.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 7 (part), 1993)
Chapter 17.32
EMERGENCY EPISODES AND PUBLIC AWARENESS
Sections: 
   
Article I. - Emergency Episodes
   
Article II. - Availability of Monitoring Data
   
Article III. - Public Awareness
Article I. Emergency Episodes
17.32.010   State jurisdiction.
17.32.020   Determination of emergency conditions.
17.32.030   Emergency episode reporting.
17.32.040   Enforcement actions.
17.32.010   State jurisdiction.
   Pursuant to A.R.S. Section 49-465, the Director of the Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality and the Governor of Arizona have exclusive jurisdiction
over any air pollution conditions which constitute an emergency risk to the
public health. Orders of the Governor during any emergency episode condition in
Pima County shall be enforced by the control officer.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 8 (part), 1993)
17.32.020   Determination of emergency conditions.
   A.   When the control officer determines that high concentrations of
pollutants in the ambient air and/or weather conditions constitute an emergency
risk to persons in the county, such determination shall be communicated
promptly to the public and to the Director of the Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality.
      1.   Criteria used for determining an emergency shall include the air
pollutant concentration levels listed in
Table 17.32.020.
      2.   Possible episode conditions shall include the progressively
deteriorating air quality levels listed as Alert, Warning, and Emergency in
Table 17.32.020. These criteria have been established to prevent, avoid, or
reduce the significant harm level of air pollution. (Significant harm means
increased morbidity or irreversible, incapacitating damage to the health of the
citizenry.)
      3.   Weather forecasts of conditions which are likely to produce
unusually high concentrations of air pollutants in a large area shall be
communicated to the public when deemed appropriate by the control officer.
   B.   Upon the recommendation of the Director of the Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality, the Governor of the state may, by proclamation, declare
that an air pollution emergency exists in a specific area and may order
appropriate curtailments of emissions as specified in 40 CFR 51, Appendix L to
eliminate the emergency in the affected area.
Table 17.32.020
AIR POLLUTION EPISODE CRITERIA 
                         Episode Stage*
Pollutant Averaging Time Alert Warning Emergency Significant Harm
                               Episode Stage*
Pollutant       Averaging Time Alert Warning Emergency Significant Harm
SO 2 (ìg/m 3 ) 24 hours       800   1,600   2,100     2,620
PM 10 (ìg/m 3 )24 hours       350   420     500       600
CO (mg/m 3 )    8 hours        17    34      46        57.5
CO (mg/m 3 )    4 hours        -     -       -         86.3
CO (mg/m 3 )    1 hour         -     -       -         144
O 3 (ppm)       1 hour         0.2   0.4     0.5       0.6
NO 2 (ìg/m 3 ) 1 hour         1,130 2,260   3,000     3,750
NO 2 (ìg/m 3 ) 24 hours       282   565     750       938
 
* Providing meteorological conditions are such that the pollutant concentration
can be expected to remain at the designated levels for at least 12 hours.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 8, 1993; Ord. 1979-93 (part), 1979)
17.32.030   Emergency episode reporting.
   A.   During any stage of an air pollution episode in the county, the control
officer shall redirect available resources toward a prearranged plan of air
quality monitoring, reporting, and communication of information to the Arizona
Department of Environmental Quality.
   B.   Such plan shall include (as directed by the Director of ADEQ)
collection and analysis of air pollutant data at intervals more frequent than
normal, and continual analysis of local weather reports and forecasts.
   C.   A written report of the air quality levels before, during, and after
the episode condition shall be forwarded to the ADEQ Director within one week
of the episode.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 8 (part), 1993)
17.32.040   Enforcement actions.
   A.   Depending on the severity of an air pollution episode, the Governor of
the state may prohibit or restrict various emission source activities in the
affected area for the duration of the episode. Such prohibitions or
restrictions may include the enforcement actions listed in
Table 17.32.040 and in 40 CFR 51, Appendix L.
   B.   During any stage of an air pollution episode in the county, upon the
request of the Director of the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality, the
control officer shall redirect available staff to assist ADEQ staff in
eliminating the episode condition, according to a prearranged plan.
      1.   Such plan shall include increased surveillance of emission sources,
possible suspensions of existing air pollution permits, and enforcement of
special emission limiting actions.
      2.   Mandatory prohibitions or restrictions imposed by the Director of
the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality shall be implemented by the
control officer upon the request of the ADEQ director.
Table 17.32.040
POSSIBLE CONTROL ACTIONS DURING VARIOUS STAGES OF AN AIR POLLUTION EPISODE* 
Alert Stage
1. Suspend all open burning permits.
2. Limit incineration to 12 noon to 4:00 p.m.
3. Curtail operations of selected manufacturing industries.
4. Request public to eliminate unnecessary motor vehicle use.
Warning State 
1. Prohibit open burning.
2. Prohibit incineration.
3. Reduce emissions from manufacturing industries by at least 40 percent.
4. Transfer power plant generating loads outside affected area.
5. Prohibit highway construction and dust producing construction activities.
6. Prohibit dust producing crop preparation and cultivation activities.
7. Request public to eliminate motor vehicle use.
Emergency Stage 
1. Prohibit operation of selected manufacturing industries.
2. Close all commercial, governmental, and institutional establishments except
   public safety and welfare institutions.
3. Reduce power generating loads.
4. Halt all construction except emergency construction.
5. Prohibit motor vehicle use except that necessary for public safety and
   welfare.
 
* Subject to orders by the Governor of Arizona and directed by the Director of
the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality.
(Ord. 1989-165 § 30, 1989: Ord. 1979-93 (part), 1979)
Article II. Availability of Monitoring Data
17.32.050   Continuous monitoring of ambient air pollution.
17.32.050   Continuous monitoring of ambient air pollution.
   A.   The control officer shall continually measure the concentration of air
pollutants in the ambient air as needed by the overall control program and
apprise the general public of current or imminent conditions which might be
hazardous to their health.
   B.   Each common pollutant shall be monitored in at least one location
representative of an area of high population density in the county.
   C.   Monitoring data shall be reduced to easily understandable terms and
made available to the public upon request as soon as possible after
acquisition.
   D.   The latest available data shall be reported as current data, and data
from any monitoring station currently in operation shall be selectively
reported upon request.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 8 (part), 1993)
Article III. Public Awareness
17.32.060   Reports to the public.
17.32.070   General information.
17.32.080   Public participation in rulemaking.
17.32.060   Reports to the public.
   A.   Violations of an ambient air standard which occurred during the
preceding calendar year shall be communicated to the public in an annual
report. This report shall be widely distributed, and shall include information
on health hazards associated with violations and on the pollution control
measures which were implemented to reduce the hazardous emission levels. This
report shall also suggest procedures for preventing recurrences of violations,
and ways in which the public may participate in these procedures. For example,
given advance information on adverse weather conditions, the control officer,
upon the approval of the Director of the Arizona Department of Environmental
Quality, may recommend that the public reduce motor vehicle use during selected
hours.
   B.   The public shall be informed of average daily visibility, and average
daily concentrations of three common air pollutants: TSP, CO and O3. This
information shall be made available to newspapers, television and radio
stations for dissemination.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 8 (part), 1993)
17.32.070   General information.
   As resources permit, air quality control district staff shall respond to
telephone and written inquiries from the public regarding the field of air
pollution control or the air quality in Pima County, and shall grant interviews
to the news media, public or private groups.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 8 (part), 1993)
17.32.080   Public participation in rulemaking.
   A.   The control officer shall encourage the public to provide input to the
rulemaking process.
   B.   Extensive publicity, including prominently displayed advertisements in
newspapers of wide circulation and notification by mail to interested public
and private organizations, shall be given to all public hearings conducted by
the air quality advisory council, the air quality hearing board, and the board
of supervisors concerning proposed amendments to this title.
   C.   The control officer shall consider public comment on methods to improve
this title, or to improve air quality in Pima County. For example, informal
comments received from interested citizens may be filed and referred to when
amending this document.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 8 (part), 1993)
Chapter 17.36
Reserved
Chapter 17.40
TRAVEL REDUCTION ORDINANCE
Sections: 
   
Article I. - General Provisions
   
Article II. - Definitions
   
Article III. - Lead Agency
   
Article IV. - Major Employers Applicability
   
Article V. - Requirements for Employers
   
Article VI. - Variances and Appeals
   
Article VII. - Enforcement
Article I. General Provisions
17.40.010   Short title.
17.40.020   Purpose.
17.40.010   Short title.
   The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Travel
Reduction Ordinance."
(Ord. 1988-72 § 1 (part), 1988)
17.40.020   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter, recognizing that motor vehicles are the single
greatest contributor to air pollution, is to improve air quality and reduce
traffic congestion in the incorporated and unincorporated areas of Pima County
by increasing alternate mode usage and reducing overall motor vehicle travel
for commute trips. This chapter shall establish a basis for a cooperative
effort of the local jurisdictions to achieve a uniform program for reduction of
work related trips by employees working for major employers subject to this
regulations.
(Ord. 1988-72 § 1 (part), 1988)
Article II. Definitions
17.40.030   Definitions.
17.40.040   Abbreviations.
17.40.030   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates,
certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
      1.   "Airshed" means the area delineated on the map attached as Exhibit
17.40.030, and codified at the end of this chapter.
      2.   "Alternate mode" means any mode of commute transportation other than
the single occupancy motor vehicle.
      3.   "Approvable travel reduction plan" means a plan submitted by a major
employer that meets the requirements as set forth in Section
17.40.070 of this chapter.
      4.   "Carpool" or "vanpool" means two or more persons traveling in a
light duty vehicle (car, truck or van) to or from work.
      5.   "Commute trip" means a trip taken by an employee to or from work
within the airshed.
      6.   "Commuter matching service" means any system, whether it uses
computer or manual methods, which assists in matching employees for the purpose
of sharing rides to reduce drive alone travel.
      7.   "Employer" means a sole proprietor, partnership, corporation,
unincorporated association, cooperative, joint venture, agency, department,
district or other individual entity, either public or private, that employs
workers. See also "major employer" and voluntary employer."
      8.   "Full-time equivalent (FTE) employees" means the number of employees
an employer would have if the employer's work needs were satisfied by employees
working forty-hour work weeks. The number of full time equivalent employees for
any employer is calculated by dividing the total number of annual work hours
paid by the employer, by two thousand eighty work hours in a year.
      9.   "Local jurisdictions" includes Pima County, city of Tucson, town of
Marana, town of Oro Valley and city of South Tucson.
      10.   "Major employer" means an employer who employs one hundred or more
full-time equivalent employees at a work site during a twenty-four-hour period
for at least six months during the year.
      11.   "Mode" means the type of conveyance used in transportation
including single occupancy motor vehicle, rideshare vehicle (carpool or
vanpool), transit, bicycle and walking.
      12.   "Motor vehicle" means any vehicle propelled by a motor including
car, van, bus, motorcycle and all other motorized vehicles.
      13.   "Public agency" means any political subdivision of the state and
any board, commission or agency thereof.
      14.   "Public interest group" means any nonprofit group whose purpose is
to further the welfare of the community.
      15.   "Regional Program" means the combination of all implemented plans
within the airshed combination.
      16.   "Ridesharing" means transportation of more than one person for
commute purposes, in a motor vehicle, with or without the assistance of a
commuter matching service.
      17.   "Transit" means a bus or other public conveyance system.
      18.   "Transportation coordinator" means a person designated by an
employer, property manager or transportation management association as the lead
person in developing and implementing a travel reduction plan.
      19.   "Transportation management association (TMA)" means a group of
employers or associations formally organized to seek solutions for
transportation problems experienced by the group.
      20.   "Travel reduction plan" means a written report outlining travel
reduction measures which will be submitted annually by each major employer.
      21.   "Travel reduction program" means a program, implementing a travel
reduction plan by an employer, designed to achieve a predetermined level of
travel reduction through various incentives and disincentives.
      22.   "Travel reduction program regional task force" means that task
force established pursuant to the intergovernmental agreement entered into by
the local jurisdictions for the purpose of implementing a uniform travel
reduction program.
      23.   "Vanpool" see "Carpool".
      24.   "Vehicle occupancy" means the number of occupants in a motor
vehicle including the driver.
      25.   "Vehicle miles traveled (VMT)" means the number of miles traveled
by a motor vehicle for commute trips.
      26.   "Work site" means a building or any grouping of buildings located
within Pima County which are on physically contiguous parcels of land or on
parcels separated solely by private or public roadways or rights-of-way, and
which are owned or operated by the same employer.
(Ord. 1988-72 § 1 (part), 1988)
17.40.040   Abbreviations.
   As utilized in this chapter, the following shall have the indicated
meanings:
   A.   PAG—Pima Association of Governments;
   B.   TMA—Transportation Management Association;
   C.   TRO—Travel Reduction Ordinance;
   D.   TRP—Travel reduction program;
   E.   VMT—Vehicle miles traveled.
(Ord. 1988-72 § 1 (part), 1988)
Article III. Lead Agency
17.40.050   Powers and duties.
17.40.050   Powers and duties.
   A.   The Pima County department of environmental quality as lead agency for
Pima County, shall evaluate major employers' TRP plans received from the TRP
task force. The lead agency shall have sixty days to object to any such plan
received, otherwise the plan is automatically approved. Any such objection
shall be based upon the criteria set forth in
Article V of this chapter. If the lead agency objects, the plan is not approved
and shall be returned to the TRP task force with appropriate comments for
review and revision in consultation with the employer.
   B.   The lead agency shall receive recommendations for enforcement from the
TRP task force. The lead agency shall determine when enforcement action is
appropriate and shall take such action as it deems necessary.
(Ord. 1990-113 § 9, 1990: Ord. 1988-72 § 1 (part), 1988)
Article IV. Major Employers Applicability
17.40.060   Major employers.
17.40.061   Voluntary participation.
17.40.060   Major employers.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all major employers.
(Ord. 1988-72 § 1 (part), 1988)
17.40.061   Voluntary participation.
   Employers or groups of employers with less than one hundred full-time
equivalent employees at a single work site are encouraged to participate in
data collection and information dissemination efforts and in the preparation of
their own travel reduction plans on a voluntary basis. These groups shall be
assisted by the TRP task force, and TRP technical advisory committee and TRP
staff, and shall be eligible for participation in all programs and services.
Groups of employers are encouraged to form transportation management
associations.
(Ord. 1988-72 § 1 (part), 1988)
Article V. Requirements for Employers
17.40.070   Requirements for major employers.
17.40.070   Requirements for major employers.
   In each year (twelve-month period following initial formal notice and each
additional twelve-month period) of the regional program each major employer
shall:
   A.   Within ninety days of notice from TRO staff that they qualify as a
major employer, provide each regular employee with information on alternate
mode options and travel reduction measures including, but limited to: Sun Tran
bus routes and schedules, the RideShare program, and bicycle routes. This
information shall also be provided to new employees at the time of hiring.
   B.   Participate in a survey and reporting effort, as directed by the TRP
task force and as scheduled by TRP staff. The results of this survey shall form
a baseline against which attainment of the targets in subsection E of this
section shall be measured as follows:
      1.   The baseline for participation in alternative modes of
transportation shall be based on the total number of employees;
      2.   The baseline for VMT shall be the average VMT per employee for
employees not residing on the work site.
   C.   Prepare and submit a travel reduction plan for submittal to TRP staff
and presentation to the TRP task force. TRP staff will assist in preparing the
plan. Major employers shall submit plans within nine weeks after they complete
their survey. The plan shall contain the following elements:
      1.   The name of the designated Transportation Coordinator;
      2.   A description of employee information programs and other travel
reduction measures which have been completed to date or during the previous
year;
      3.   A description of travel reduction measures to be undertaken by the
major employer in the coming year of the plan. The following measures may be
included:
         a.   A commuter matching service, in addition to or coordinated with
PAG's RideShare program, to facilitate employee ridesharing work trips,
         b.   Provision of vans or vanpooling,
         c.   Subsidized carpooling or vanpooling which may include payment for
fuel, insurance or parking,
         d.   Use of company vehicles for carpooling,
         e.   Provision of preferential parking for carpool or vanpool users
which may include close-in parking or covered parking facilities,
         f.   Cooperation with Sun Tran or other transportation providers to
provide additional regular or express service buses to the work site,
         g.   Subsidized bus fares,
         h.   Construction of special loading and unloading facilities for
transit and carpool and vanpool users,
         i.   Cooperation with local jurisdictions to construct walkways or
bicycle routes to the work site,
         j.   Provision of bicycle racks, lockers and showers for employees who
walk or bicycle to and from work,
         k.   Provision of a special information center where information on
alternate modes and other travel reduction measures will be available,
         l.   Establishment of a work-at-home program, full or part-time, for
employees,
         m.   Establishment of a program of adjusted work hours which may
include compressed work weeks and employee-selected starting and stopping
hours. Work hour adjustments should not interfere with or discourage the use of
ridesharing and transit,
         n.   Establishment of a program of parking incentives and
disincentives; such as a fee for parking and/or a "rebate" for employees who do
not use the parking facility,
         o.   Incentives to encourage employees to live closer to work,
         p.   Implementation of other measures designed to reduce commute trips
such as the provision of day care facilities or emergency taxi services.
   D.   An approvable travel reduction plan shall meet all of the following
criteria:
      1.   The plan shall designate a transportation coordinator;
      2.   The plan shall describe a mechanism for regular distribution of
alternate mode transportation information to employees;
      3.   For employers who in any year, meet or exceed annual regional
targets for travel reduction, the plan shall accurately and completely describe
current and planned travel reduction measures;
      4.   For employers who, in any year, fall below the regional targets for
travel reduction, the plan shall include commitments to implement:
         a.   At least two specific travel reduction measures (such as those
described in subsection (C)(3) of this section), in the first year of the
regional program.
         b.   At least three specific Alternate Modes incentives programs (such
as those described in subsection (C)(3) of this section) in the second year of
the regional program;
      5.   After the second year, the travel reduction program task force shall
review the travel reduction programs for employers not meeting regional targets
and may recommend additional measures.
   E.   Employers shall implement all travel reduction measures considered
necessary by the task force to attain the following target employee
participation in alternate modes or commuter trip VMT reductions per regulated
work site.
      1.   Fifteen percent of the total employee pool in the first year of the
regional program;
      2.   Twenty percent of the total employee pool in the second year of the
regional program;
      3.   Twenty-five percent of the total employee pool in the third year of
the regional program.
   F.   After the third year of the regional program, either:
      1.   An increase in employee participation in alternate modes of one
percent per year for each subsequent year until forty percent of all commute
trips are made by alternate modes; or
      2.   Alternatively, a reduction in average annual VMT per employee of
1.5% per year can be selected by a major employer after a twenty-five percent
alternate mode or commuter trip VMT reduction usage is achieved.
(Ord. 1988-72 § 1 (part), 1988)
Article VI. Variances and Appeals
17.40.080   Variances.
17.40.081   Appeals.
17.40.080   Variances.
   A.   The TRP task force shall serve as a hearing board for major employers
requesting variances from all or part of TRP ordinance requirements and/or
travel reduction plan scheduling.
   B.   Any major employer wishing a variance from any of the requirements of
this chapter shall make written application to the TRP task force which will
determine within sixty days whether to recommend the variance. The
recommendation will be forwarded in writing to the lead agency which will or
will not authorize the variance within sixty days. Request for variances shall
be finally approved or disapproved within one hundred twenty days of the filing
of a request by an employer.
(Ord. 1988-72 § 1 (part), 1988)
17.40.081   Appeals.
   A.   Any major employer or any resident of the jurisdiction may appeal a
decision of the lead agency to authorize or withhold variances or a decision of
the lead agency regarding enforcement or other provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The Pima County board of supervisors will hear and decide the appeal.
If the decision is to disapprove the plan, the plan shall be returned to the
TRP task force for review and revision or to the lead agency for appropriate
action.
(Ord. 1988-72 § 1 (part), 1988)
Article VII. Enforcement
17.40.090   Violations.
17.40.091   Penalties.
17.40.090   Violations.
   A.   The lead agency, upon determining a substantial violation of this
chapter, shall request the county attorney to take appropriate legal action in
superior court.
   B.   Violations of any of the following requirements may subject a major
employer to civil penalties:
      1.   Failure to collect or supply information requested by the TRP task
force;
      2.   Failure to disseminate information on alternate modes and other
travel reduction measures as specified herein;
      3.   Failure to designate a transportation coordinator;
      4.   Failure to submit an approvable travel reduction plan;
      5.   Failure to implement an approved plan within the time schedule
provided or failure to perform a revision of a plan as required by the TRP task
force;
   C.   Failure by a major employer to meet travel reduction goals as defined
in Section
17.40.070 (E) and (F) of this chapter shall not constitute a violation;
provided, that the major employer is attempting in good faith to meet the
goals.
(Ord. 1988-72 § 1 (part), 1988)
17.40.091   Penalties.
   A.   Except as provided in this chapter, any employer who violates the
requirements of this chapter is guilty of a civil infraction and subject to
civil penalty of up to two hundred and fifty dollars per day of violation for
each day the violation continues. In the alternative, this chapter authorizes
the use of the authority of A.R.S. Section 49-502 to enforce this chapter.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 8, 1993; Ord. 1988-72 § 1 (part), 1988)
Exhibit 17.40.030
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4396.png]
Chapter 17.44
VOLUNTARY NO-DRIVE DAY ORDINANCE
Sections: 
   
Article I. - General Provisions
Article I. General Provisions
17.44.010   Short title.
17.44.020   Purpose.
17.44.030   Funding.
17.44.010   Short title.
   The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Voluntary No-
Drive Day Ordinance."
(Ord. 1993-128 § 9, 1993;)
17.44.020   Purpose.
   A Voluntary No-Drive Day program for Pima County is mandated by A.R.S. 49-
506. The purpose of the program is to increase the community's awareness and
knowledge of air quality issues related to automobile-generated air pollution.
To achieve this goal, the Voluntary No-Drive Day program shall:
      1.   Develop a coordinated, twelve month plan to increase the use of
alternate transportation modes;
      2.   Sponsor events which generate media coverage, both mass media and
targeted media;
      3.   Develop events in conjunction with other organizations or agencies
which have the capacity to contribute resources towards air quality awareness
and information;
      4.   Increase community knowledge of air quality related issues; and
      5.   Increase the community's awareness of the health and welfare risks
associated with long-term exposure to automobile-generated pollution.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 9, 1993)
17.44.030   Funding.
   The Voluntary No-Drive Day program shall be funded from the State Air
Quality Fund pursuant to A.R.S. Section 49-551 and implementation of the
program shall be subject to the availability of such funds.
(Ord. 1993-128 § 9, 1993)
Title 18 ZONING
   
Chapter 18.01 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
Chapter 18.03 - GENERAL DEFINITIONS
   
Chapter 18.05 - ZONES, MAPS AND BOUNDARIES
   
Chapter 18.07 - GENERAL REGULATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
   
Chapter 18.09 - GENERAL RESIDENTIAL AND RURAL ZONING PROVISIONS
   
Chapter 18.11 - TH TRAILER HOMESITE ZONE
   
Chapter 18.12 - IR INSTITUTIONAL RESERVE ZONE
   
Chapter 18.13 - RH RURAL HOMESTEAD ZONE
   
Chapter 18.14 - GR-1 RURAL RESIDENTIAL ZONE
   
Chapter 18.15 - ML MOUNT LEMMON ZONE
   
Chapter 18.17 - SR SUBURBAN RANCH ZONE*
   
Chapter 18.18 - SR-2 SUBURBAN RANCH ESTATE ZONE
   
Chapter 18.19 - SH SUBURBAN HOMESTEAD ZONE
   
Chapter 18.21 - CR-1 SINGLE RESIDENCE ZONE
   
Chapter 18.23 - CR-2 SINGLE RESIDENCE ZONE
   
Chapter 18.25 - CR-3 SINGLE RESIDENCE ZONE
   
Chapter 18.27 - CR-4 MIXED-DWELLING TYPE ZONE
   
Chapter 18.29 - CR-5 MULTIPLE RESIDENCE ZONE
   
Chapter 18.31 - TR TRANSITIONAL ZONE
   
Chapter 18.33 - CMH-1 COUNTY MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOME—1 ZONE
   
Chapter 18.35 - CMH-2 COUNTY MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOME—2 ZONE
   
Chapter 18.37 - MU MULTIPLE USE ZONE
   
Chapter 18.39 - GENERAL COMMERCIAL STANDARDS
   
Chapter 18.40 - MR MAJOR RESORT ZONE
   
Chapter 18.41 - RVC RURAL VILLAGE CENTER ZONE
   
Chapter 18.43 - CB-1 LOCAL BUSINESS ZONE
   
Chapter 18.45 - CB-2 GENERAL BUSINESS ZONE
   
Chapter 18.47 - INDUSTRIAL ZONING CLASSIFICATIONS
   
Chapter 18.49 - CPI CAMPUS PARK INDUSTRIAL ZONE
   
Chapter 18.51 - CI-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL/WAREHOUSING ZONE
   
Chapter 18.53 - CI-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL ZONE
   
Chapter 18.55 - CI-3 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL ZONE*
   
Chapter 18.57 - AIRPORT ENVIRONS AND FACILITIES*
   
Chapter 18.58 - HELIPORTS AND HELISTOPS
   
Chapter 18.59 - GC GOLF COURSE ZONE
   
Chapter 18.61 - HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE*
   
Chapter 18.63 - HISTORIC ZONE
   
Chapter 18.65 - (RESERVED)
   
Chapter 18.67 - BUFFER OVERLAY ZONE
   
Chapter 18.68 - INFILL OVERLAY ZONE
   
Chapter 18.69 - SUBDIVISION STANDARDS
   
Chapter 18.70 - MINOR LANDS DIVISION
   
Chapter 18.71 - DEVELOPMENT PLAN STANDARDS*
   
Chapter 18.72 - NATIVE PLANT PRESERVATION
   
Chapter 18.73 - LANDSCAPING, BUFFERING AND SCREENING STANDARDS*
   
Chapter 18.75 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS
   
Chapter 18.77 - ROADWAY FRONTAGE STANDARDS
   
Chapter 18.78 - GATEWAY OVERLAY ZONE
   
Chapter 18.79 - SIGN STANDARDS*
   
Chapter 18.81 - GRADING STANDARDS
   
Chapter 18.83 - ADDRESS STANDARDS
   
Chapter 18.85 - (RESERVED)
   
Chapter 18.87 - (RESERVED)
   
Chapter 18.89 - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
   
Chapter 18.90 - SPECIFIC PLANS
   
Chapter 18.91 - REZONING PROCEDURES
   
Chapter 18.92 - TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS
   
Chapter 18.93 - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT VARIANCES, TEMPORARY USE PERMITS AND
INTERPRETATIONS*
   
Chapter 18.95 - COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT*
   
Chapter 18.97 - CONDITIONAL USE PROCEDURES
   
Chapter 18.99 - REVIEW COMMITTEES
   
Chapter 18.101 - ADMINISTRATORS
Chapter 18.01
GENERAL PROVISIONS
18.01.010   Short title.
18.01.020   General purpose and adoption.
18.01.030   Application of zoning code.
18.01.040   Interpretation and conflict.
18.01.050   Repeal of inconsistent provisions.
18.01.060   Severability.
18.01.070   Code amendment procedures.
18.01.010   Short title.
   A.   This title may be referred to as the county zoning code.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.01.020   General purpose and adoption.
   A.   Purpose. A code:
      1.   Adopting an official land use plan:
         a.   Providing for the creation of zoning districts in the
unincorporated area of Pima County, Arizona,
         b.   Prescribing area requirements, the classes of uses of buildings,
structures, improvements and premises in said several zoning districts;
      2.   Adopting a map of said zones;
      3.   Defining the terms used in said code;
      4.   Establishing boards of adjustment and appeals;
      5.   Providing for the adjustment, amendment and enforcement of said
code; and
      6.   Prescribing penalties for the violation thereof.
   B.   Adoption. For the promotion and protection of the public health, peace,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare, and in order to secure for
the citizens of Pima County, Arizona, the social and economic advantages of an
orderly, efficient use of land, and as a part of the master plan for said
county, there is hereby adopted and established an official land use plan and
zoning code for Pima County, Arizona, and rules, regulations and plans by which
the future growth and development of said county may be directed in accordance
with said plan and code, as provided in A.R.S. Section 11-801, et seq.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.01.030   Application of zoning code.
   A.   Guiding Principles. The following principles and rules are hereby
adopted as a guide in the use and application of this code:
      1.   The powers of the board of supervisors, the planning and zoning
commission, the several boards of adjustment, the zoning inspector and all
other persons or agencies charged with the administration of this code shall be
strictly limited by the expressed intent of the legislature in the enactment of
A.R.S. Section 11-801, et seq. and by the language of this code.
      2.   All terms used herein shall be interpreted according to their
common, plain, natural and accepted usage when not otherwise defined herein.
      3.   In any dispute concerning the application of any provision of this
code, that solution shall be favored which is most reasonable with regard to
the general purpose of this code and the established and accepted principles of
American planning and zoning law.
      4.   The application of this code to any property or use classified
herein shall be governed by all the particular facts in each individual case,
and the fundamental rights of any individual owner shall not be prejudiced by
reason of being in a minority, either in numbers or in land owned, and any such
owner shall be entitled to a balancing of equities of all the interests
concerned in said application.
      5.   The right of every affected property owner to petition and to be
heard whenever the application of this code is at issue, shall be strictly
observed at all times.
      6.   No special favors or privileges shall be granted to any individual
or group of property owners and no permit shall be issued under the terms of
this code which will or might reasonably tend to destroy the established
economic or social uses and values of adjacent or surrounding properties.
      7.   On every application of this code to any given area, the relative
importance of the interests involved shall be as follows:
         a.   First, established conforming uses of adjacent or surrounding
properties having an equal or higher classification;
         b.   Second, the cost of tax-supported and other public services to
the area affected, and the increased or decreased share of this cost which
might be borne by said area if a proposed use or change of classification is
permitted; and
         c.   Third, the value of the proposed classifications and uses to the
orderly development of the neighborhood or area affected.
      8.   The theory and use of "spot" zoning is hereby specifically
repudiated in the application of any classification of this code to any given
land area.
   B.   Regulations. Except as hereinafter provided:
      1.   All property, except that covered by statutory exemptions, shall be
hereby governed according to the type of zone in which the same is located, as
shown on the zoning maps adopted and made part hereof, and shall be subject to
the regulations hereinafter set froth for such zones, the regulations applying
to specific uses and the general regulations hereinafter set forth;
      2.   When property designated for use in a specific zone is restricted in
any manner, it shall be so labeled with an (R) so as to indicate that upon the
public record restrictions exist;
      3.   No building shall be erected and no existing building shall be
moved, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land, building or premises
be used, designed or intended to be used for any purpose or in any manner other
than a use listed in this code, or amendments thereto, as permitted in the zone
in which such land, building or premises is located;
      4.   No building shall be erected, nor shall any existing building be
moved, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed in height the limit
established by this code, or amendments thereto, for the zone in which such
building is located;
      5.   No building shall be erected, nor shall any existing building be
moved, altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open spaces surrounding any
building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity with
the building-site requirements and the area and yard regulations established by
this code, or amendments thereto, for the zone in which such building is
located;
      6.   No yard or other space provided about any building for the purpose
of complying with the regulations of this code, or amendments thereto, shall be
considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building or
structure;
      7.   No structure shall be erected in a required front yard, side yard or
rear yard, except as specifically permitted herein; and
      8.   The express enumeration and authorization herein of a particular
class of building, structure, premises or use in a zone shall be deemed a
prohibition of such building, structure, premises or use in all other zones of
more restrictive classification.
   C.   Statutory Exemptions.
      1.   As specified in A.R.S. Section 11-830, the provisions of this code
shall not prevent, restrict or otherwise regulate in any district or zone the
use or occupation of land or improvements for railroad, mining, metallurgical,
grazing or general agricultural purposes, as defined herein, provided the tract
or premises so used is not less than five contiguous commercial acres.
      2.   Land shall be classified as being used for:
         a.   Grazing purposes when fifty percent or more of the owner's income
from said land is derived from the use of, or from the rental of said land for
grazing purposes; or
         b.   General agricultural purposes when fifty percent or more of the
owner's income from said land is derived from the production of agricultural
products or from the rental of said land for the production of said products.
      3.   Under A.R.S. Section 11-269.10, the provisions of this code do not
prohibit a resident from parking of a motor vehicle on a street or driveway in
the county if the vehicle is required to be available at designated periods at
the person's residence as a condition of the person's employment and either of
the following applies:
         a.   The resident is employed by a public service corporation that is
regulated by the corporation commission, an entity regulated by the federal
energy regulatory commission or a municipal utility and the public service
corporation, federally regulated utility or municipal utility is required to
prepare for emergency deployments of personnel and equipment for repair or
maintenance of natural gas, electrical, telecommunications or water
infrastructure, the vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating of twenty
thousand pounds or less and is owned or operated by the public service
corporation, federally regulated utility or municipal utility and the vehicle
bears an official emblem or other visible designation of the public service
corporation, federally regulated utility or municipal utility.
         b.   The resident is employed by a public safety agency, including
police or fire service for a federal, state, local or tribal agency or a
private fire service provider or an ambulance service provider that is
regulated pursuant to title 36, chapter 21.1, and the vehicle has a gross
vehicle weight rating of ten thousand pounds or less and bears an official
emblem or other visible designation of that agency.
      4.   For the purposes of this section, "telecommunications" means the
transmission of information of the user's choosing between or among points
specified by the user without change in the form or content of the information
as sent and received. Telecommunications does not include commercial mobile
radio services.
   D.   Provisions for Nonconforming Uses and Buildings.
      1.   Nonconforming Uses Exempted.
         a.   As specified in A.R.S. Section 11-812, the provisions of this
code shall not affect existing uses of property or the right to its continued
use or the reasonable repair or alteration thereof for the purpose for which
used on February 16, 1953, or for any other use of the same or a more
restrictive classification.
         b.   A nonconforming business use within any district or zone shall
have the right to expansion, provided it does not exceed one hundred percent of
the area of the original business. Area of the original business is defined as
being any land or building, or both, improved for a business purpose.
         c.   The term "business use," as used in this subsection, shall be
limited to the uses described in Sections
18.31.010(B) (TR transitional zone),
18.43.030(B) (CB-1 local business zone),
18.45.030(B) and (C) (CB-2 general business zone),
18.51.030(B) and (C) (CI-1 light industrial/ware-housing zone), and
18.43.030(B), (D) and (F) (CI-2 general industrial zone) of this code.
      2.   Nonconforming Use of Land. The lawful use of land existing at the
time this code or any preceding Pima County zoning ordinance became effective,
or on the effective date of any amendment of the text or of the maps hereof,
although such use does not conform to the provisions hereof for said land, may
be continued, but if such nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of
twelve months, any future use of said land shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this code.
      3.   Nonconforming Use of Buildings.
         a.   The lawful use of a building existing on February 16, 1953,
although such use does not conform with the provisions hereof for such building
and such use, may be continued provided no structural alterations, except those
required by law or ordinance or permitted by the board of adjustment (
Chapter 18.93, boards of adjustment and appeals) under this code, are made
herein.
         b.   If any such nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of
twelve months, any future use of said building shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this code; provided, that the owner of any building which was
under construction or vacant on February 16, 1953, and was designed for a use
not in conformity with the zoning classification in which it was located on
said date, may, upon application, have a certificate of nonconforming use
issued by the zoning inspector within sixty days from February 16, 1953, which
certificate shall establish the nonconforming character of said building for a
period not to exceed twelve months from February 16, 1953. Occupancy of said
building by a use permitted under said certificate during said period shall
establish said use as a nonconforming use under this subsection. A certificate
for an additional period of not more than twelve months may be granted by the
board at or before the expiration of the original certificate upon the showing
of extreme hardship and that the surrounding area would not be subject to
additional damage thereby.
      4.   Plans for Nonconforming Use.
         a.   Any owner of land zoned under this code shall file in writing
with the planning and zoning commission within one hundred eighty days after
February 16, 1953, a plan of development for such land, including uses not
permitted by the zoning, shall be issued a special nonconforming hardship use
permit by the board of adjustment for said proposed development, or any part
thereof, at any time within two years from February 16, 1953.
         b.   If any temporary governmental regulation prohibiting the proposed
development is in full force and effect during said two-year period, the time
limit shall be extended for an additional period equal to the time said
governmental regulation is in effect, but no such permit shall be issued more
than five years after February 16, 1953.
         c.   Said plan of development with necessary plans and sketches shall
show the legal description of the land and the location of proposed buildings
and improvements in sufficient detail to determine the conformity or
nonconformity of the proposed uses. Any use proposed in any such plan of
development shall conform to the minimum standards of the most restrictive zone
in which said use would be a nonconforming use under this code.
      5.   Alteration of Nonconforming Buildings. No existing building
designed, arranged or intended for or devoted to a use not permitted under the
regulations of this code for the zone in which located shall be enlarged,
extended, reconstructed or structurally altered unless such building and such
enlargement, extension, reconstruction and structural alterations, and the
further use thereof, conform in every respect with the regulations specified by
this code for such zone in which said building is located, except a
nonconforming business use as provided in Section
18.01.030(D)(1) and except as provided in Section
18.01.030(D)(7), but nothing in this subsection shall authorize the violation
of any setback, health or sanitary law, ordinance or regulation not a part of
this code.
      6.   Destroyed Nonconforming Buildings.
         a.   If, at any time, any building in existence or maintained on
February 16, 1953, and which does not conform to the regulations for the zone
in which it is located, shall be destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God or
act of the public enemy to the extent of one hundred percent of its value,
according to the appraisal thereof by competent appraisers, then and without
further action by the board of supervisors the said building and the land on
which said building was located or maintained shall from and after the date of
such destruction be subject to all of the regulations specified by this code
for the zone in which such land and building are located.
         b.   In the event a building is destroyed to the extent of one hundred
percent of its value, the owner thereof shall have the right to rebuild for
said use; provided said structure is rebuilt in conformance with the
requirements of the most restrictive zone in which said nonconforming use would
otherwise be permitted and provided permits for such construction is obtained
within three months of the date of destruction and such construction is started
within six months of the date of destruction.
      7.   Exception for Green Building Upgrades and Renovations that Reduce
Energy or Water Consumption. Notwithstanding Sections
18.01.030(D)(3)(a) or
18.01.030(D)(5), structural alterations, excluding enlargement and extension
except as provided below, necessary for green building upgrades and renovations
that reduce energy or water consumption are permitted without the requirement
for the lawful nonconforming aspects of the building or use to be brought into
conformance with the regulations specified in this code and shall not require
submittal of a development plan for review and approval in accordance with
Section
18.71.010(B). For the purposes of this section, permitted enlargement and
extension includes the installation of rainwater harvesting systems, ground- or
roof-mounted solar energy systems, roof eaves or overhangs, attached shade
structures or detached shade structures extending three feet or less from the
main building, roofed porches, and green roofs. Green building upgrades and
renovations must reduce energy or water consumption. Examples include, but are
not limited to, lighting, air barrier, duct insulation, duct sealing, attic
insulation, wall insulation, plumbing fixtures, windows, HVAC, domestic solar
hot water system, solar photovoltaic system, water harvesting cistern, roof
eaves or overhangs, attached shade structures or detached shade structures
extending three feet or less from the main building, roofed porches, vegetated
roofs, and Energy Star qualified roof product, or as determined by the chief
zoning inspector or designee.
   E.   Zoning Permits.
      1.   A zoning use permit shall be required for the erection,
construction, reconstruction or alteration of any structure, or the change in
use of any property or structure, whether or not the activity requires a
building permit.
      2.   A zoning use permit is required for the above activities when the
activities do not require a building permit, except that an accessory building
or accessory structure of two hundred square feet or less in area does not
require a zoning use permit when the cost of the accessory building or
accessory structure is one thousand dollars or less. However, accessory
buildings and structures of two hundred square feet or less are still subject
to development standards of the underlying zone.
   F.   Time Limits for Development Plans, Tentative Subdivision Plats and Type
II Grading Permits. Notwithstanding any other provisions in this title, the
director of development services, or designee, may grant approvals for
development plans, tentative subdivision plats and Type II grading permits for
up to three years. Time limit extensions may be granted in accordance with
Section
18.01.030(G).
   G.   Time Limit Extensions for Development Plans, Tentative Subdivision
Plats and Type II Grading Permits. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
title, the director of development services, or designee, may grant time limit
extensions for development plans, tentative subdivision plats and Type II
grading permits. Time limit extensions may be granted for up to three years. An
applicant for an extension must pay a fee per the board of supervisors' adopted
fee ordinance and demonstrate that unforeseen circumstances beyond the
applicant's control caused the applicant to need the extension.
(Ord. 2013-42, § 1, 2013; Ord. 2012-24 § 1, 2012; Ord. 2011-45 § 1, 2011; Ord.
2009-59 § 1, 2009; Ord. 2009-35 § 1, 2009; Ord. 2004-59 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1994-
135 § 1, 1994; Ord. 1985-188 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.01.040   Interpretation and conflict.
   A.   Interpretation.
      1.   Interpreting and applying the provisions of this code, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of public safety,
health, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare.
      2.   It is not intended by this code to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in
any way to impair or interfere with any existing provision of law or ordinance
previously adopted pursuant to the laws relating to the use of building or
premises, or relating to the erection, construction, establishment, alteration
or enlargement of any buildings or improvements, except to the extent any
existing provisions conflict with or are inconsistent with the valid provisions
of this code, and to that extent and no more, the same are hereby repealed.
   B.   Conflict. It is not intended by this code to interfere with or abrogate
or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement between private parties, but
where the zoning provisions of this code are more restrictive than any existing
private restrictive covenant affecting any portion of the unincorporated area
of the county, said zoning provisions shall prevail over said private covenant.
   C.   When interpreting the specific language of the zoning code, ambiguities
and conflicting provisions shall be resolved by reference to the following
guidelines:
      1.   The chapter purpose statements, the general purpose of the zoning
code and the type and intent of the zone;
      2.   Use compatibility within a zone;
      3.   Impact on other property within the zone, and adjacent or affected
property;
      4.   Context of the section; and
      5.   Compatibility with applicable zoning code sections and other Pima
County regulations.
(Ord. 1986-152 § 1, 1986; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.01.050   Repeal of inconsistent provisions.
   A.   All ordinances and portions or ordinances of Pima County in conflict
herewith are hereby expressly repealed.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.01.060   Severability.
   A.   This code and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be
severable. Should any chapter, section, subsection or provision of this code be
declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the code as a whole, or
any portion thereof other than the chapter, section, subsection or provision so
declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.01.070   Code amendment procedures.
   A.   Purpose. As authorized by A.R.S. Section 11-829, this section
establishes a public process for code text amendments, upon recommendation by
the planning and zoning commission and adoption by the board of supervisors,
that are consistent with the guiding principles of this code.
   B.   Initiation.
      1.   The board of supervisors or the planning and zoning commission is
responsible for the initiation of code amendments, and may hear requests for
the same from private individuals who have submitted evidence that public
benefit would result from such amendment. The board of supervisors, if
initiating the code amendment, shall set the amendment for the planning and
zoning commission public hearing;
      2.   The planning and development services department is responsible for
the development and coordination of code text amendments.
   C.   Planning and Zoning Commission Review.
      1.   Commission preliminary review:
         a.   A preliminary hearing, as may be required by written commission
policy, shall be held by the commission to determine the merits of the draft
text amendment, unless the amendment has been initiated by the board of
supervisors;
         b.   The commission may set the proposed amendment for public hearing,
remand it to the department for further development, deny the request, or
continue the hearing for a definite time not to exceed nine months;
      2.   Commission public hearing:
         a.   Public hearing notice shall be provided as directed by the board
of supervisors for each proposed text amendment pursuant to at least one of the
following notification procedures:
            1)   By first class mail to each real property owner, as shown on
the last assessment, whose real property is directly affected by the changes,
            2)   By publishing a "display ad" covering not less than one-eighth
of a full page in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. The county
shall also send notice by first class mail to persons who register their names
and addresses with the county as being interested in receiving such notice. The
county shall charge a fee in accordance with the development services fee
schedule.
         b.   The commission shall hold, at a minimum, one public hearing at
which all interested parties may appear and shall be heard;
         c.   The commission may continue the hearing for a definite time not
to exceed nine months;
         d.   After the public hearing, the department shall transmit the
findings and recommendation of the commission to the board of supervisors.
   D.   Board of Supervisors Review.
      1.   Public hearing notice shall be provided by publishing such changes
prior to the first hearing on such changes in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county. The changes shall be published in a "display ad"
covering not less than one-eighth of a full page.
   E.   Public Notice Register. The county shall annually publish a public
notice register application form in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county. The form shall not be less than one-eighth of a page. Persons included
in the public notice register shall receive notice in conformance with Section
18.01.070(C)(2)(a).
   F.   Receipt of Notice. The failure to receive notice by any person or
entity shall not constitute grounds for any court to invalidate the actions of
the county for which the notice was given.
(Ord. 2011-2 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1991-36 § 1, 1991; Ord. 1989-14 § 1, 1989; Ord.
1988-204 (part), 1989; Ord. 1985-141 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part),
1985)
Chapter 18.03
GENERAL DEFINITIONS
18.03.010   General usage.
18.03.020   Definitions.
18.03.030   Illustrations.
18.03.010   General usage.
   A.   The definitions provided for in this chapter shall apply throughout
this code, unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the context or
the term is defined differently in any other chapter.
   B.   When not inconsistent with the context:
      1.   Words used in the present tense include the future;
      2.   Words in the singular number include the plural; and
      3.   Words in the plural number include the singular.
   C.   The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory.
   D.   Terms found in uppercase type refer to definitions found elsewhere in
this chapter.
(Ord. 2004-59 § 2, 2004; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.03.020   Definitions.
   A.   Definitions "A."
      1.   Accessory building: A subordinate building on the same lot or
building site as a main building, the use of which is incidental to that of the
main building and which is used exclusively by the occupants of the main
buildings or their nonpaying guests or employees.
      2.   Accessory dwelling unit: A self-contained living unit that is on the
same lot or parcel as a single-family dwelling of greater square footage than
the accessory dwelling unit, that includes its own sleeping and sanitation
facilities and that may include its own kitchen facilities.
      3.   Accessory structure: Any structure not defined as an "accessory
building" on the same lot or site as a main building, the use of which is
incidental and subordinate to that of the main building on the same lot or
site.
      4.   Accessory use: A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use of a lot or building located upon the same lot or building site.
      5.   Acre: A land area of forty-three thousand five hundred sixty square
feet.
      6.   Adaptive reuse: The conversion of an existing one-family dwelling or
portions of a one-family dwelling located on a lot abutting a major street, as
designated on the major streets and scenic routes plan, to an office use or a
use that is similarly low intensity and low traffic generating.
      7.   Adult activities facility: A retail, commercial, recreational or
industrial establishment which includes, as a regular and substantial portion
of its business, conduct or matter distinguished or characterized by emphasis
on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Adult activities
facilities include, but are not limited to the following: adult arcades, adult
bookstores, or video stores, cabarets, adult live entertainment establishments,
adult motion picture theaters, adult theaters, and massage establishments that
offer adult services or nude model studios.
      8.   Adult arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
and in which coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other
image producing devices are maintained to show images involving specific sexual
activities or specific anatomical areas to persons in booths or viewing rooms.
      9.   Adult bookstore or video store: A commercial establishment that
offers for sale or rent any of the following as one of its principal business
purposes:
         a.   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter,
photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or reproductions or slides
or other visual representations that depict or describe specific sexual
activities or specific anatomical areas.
         b.   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use
in connection with specific sexual activities.
      10.   Adult care home service: A home occupation providing care for up to
ten elderly or functionally impaired adults in a protective setting for a
portion of a twenty-four-hour day.
      11.   Adult live entertainment establishment: An establishment that
features either:
         a.   Persons who appear in a state of nudity.
         b.   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
specific anatomical areas or specific sexual activities.
      12.   Adult motion picture theater: A commercial establishment in which,
for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides
or other similar photographic reproductions that are characterized by the
depiction or description of specific sexual activities or specific anatomical
areas are predominantly shown.
      13.   Adult oriented businesses: Adult arcades, adult bookstores or video
stores, cabarets, adult live entertainment
establishments, adult motion picture theaters, adult theaters, and massage
establishments that offer adult services or nude model studios.
      14.   Adult oriented business manager: A person on the premises of an
adult oriented business who is authorized to exercise overall operational
control of the business.
      15.   Adult service: Dancing, serving food or beverages, modeling,
posing, wrestling, singing, reading, talking, listening or other performances
or activities conducted for any consideration in an adult oriented business by
a person who is nude or seminude during all or part of the time that the person
is providing the service.
      16.   Adult service provider or erotic entertainer: Means any person who
provides an adult service.
      17.   Adult theater: A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment that predominantly features persons who appear in a
state of nudity or who engage in live performances that are characterized by
the exposure of specific anatomical areas or specific sexual activities.
      18.   Agriculture: The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops,
horticulture, animal husbandry and uses customarily incidental thereto, but not
including commercial slaughterhouses, stockyards, meat packing plants,
fertilizer yards, bone yards, or plants for the reduction of animal matter.
      19.   Alley: A way dedicated to the public which affords a secondary
means of access to abutting property.
      20.   Animal rescue and sanctuary facility: Those premises that provide
humane care for domestic animal(s) and/or any other animal(s) not under the
jurisdiction of the Arizona Game and Fish Department, operate as an animal
welfare facility, and provide adoption services for adoptable animals. Animals
maintained at such premises are not, for commercial purposes, bought, sold,
intentionally bred, or traded. Individual residences where animals are fostered
under the auspices of a third-party, non-profit 501(c)(3) animal welfare
organization or Pima County animal care are not considered to be an animal
rescue and sanctuary facility so long as they comply with any limits on the
number of animals set forth in the applicable zone.
      21.   Apartment: One or more rooms occupying all or part of a floor or
floors in a building of one or more floors or stories, but not the entire
building, whether the apartment is intended for use as a residence, office, for
the operation of any industry or business, or for any other use permitted in
the zone in which it is located.
      22.   Apiary: A place where bees are kept and permitted to propagate or
produce honey.
      23.   Artisan: Person working at a craft such as ceramics, metalworking,
woodworking, jewelry making, leatherworking, weaving, antique furniture
repairing and the making of custom furniture.
      24.   Artist: Practitioner of drawing, painting, sculpting, writing,
photography or similar activity.
      25.   Assisted living center: A state licensed residential care
institution that provides or contracts to provide supervisory care services, or
directed care services, for eleven or more residents on a continuing basis.
      26.   Assisted living home: A single housekeeping unit in a dwelling
where lodging, meals, assistance and care can be provided to ten or fewer adult
individuals who are elderly or have physical or mental disabilities and who are
not related to the owner or manager.
      27.   Average finished grade: The mean average elevation of ground after
site preparation, measured five feet from a building at five-foot intervals.
   B.   Definitions "B."
      1.   Basement: A space which is partly underground and has at least half
of its height, from floor to finished ceiling, below the average finished
grade. See also story.
      2.   Bed and breakfast establishment: A residential property that is
occupied by an owner or a full-time resident as his or her principal residence
and is also being used for short term commercial lodging or lodging for
compensation and breakfast service for a limited number of overnight guests of
not more than sixty consecutive days each stay.
      3.   Board: One of the boards of adjustment appointed under the authority
of this code.
      4.   Boarding/rooming house: A building, other than a hotel, where
lodging is provided, with or without meals, for compensation, for five or more
persons and not primarily for transients.
      5.   Buildable area: The net portion of the lot remaining after deducting
all required yards from the gross area of a lot or building site.
      6.   Building: A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls.
      7.   Building height:
         a.   The vertical distance between the level of the average finished
grade and:
            1)   The highest point of the parapet of a flat roof,
            2)   The deckline of a mansard roof, or
            3)   The mean average point between the eaves and ridge of the
highest gable, hip, gambrel or other such roof element; provided, that the
ridge line of the roof shall not exceed four feet above the maximum permitted
building height of the zone;
         b.   The height of a stepped or terraced building shall be the maximum
of any segment of such building, as measured from the average finished grade of
that building segment;
         c.   This definition shall not apply to
Chapter 18.61 (HD hillside development overlay zone).
      8.   Building official: The county official or authorized representative
of the county department of planning and development services charged with the
administration and enforcement of the county building codes (Title 15).
      9.   Building site: The ground area of a building or buildings together
with all open spaces adjacent thereto as required by this code.
      10.   Bulk station: A place where liquefied petroleum, gas, crude
petroleum, gasoline, naphtha, benzene, benzol, kerosene or any other liquid,
except such as will stand a test of one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit,
closed cupped testers, are stored in wholesale quantities where the aggregate
capacity of all storage tanks is more than ten thousand gallons.
   C.   Definitions "C."
      1.   Cabaret: A nightclub, theater or other establishment which features
live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, "go-go" dancers, exotic
dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers, where such performances are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      2.   Cargo container: A standardized, reusable vessel that is or appears
to be: (1) originally, specifically or formerly designed for or used in the
packing, shipping, movement or transportation of freight, articles, goods or
commodities, or (2) designed for or capable of being mounted on a chassis or
bogie for movement by truck trailer or loaded on a ship.
      3.   Carport: A roofed structure, permanently open on at least two sides,
designed for the parking of one or more motor vehicles.
      4.   Child care center: A facility providing compensated nonresidential
care and supervision to more than four children and licensed by the state of
Arizona. Also termed a day nursery.
      5.   Child care home service: A home occupation providing compensated
nonresidential care and supervision to no more than ten children at the same
time.
      6.   Church:
         a.   A building or group of buildings used primarily as a place of
communion or worship;
         b.   Includes convents, religious educational buildings and parish
houses, but not parochial schools.
      7.   Cistern: The storage component of a rainwater harvesting system.
Cisterns are also known as water tanks or rain barrels.
      8.   Civil engineer: A professional engineer registered in the state of
Arizona to practice civil engineering.
      9.   Club or lodge: A regularly constituted association of persons who
are bona fide members paying regular dues, primarily organized for some common
social purpose, and which derives not more than one-half of its revenue or
income from the sale of goods and services to its members or others.
      10.   Code: The Pima County Zoning Code (Title 18).
      11.   Commercial vehicle: A vehicle designed or used primarily for
business rather than personal transportation. This includes vehicles having a
gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) exceeding sixteen thousand one pounds,
vehicles which have been modified for business use, or vehicles which are
normally loaded with materials to support a business use and display any type
of commercial signage.
      12.   Commission: The Pima County planning and zoning commission.
      13.   Communication tower: A free-standing structure including
appurtenances used for the following communication purposes:
         a.   VHF and UHF television;
         b.   AM and FM radio;
         c.   Two-way radio;
         d.   Common carriers;
         e.   Wireless communication;
         f.   Microwave.
         g.   Amateur (ham) radio towers over one hundred feet in height.
      14.   Communication tower co-location: Use of a single communication
tower structure by more than one utility or wireless communication service, or
both.
      15.   Communication tower equipment: The equipment, except antennas,
necessary to the operation of a communication tower.
      16.   Communication tower equipment area: The area located on, at, or
near a communication tower in which equipment necessary to the operation of the
communication tower is placed.
         a.   Equipment cabinets attached to the communication tower are
included in the definition of a "communication tower equipment area."
         b.   Flush mounted antennas and utility meters and pedestals are not
included in the definition of "communication tower equipment area" and
construction of such equipment does not, by itself, create a communication
tower equipment area.
      17.   Communication tower - lattice type: A communication tower featuring
an open framework of lateral cross members which stabilize the communication
tower.
      18.   Communication tower - monopole type: A communication tower that
consists of a single upright pole or antenna, engineered to be self-supporting
that does not require lateral cross supports but may utilize guys.
      19.   Communication tower - flush-mounted antenna: An antenna mounted
within eighteen inches of the pole or lattice framework is considered flush-
mounted.
      20.   Communication tower equipment vault ("vault"): An underground
structure containing a communication tower equipment area, having an entry
hatch which does not exceed thirty inches above ground level.
      21.   Communication tower - monopalm: A communication tower monopole
camouflaged to look like a palm tree.
      22.   Communication tower - monopine: A communication tower monopole
camouflaged to look like a pine tree.
      23.   Community food pantry: a facility operated by a non-profit
corporation to collect, store, package, and distribute food, such as fresh
produce, perishables, canned goods, or food staples to persons and households
in need. Facility shall primarily distribute food but may also include
toiletries and hygienic items, diapers, pet food, clothing, and incidental
household items.
      24.   Community service agency: An organization such as an orphanage,
home for the aged, Y.M.C.A., Y.W.C.A., Boy Scouts, C.Y.O., Y.M.H.A., Campfire
Girls, or any similar organization organized as a nonprofit corporation or
supported in whole or in part by public subscription and primarily established
to serve the social or welfare needs of the community or any part thereof, and
not organized for the personal profit of any individual, group of individuals,
or corporation.
      25.   Condominium:
         a.   Real estate, portions of which are designated for separate
ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely
by the owners of the separate portions. Real estate is not a condominium unless
the undivided interest in the common elements are vested in the unit owners.
         b.   If in existence before January 1, 1986, the ownership of single
units or apartments with common elements located on property within a
horizontal property regime recorded pursuant to former A.R.S. Section 33-551,
et seq.
      26.   Contour line: A line on a topographic map comprising points of
equal elevation.
      27.   Contractor's yard: Any land or building used for the storage of
equipment, vehicles, machinery (new or used), building materials, paints, pipe
or electrical components used by the owner or occupant of the premises in the
conduct of any building trades or building craft.
      28.   County: Pima County, Arizona.
      29.   County engineer: The director or authorized representative of the
county department of transportation and flood control district.
      30.   Cut: The land surface which is shaped through the removal of soil,
rock or other earth materials.
   D.   Definitions "D."
      1.   Discernibly turgid state: Means the state of being visibly swollen,
bloated, inflated or distended.
      2.   Dwelling, duplex: A building containing only two dwelling units.
      3.   Dwelling, multiple: A building or portion thereof containing three
or more dwelling units.
      4.   Dwelling, one-family: A building containing only a single dwelling
unit.
      5.   Dwelling, triplex: A building containing only three dwelling units.
      6.   Dwelling group: A group of two or more detached or semi-detached
one-family, duplex or multiple dwellings occupying a parcel of land in one
ownership and having any yard or court in common, including house court and
apartment court, but not including motel.
      7.   Dwelling unit: A room or suite of two or more rooms that is designed
for, or is occupied by, one family doing its own cooking with internal
unimpeded access to all kitchens, and no more than two kitchens.
   E.   Definitions "E."
      1.   Earth material: Rock, soil or sand, or any combination thereof.
   F.   Definitions "F."
      1.   Factory-built (modular) building:
         a.   A residential or nonresidential building including a dwelling
unit or habitable room thereof which is either wholly or in substantial part
manufactured at an off-site location to be assembled on site, except that it
does not include a manufactured home, a multisectional manufactured home,
trailer, recreational vehicle or mobile home, as defined in A.R.S. Section 41-
2142 and this code.
         b.   A factory built building includes all the plumbing, heating,
cooling and electrical systems of the building and shall bear the Arizona
insignia of approval for factory-built building pursuant to A.R.S. Section 41-
2142.
      2.   Family:
         a.   Any number of individuals related by blood or marriage, or not
more than five unrelated persons customarily living together as a single
housekeeping unit, and using common cooking facilities, as distinguished from a
group occupying a hotel or club.
         b.   Family includes group homes certified by Pima County or the
department of economic security as an adult foster care home.
         c.   A family shall be deemed to include domestic servants.
      3.   Fertilizer yard/processing plant: A place where animal matter is
collected, processed or stored on a commercial basis.
      4.   Fill: The placement of earth material upon an existing grade.
      5.   Floor Area Ratio (FAR): The gross floor area, as defined in Section
T.020B, of all buildings or structures on a site divided by the gross area of
the site.
   G.   Definitions "G."
      1.   Garage, private: An accessory building or portion of the main
building, designed or used for the shelter or storage of self-propelled
vehicles owned or operated by the occupants of the main building.
      2.   Garage, public: Premises, except those herein defined as a private
garage or storage garage, used for the storage or care of self-propelled
vehicles, or where such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired, or kept
for hire or sale.
      3.   Garage, storage: Premises, except those herein defined as a private
garage or public garage, used exclusively for the storage of self-propelled
vehicles, and for no other purpose whatever.
      4.   Gasoline service station: A retail establishment primarily engaged
in selling petroleum products, but not including auto repair shops, body and
fender works, similar repairing and painting uses, or mechanical or steam
washracks.
      5.   Grazing: The feeding of domestic livestock on an open range or
fenced pasture for commercial purposes and uses customarily incidental thereto,
but not including commercial slaughter houses, stockyards, fertilizer yards,
bone yards or plants for the reduction of animal matter.
      6.   Green building: A structure or elements of a structure that
incorporate the principles of sustainable design - design in which the impact
of a building on the natural environment or human health will be less than a
building that solely meets the minimum requirements of the building code. Green
buildings incorporate:
         a.   Principles of energy and resource efficiency;
         b.   Practical applications of waste reduction and pollution
prevention;
         c.   Good indoor air quality and natural light to promote occupant
health and productivity; or
         d.   Transportation efficiency in siting and construction, during use
and reuse.
      7.   Green infrastructure (GI): Practices that use or mimic natural
systems and processes to promote infiltration, evapotranspiration, and
harvesting of stormwater for retention and use in the landscape, generally by
using vegetation and soil to manage stormwater where it falls.
      8.   Group home: A licensed home suitable for accommodating more than
five, but fewer than eleven minor children in addition to those minor children
related to the operators in residence by blood or adoption; or a licensed home
suitable for accommodating more than five but fewer than eleven persons who
require special care for physical or mental reasons.
      9.   Guest house: A detached structure consisting of a minimum of two
rooms and a bathroom, which may have a kitchen, used primarily by members of
the family occupying the main dwelling and their non paying guests.
      10.   Guest room: Living quarters designed to provide lodging for
compensation to short-term guests.
   H.   Definitions "H."
      1.   Hangar: See private aircraft hangar.
      2.   Home occupation: A commercial activity carried on by the occupant of
a dwelling as a secondary use. Refer to Section
18.09.030.
      3.   Hospital: A building or group of buildings arranged, intended,
designed or used for the housing, care, observation and treatment of sick human
beings.
      4.   Hotel: A building containing six or more guest rooms, in which
lodging is provided and offered to the public for compensation and which is
open to transient guests, together with commercial accessory uses operated
primarily for the convenience of the guests thereof.
   I.   Definitions "I."
      1.   Inoperable motor vehicle: Any non-commercial unlicensed and
unregistered motor vehicle, including recreation vehicles and trailers that
cannot legally or mechanically be operated on a public roadway, or a watercraft
that does not meet safety requirements for operation on public waterways.
   J.   Definitions "J."
      1.   Junk yard:
         a.   The use of more than two hundred square feet of the area of any
lot for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metals or
other scrap materials, or for the dismantling, demolition, abandonment of
automobiles or other vehicles or machines or parts thereof;
         b.   Shall include salvage yards, auto wrecking yards, and impoundment
storage yards.
   K.   Definitions "K."
      1.   Kennel, commercial: A structure, shelter, animal run, or fenced area
used for the breeding, feeding, raising, keeping, training, boarding or selling
on the premises of five or more dogs or cats for compensation.
      2.   Kitchen: Any room in a building which is used, intended or designed
to be used for cooking or preparation of food.
   L.   Definitions "L."
      1.   Landscape architect: A professional registered with the state of
Arizona to practice landscape architecture.
      2.   Large scale retail establishment: A single building that includes
retail and related uses, occupying more than eighty thousand square feet under
one roof and in one ownership. This includes wholesale clubs and related uses.
      3.   Lot: A parcel of land with fixed boundaries as reflected on a deed,
subdivision plat, record of survey or court order.
      4.   Lot, corner:
         a.   A lot located at the junction of two or more intersecting
streets, having an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five degrees,
with a boundary line thereof bordering on two of the streets;
         b.   The point of intersection of the street lot lines is the corner.
      5.   Lot, interior: A lot which is not a corner lot.
      6.   Lot, key: A lot:
         a.   Abutting along the entire length of at least one of its side lot
lines, either directly or across an alley, the rear lot line of any other lot;
or
         b.   Situated between two such key lots.
      7.   Lot, through: An interior lot having frontage on two parallel or
approximately parallel streets.
      8.   Lot, depth: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.
      9.   Lot line: A property line bounding a lot.
      10.   Lot line, front:
         a.   In the case of a lot abutting only one street, the line
separating such lot from the street;
         b.   In the case of a corner or through lot, the owner may elect any
street lot line as the front lot line, provided such choice, in the opinion of
the zoning inspector, will not be injurious to the existing or desirable future
development of adjacent properties.
      11.   Lot line, rear:
         a.   The lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front
lot line;
         b.   The rear lot line of an irregular, triangular or gore lot shall,
for the purpose of this code, be a line entirely within the lot at least ten
feet long and parallel to and most distant from the front lot line.
      12.   Lot line, side:
         a.   Any lot line not a front lot line or a rear lot line;
         b.   A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a street lot
line;
         c.   A side lot line separating a lot from another lot is an interior
side lot line.
      13.   Lot line, street or alley: A lot line separating a lot from a
street or alley.
      14.   Lot width: The mean horizontal width of the lot measured at right
angles to the lot depth.
      15.   Low impact development (LID): A land development or re-development
approach that preserves or restores on-site natural systems and hydrologic
functions, and reduces impervious or disturbed areas to manage stormwater as
close to its source as possible.
   M.   Definitions "M."
      1.   Manufactured home:
         a.   A structure transportable in one or more sections which:
            1)   In the traveling mode, is at least eight body feet in width or
forty body feet in length, or, when erected on a site, is three hundred twenty
or more square feet, and
            2)   Is built on a permanent chassis, and
            3)   Is designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a
permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, which include
the plumbing, heating, cooling, and electrical systems contained therein;
         b.   This definition applies only to units constructed after June 15,
1976, except that this term shall include any structure which meets all the
requirements of the definition except the size requirements, provided such
structure has received a special size reduction certificate pursuant to Section
603(b) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as may be amended.
      2.   Manufactured home, multisectional:
         a.   A multisectional dwelling unit, manufactured after June 15, 1976
built to HUD standards with a HUD seal affixed, that when joined measures
twenty by forty feet or larger, does not exceed two stories in height, and is
installed on a permanent foundation, provided that:
            1)   If a perimeter foundation wall is not installed, all sides of
the home shall extend to meet the ground, or a facade with the appearance of a
foundation wall shall be used on all sides of the home; and
            2)   Each side of the home shall have roofing and siding materials
similar in appearance and kind to conventional homes and shall have one or more
of the following:
               a)   A parapet roof style, or
               b)   A flat or pitched roof with eaves that overhang sixteen
inches or more;
         b.   Building permits for these structures may be issued only in
accordance with Section
18.09.070 (General residential and rural zoning provisions) or in those zones
in which manufactured homes are a permitted use.
      3.   Manufactured home park: A site as defined in this section, under a
single or unified ownership:
         a.   containing spaces with required improvements and utilities that
are leased for the long-term placement of four or more manufactured or mobile
homes for dwelling purposes, or
         b.   upon which four or more manufactured or mobile homes are occupied
as dwellings, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such
accommodations. The development of manufactured or mobile homes on contiguous
lots in a recorded subdivision is not a manufactured home park under this
definition.
      4.   Massage establishment: An establishment in which a person, firm,
association or corporation engages in or permits massage activities, including
any method of pressure on, friction against, stroking, kneading, rubbing,
tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of external soft parts of the body
with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical apparatus or electrical
apparatus or appliance. This paragraph does not apply to licensed physicians;
registered nurses; licensed practical nurses or technicians who are acting
under the supervision of a licensed physician; persons who are employed or
acting as trainers for a bona fide amateur, semiprofessional or professional
athlete or athletic team; or persons who are licensed pursuant to Arizona
Revised Statutes, title 32, chapter 3 (barbers) or 5 (cosmetologists) if the
activity is limited to the head, face or neck.
      5.   Medical marijuana designated caregiver cultivation location: An
enclosed facility, that does not exceed two hundred fifty square feet of
cultivation space, where a designated caregiver, as defined by A.R.S. Section
36-2801(5), cultivates marijuana if the designated caregiver's registry
identification card provides that the designated caregiver is authorized to
cultivate marijuana. The location must comply with the security requirements of
A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 28.1.
      6.   Marijuana dispensary: A nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary
defined in A.R.S. § 36-2801(12) or a marijuana establishment defined in A.R.S.
§ 36-2850(21)(a) that acquires, possesses, cultivates, manufactures, delivers,
transfers, transports, supplies, sells or dispenses marijuana or related
supplies and educational materials to customers.
      7.   Marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location: The additional
location where marijuana is cultivated by a medical marijuana dispensary as
referenced in A.R.S. § 36-2804(B)(1)(b)(ii) or the additional location where
marijuana is cultivated by a marijuana establishment as referenced in A.R.S. §
36-2850(21)(a), except that marijuana product manufacturing shall not take
place at the cultivation location.
      8.   Marijuana Product Manufacturing Location: The location, separate
from a marijuana dispensary, where marijuana products are manufactured;
marijuana products include edible products, ointments, and tinctures.
      9.   Medical marijuana qualifying patient cultivation location: An
enclosed facility, that does not exceed fifty square feet of cultivation space
for each location, where a qualifying patient, as defined by A.R.S. § 36-2801
(15), cultivates marijuana if the qualifying patient's registry identification
card states that the qualifying patient is authorized to cultivate marijuana.
Medical marijuana cultivation as an accessory use to the qualifying patient's
primary residence must not be detectable from the exterior of the building in
which the cultivation takes place. The qualifying patient cultivation location
must comply with the security requirements of A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 28.1.
      10.   Metallurgical: Includes the land used in treating and reducing
metal-bearing ores by mechanical, physical or chemical methods on a commercial
basis and uses incidental thereto, but does not include permanent residential
housing or the fabricating of metals or metal materials.
      11.    Mining: Includes the land necessary or incidental to the digging,
excavating or otherwise procuring of minerals and ores found in their natural
state, but does not include permanent residential housing or the operating of a
rock crusher.
      12.   Mobile home:
         a.   A transportable structure suitable for year-round single-family
occupancy and having water, electrical, and sewage connections similar to those
of conventional dwellings;
         b.   This definition applies only to units constructed prior to June
15, 1976. Compare with manufactured home.
      13.   Motel:
         a.   A building or group of buildings on the same lot, whether
detached or in connected rows, containing individual sleeping or dwelling units
and designed for, or occupied by, automobile travelers or other transient
tenants;
         b.   Shall include tourist courts, autocourts, and automobile courts.
      14.   Motor Vehicle:
         a.   A self-propelled vehicle.
         b.   Does not include a motorized wheelchair, an electric personal
assistive mobility device or a motorized skateboard.
   N.   Definitions "N."
      1.   Neighborhood Market: A small- to moderate-scale grocery store
oriented to serving the immediate area as a source of fresh food that dedicates
at least 10% of the sales floor area to the sale of a variety of fresh food.
The fresh food selection must include fruits, vegetables, dairy, eggs, meat,
fish, or poultry.
      2.   Non-chartered financial institution: Means a business other than a
state or federally chartered bank, credit union, mortgage lender or savings and
loan association, that offers check cashing services and loans for payment of a
percentage fee. Specifically included are check-cashing businesses that charge
a percentage fee for cashing a check or negotiable instrument, "payday loan"
businesses that make loans upon assignments of wages received, or businesses
that function as deferred presentment services.
      3.   Notification area: A property subject to a public hearing on a
planning or zoning matter and all properties, any portion of which is within a
specified radius of the subject property, which receive mailed notice of the
hearing from Pima County.
      4.   Nude model studio: A place in which a person who appears in a state
of nudity or who displays specific anatomical areas is observed, sketched,
drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted by other persons
who pay money or other consideration. Nude model studio does not include a
proprietary school that is licensed by this state, a college, community college
or university that is supported entirely or in part by taxation, a private
college or university that maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, community college or university that is
supported entirely or in part by taxation or a structure to which the following
apply:
         a.   A sign is not visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising appears indicating that a nude person is available for
viewing.
         b.   A student must enroll at least three days in advance of a class
in order to participate.
         c.   No more than one nude or seminude model is on the premises at any
time.
      5.   Nude, nudity or state of nudity: Means any of the following:
         a.   The appearance of a human anus, genitals, buttocks, or female
breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
         b.   A state of dress that fails to opaquely cover a human anus,
genitals, buttocks, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
      6.   Nursery (plant nursery):
         a.   A place where young trees or other plants are raised for
transplanting or for sale;
         b.   Does not include commercial fertilizer yard or processing plant.
   O.   Definitions "O."
      1.   Off-road vehicle: Any motorized vehicle when used off paved or
unpaved roadways, including motorcycles, motorbikes, motor scooters, minibikes,
pocket bikes, three-wheelers, quads, four-wheel drive vehicles, go-carts,
sandrails, and other similar vehicles.
      2.   Off-road vehicle facility: A place where off-road vehicles are
operated such as a track, vehicle jumping area, or any other constructed
facility, generally with berms, hills, banked turns, and other grading. Off-
road vehicle facility also includes any path or trail over which vehicles
traverse repetitively for recreational or training purposes on any private real
property within Pima County, other than a dedicated or private street, road, or
alley.
      3.   Open space, functional:
         a.   Open space that is a designed element of the development and has
a functionally described and planned use as an amenity for the direct benefit
of the residents of a development, with not more than three percent of man-made
impervious surface within such designated areas;
         b.   Examples include landscaped areas which provide visual relief,
shade, screening, buffering and other environmental amenity; nature trails;
exercise trails; open playgrounds, e.g., baseball, multiuse; picnic areas and
facilities; recreation areas and facilities, e.g., swimming pools, tennis
courts; and golf courses in accordance with
Chapter 18.59 (Golf Course Zone.)
      4.   Open space, natural: Any area of land, essentially unimproved and
not occupied by structures or man-made impervious surfaces, except pedestrian
and nonmotorized access trails, that is set aside, dedicated or reserved in
perpetuity for public or private enjoyment as a preservation of conservation
area.
   P.   Definitions "P."
      1.   Parking area: Area that contains parking spaces, associated drive
lanes, and internal landscaping required by Section
18.75.040(3).
      2.   Pedestrian entry architectural feature: A doorway into a site, along
with the architectural treatments that accompany it, that is used by people
traveling on foot.
      3.   Planning director: The director or authorized representative of the
county department of planning and development services.
      4.   Private aircraft hangar: An enclosed structure designed for the
storage and routine maintenance of aircraft located on a lot that has recorded
access to a private airport facility, ultra light facility, or general aviation
airstrip.
      5.   Planning unit: A portion of a proposed development containing a
unique land use, density, or residential or nonresidential building style
separated from other planning units by a natural or manmade feature.
      6.   Professional means accountants, architects, chiropodists,
chiropractors, dentists, engineers, lawyers, naturopaths, osteopaths,
physicians, surgeons, surveyors.
      7.   Public assembly facility: A building or group of buildings arranged,
intended, designed or used for indoor public assembly for social, recreational,
entertainment, educational or religious purposes, such as an arena, coliseum,
convention center, exhibition hall, auditorium or theater. A "public assembly
facility" may include ancillary facilities and activities such as food and
beverage preparation and sales, retail and service commercial uses, and
recreational and health club.
   Q.   Definitions "Q." Reserved.
   R.   Definitions "R."
      1.   Railroad:
         a.   Includes the land used for general railroad purposes, including
mainline and switching trackage, repair shops, stations, communications
equipment, roundhouses and storage facilities;
         b.   Does not include railroad equipment (miniature or otherwise)
operated by its owner as a hobby or as a part of the equipment of an amusement
resort.
      2.   Rain barrel: A barrel used as a cistern to store rainwater.
      3.   Rainwater harvesting system: A system used to capture, convey,
store, and release rainwater for future use. A rainwater harvesting system
consists of the following primary subsystems: catchment area, first flush
diverters (an optional system that diverts the initial pulse of rainfall to
remove large debris), roof washer (an optional system that filters small
debris), conveyance system (guttering, downspouts, piping, screen filtration,
and transfer pump for use of remote cisterns), an above- or below-ground
storage tank(s) (typically a cistern or a simple barrel), cistern overflow
device for down-gradient discharge, and distribution system (which may include
a pump or pressure system if not gravity fed).
      4.   Renewable energy system—Ancillary scale: A system primarily intended
for on-site use only to off-set part or all of a property owner's or occupant's
electricity requirements. Selling energy to a utility is incidental.
      5.   Renewable energy system—Utility scale: A system that generates
energy primarily intended for off-site consumption. Accessory uses may include
buildings associated with electrical operational infrastructure such as
inverters and transformers.
      6.   Research laboratory:
         a.   An administrative, engineering, scientific research, design or
experimentation facility;
         b.   Shall include research on such things as electronic components,
optical equipment, etc., but not research requiring the use of animal husbandry
(including dogs, poultry, or monkeys), heavy equipment (such as construction
equipment); and
         c.   Shall be free of dust, smoke, fumes, odors, or unusual vibrations
or noise. The waste from such facilities shall meet the requirements of the
appropriate health authority.
      7.   Residential substance abuse diagnostic and treatment facility: A
facility designed to diagnose and treat persons suffering from the abuse of
chemical substances and alcohol subject to the licensure procedures of the
Arizona Department of Health Services.
      8.   Resort:
         a.   A building or group of buildings containing guest rooms, with a
large portion of the site devoted to recreational activities such as tennis,
horseback riding, swimming, and golf (Refer to
Chapter 18.59, GC Golf Course Zone for golf course requirements).
         b.   Shall include guest ranch.
      9.   Resort, major: A resort having fifty or more guest rooms.
      10.   Resort, minor: A resort having less than fifty guest rooms.
   S.   Definitions "S."
      1.   Safe routes: A program, based on the nationwide safe routes to
school programs, that encourages and enables children to walk and bicycle to
school and other associated public use facilities safely through the use of
educational programs, by improving bicycle and pedestrian facilities and
through careful subdivision layout and street design.
      2.   Sanatorium/rest home: A building or group of buildings, arranged,
intended, designed or used for the housing, care or treatment of sick people or
convalescents other than those mentally ill or afflicted with infectious,
contagious or communicable diseases.
      3.   School, charter: A public school established by contract with a
school district governing board, the state board of education or the state
board for charter schools pursuant to A.R.S. Title 15, Chapter 1 Article 8.
Charter Schools are classified as public schools for the purpose of zoning and
the assessment of zoning fees, site plan fees and development fees pursuant to
A.R.S. Section 15-189.01.
      4.   School, parochial: A school, affiliated with a religious
institution, comprising a building, or group of buildings, the use of which
meets state requirements for elementary or secondary education, and which does
not secure a major part of its funding from any governmental agency.
      5.   School, private: Any building, or group of buildings, the use of
which meets state requirements for elementary or secondary education, and which
does not secure any major part of its funding from a governmental agency.
      6.   Secondary dwelling: A mobile home or manufactured home, with kitchen
facilities, used exclusively by an ill, handicapped, or elderly person in need
of special care or supervision, or a care provider for such person, if the ill,
handicapped or elderly person is the owner or resident of the main dwelling or
a relative of the owner or resident of the main dwelling.
      7.   Self-storage facility: A facility used only for the storing of
household and personal property (no commercial storage) with no commercial
transactions permitted other than the rental of the storage units.
      8.   Seminude: Means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more
than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, and female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola, as well as portions of the body that
are covered by supporting straps or devices.
      9.   Semi-professional:
         a.   Includes insurance brokers, photographic studios, public
stenographers, real estate brokers, stockbrokers, and other persons who operate
or conduct offices which do not require the stocking of goods for sale at
wholesale or retail;
         b.   Does not include barbers, beauty operators, cosmetologists,
embalmers or morticians.
      10.   Setback lines: Such lines are established generally, but not
always, parallel to the center line of a street between which no part of a
building or structure or any part thereof may be erected or projected except as
otherwise provided in this code.
      11.   Shopping center, neighborhood: A development that contains more
than one retail or service use emphasizing neighborhood scale retail and
services. The development employs similar access points and unified internal
circulation and is approved under one or more associated development plans. No
single building occupant shall exceed eighty thousand square feet and the
aggregate square footage of the buildings on the site may not exceed one
hundred fifty thousand square feet.
      12.   Shopping center, regional: A regional shopping development that may
contain a major commercial anchor building or large scale retail establishment
building and may contain one or more attached or detached buildings with
permitted uses. The development uses coordinated access and internal
circulation and is approved under one or more related development plans. The
aggregate square footage of the building on the site may exceed one hundred
fifty thousand square feet.
      13.   Shopping center, small: A development that may contain one or more
small scale commercial buildings. The development uses coordinated access and
internal circulation and is usually approved under one development plan. No
single building occupant may exceed thirty-five thousand square feet and the
aggregate square footage of the building on the site shall not exceed one
hundred thousand square feet.
      14.   Site: Refers to a single lot or a combination of contiguous lots,
or a leased area on a lot that meets the minimum zoning standards of the
applicable zone.
      15.   Specific plan: A zoning document adopted in accordance with
Chapter 18.90 (Specific Plans) that includes text, maps or other exhibits
regulating land use and development within a specified area of the county.
      16.   Specified anatomical areas are: (1) less than completely and
opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts
below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or (2) human male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered.
      17.   Specified sexual activities are: (1) human genitals in a state of
sexual stimulation or arousal; or (2) acts of human masturbation, sexual
intercourse or sodomy, oral copulation; or (3) fondling or other erotic
touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts.
      18.   Stable, commercial: A stable for horses which are let, hired, used
or boarded on a commercial basis or for compensation.
      19.   Stable, community: A noncommercial stable for horses, operated by
and for the exclusive use of the members of a nonprofit, incorporated community
organization.
      20.   Stable, private: A stable for horses which are used by the owners
of the property and their guests without compensation.
      21.   Stormwater harvesting system: A system for the on-site collection
and retention of precipitation that has reached the ground, collected from
paved, impervious or disturbed surfaces. System elements may consist of:
         a.   Earthworks (including but not limited to depressed landscape
areas, basins, berms, swales);
         b.   Structures (including but not limited to curbs with inlets,
scuppers or cuts, gabions, check-dams, permeable paving, rock mulch); and
         c.   Other green infrastructure and low impact development elements to
slow and disperse stormwater and promote its infiltration into the soil.
      22.   Story: The horizontal division of a building between a floor and
the finished ceiling or finished undersurface of the roof directly above it.
Shall include:
         a.   A basement, if the vertical distance from the average finished
grade to its ceiling is greater than five feet on any side of the building; and
         b.   A mezzanine or loft.
      23.   Street: A way for vehicular traffic dedicated to the public or
designated as subdivision common area which affords the principal means of
access to abutting property.
      24.   Structure:
         a.   Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having a location on the
ground;
         b.   For the purposes of this ordinance, "structure" does not include:
            1)   Items constructed or placed roughly parallel to and at the
same elevation as the ground surface such as roads, driveways, alleys,
uncovered slabs, and recreational courts.
            2)   Mailboxes, hardscape features, fences, and other items
traditionally associated with residential uses when such items are eighty-four
inches or less in height.
            3)   Items placed underground with no surface expression such as
utility, water, and sewer lines.
            4)   Amateur radio towers one hundred or less in height.
            5)   Underground cisterns.
            6)   Clothes lines seventy-two inches or less in height.
      25.   Structural alterations: Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, floor joists or roof
joists, or which expands the height, bulk, or area thereof.
      26.   Studio: Place for the creation or retail sale of the works of an
artist or artisan.
      27.   Substantial portion: As it relates to adult activities facility.
Substantial portion of a retail adult activity facility establishment is
defined as having 10 percent or more of gross floor area and/or stock in trade
consisting of any one or more of the following:
            1)   books, magazines, or other printed matter, or films, videos,
DVD's, or other visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis
upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or specified
anatomical areas; or
            2)   devices, sexual/marital toys/aids or paraphernalia, which are
designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities;" or
            3)   any business, conduct or matter distinguished or characterized
by emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas,"
for sale or display
      28.   Supervisors: The board of supervisors of Pima County.
      29.   Swap meets:
         a.   A place of commercial activity popularly known as a swap meet,
flea market or park-and-swap, which is open to the general public and composed
of enclosed, semi-enclosed or outdoor stalls, stands or spaces rented or leased
to persons on a daily basis for the purpose of the display and sale, exchange
or barter of new or used merchandise;
         b.   Shall not include occasional craft fairs and benefit sales.
      30.   Swimming pools: Shall be deemed to consist of the following
classes:
         a.   Private: When consisting of an accessory structure appurtenant to
a one-family or duplex dwelling and used only as such by persons residing on
the same lot and their private guests (as distinguished from groups of any
kind) with no payment of any kind or in any form charged as received for such
use;
         b.   Semi-public: When consisting of an accessory structure
appurtenant to a multiple dwelling, hotel, motel, church, school, private club,
or country club, and used only as such by persons who reside or are housed on
the same lot or who are regular members of such church, club, country club or
regular attendants at such school and by individual guests (as distinguished
from groups of any kind) of the foregoing where admission to use the pool is
included in consideration given for the primary use of the premises. Said pools
are divided into the following classes:
            1)   Type A membership pools: Which include those pools operated
not for profit and not open to the general public; there being a limited number
of members, and such members usually being limited to that general
neighborhood, with the members paying a monthly or annual fee,
            2)   Type B pools: Maintained by hotels, motels, and like
establishments which cater to transient guests,
            3)   Type C pools: Maintained by apartments, residential-type
trailer courts, cooperative or condominium-type housing, for persons residing
therein and their guests,
            4)   Type D pools: Maintained by swim clubs, health clubs and
athletic organizations, country clubs and other private organizations, wherein
the pool is not open to the general public;
         c.   Public: A swimming pool maintained and operated by a municipality
or other unit of government for the general public, whether or not an admission
fee is charged;
         d.   Commercial: A swimming pool operated for profit, open to the
public upon payment of a fee.
      31.   Swimming school: A school established for aquatic training and
swimming instruction.
   T.   Definitions "T."
      1.   Tourist camp: An area or tract of land where space is rented or held
out for rent to tent campers furnishing their own camping equipment or where
free camping is permitted owners or users of tent camping equipment for the
purpose of securing their trade.
      2.   Tourist court: See motel.
      3.   Townhouse: A duplex or multiple dwelling constructed as a series of
dwelling units, all of which are attached to the adjacent dwelling units with
no visible separation between walls or roofs, and with areas of individual and
common ownership indicated on a subdivision plat.
      4.   Trailer: A recreational vehicle built on a chassis, designed for
highway travel, pulled by a private vehicle and not requiring a special permit.
      5.   Trailer court: Any parcel of land used or offered for use in whole
or in part for the parking or storage of two or more trailers used or intended
to be used for living or sleeping purposes.
   U.   Definitions "U."
      1.   Ultralight aircraft: Any vehicle that:
         a.   If unpowered, weighs less than one hundred fifty-five pounds; or
         b.   If powered:
            1)   Weighs less than three hundred fifty pounds empty weight,
excluding floats and safety devices;
            2)   Has a fuel capacity of not exceeding five U.S. gallons;
            3)   Is not capable of more than fifty-five knots calibrated
airspeed at full power in level flight; and
            4)   Has a power-off stall speed which does not exceed twenty-nine
knots calibrated airspeed.
      2.   Urban heat island: A developed urban or suburban area that is
significantly warmer (two degrees to ten degrees Fahrenheit or one degree to
six degrees Celsius) than surrounding rural areas due to the retention of heat
by un-shaded buildings and paved surfaces. Urban heat islands can increase
energy demands, air conditioning costs, air pollution and greenhouse gas
emissions, and heat-related illness and mortality.
   V.   Definitions "V."
      1.   Vehicular entry architectural feature: An entry or a gate into a
site, along with the architectural treatments that accompany it, that is used
primarily by motor vehicles.
      2.   Vegetated roof: A roof partially or fully covered by vegetation,
used to manage water runoff and provide additional insulation in the winter and
cooling in the summer. The vegetation is typically grown in a growing medium
above a waterproof membrane that is part of a multi-component engineered
system, but can also be grown in containers. Also known as a green roof, eco-
roof, or living roof, it can range from a tended roof garden to a low-
maintenance ecology.
   W.   Definitions "W."
      1.   Wildlife rehabilitation facility: The premises where a licensed
operator or their agent(s) and assistant(s), as authorized and licensed by the
Arizona Game and Fish Department, rehabilitate orphaned, injured, sick, or
otherwise debilitated wildlife to a physical condition whereby the wildlife can
be restored to the wild. This term includes those premises where a licensed
operator or their agent(s) and assistant(s), as authorized and licensed by the
Arizona Game and Fish Department, hold wildlife for purposes of education,
scientific collection, humane treatment, or other permissible uses under the
Arizona Game and Fish Commission Rules, Title 12, Chapter 4.
      2.   Wireless communication tower and appurtenances: A structure and
appurtenances used exclusively for wireless communication purposes, such as
cellular telephone and paging services, which may include a monopole or a
lattice tower with antenna, or an antenna mounted on a building roof or facade
or other existing structure, with or without an equipment area used to house
equipment necessary for the operation of the wireless communication tower.
   X.   Definitions "X." Reserved.
   Y.   Definitions "Y."
      1.   Yard: An open and unoccupied space on a building site and, except as
otherwise provided in this code, open and unobstructed from the ground to the
sky.
      2.   Yard, front: A yard extending full width of the building site
between the front lot line and the nearest line of the main building or the
nearest line of any enclosed or covered porch.
      3.   Yard, rear: A yard extending across the full width of the building
site between the rear lot line and the nearest rear line of the main building
or the nearest line of any enclosed or covered porch.
      4.   Yard, side: A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard
between the side lot line and the nearest line of the main building.
   Z.   Definitions "Z."
      1.   Zoning inspector: The county official or authorized representative
of the county department of planning and development services charged with the
enforcement of this code.
(Ord. 2025-27 § 1, 2025; Ord. 2025-8 § 1, 2025; Ord. 2022-16 § 1, 2022; Ord.
2019-5 § 1, 2019; Ord. 2018-29 § 1, 2018; Ord. 2016-21 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2015-7 §
1, 2015; Ord. 2013-42 § 2, 2013; Ord. 2012-71 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2012-15 § 1,
2012; Ord. 2012-22 § 1, 2012; Ord. 2011-60 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2011-59 § 1, 2011;
Ord. 2011-2 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2010-59 § 1, 2010; Ord. 2009-101 § 1, 2009; Ord.
2009-98 § 1, 2009; Ord. 2009-70 § 1, 2009; Ord. 2008-118 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2008-
70 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2007-81 § 1, 2007; Ord. 2007-3 § 1, 2007; Ord. 2006-92 § 1,
2006; Ord. 2006-85 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2006-30 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2005-105 § 1, 2005;
Ord. 2005-87 § 1, 2005; Ord. 2005-85 § 1, 2005; Ord. 2005-34 § 1, 2005; Ord.
2004-59 § 2, 2004; Ord. 2003-85 § 1, 2003; Ord. 2003-42 § 1, 2003; Ord. 2002-67
§ 1, 2002; Ord. 2001-165 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 2000-77 § 1 (part), 2000; Ord.
1999-78 § 1, 1999; Ord. 1998-51 § 1, 1998; Ord. 1998-37 § 1, 1998; Ord. 1998-36
§ 1, 1998; Ord. 1997-74 § 1, 1997; Ord. 1997-40 § 1, 1997; Ord. 1997-28 § 1,
1997; Ord. 1997-20 § 1, 1997; Ord. 1997-1 § 1, 1997; Ord. 1996-59 § 1, 1996;
Ord. 1994-136 § 1, 1994; Ord. 1994-114 § 1, 1994; Ord. 1994-112 § 1 (part),
1994; Ord. 1994-82 (part), 1994; Ord. 1992-93 (part), 1992; Ord. 1992-6 § 1
(part), 1992; Ord. 1991-33 § 1 (part), 1991; Ord. 1991-6 § 1 (part), 1991; Ord.
1990-11 § 1 (part), 1990; Ord. 1989-1 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 1988-78 § 1
(part), 1988; Ord. 1987-64 § 1 (part), 1987; Ord. 1986-215 (part), 1986; Ord.
1986-187 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1986-188 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1986-150
(part), 1986; Ord. 1986-67 (part), 1986; Ord. 1986-43 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord.
1986-42 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1986-41 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1986-19 § 1
(part), 1986; Ord. 1985-153 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-152 § 1 (part), 1985;
Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.03.030   Illustrations.
   A.   
Figure 18.03-1: Average Finished Grade.
   B.   
Figure 18.03-2: Basement and Story.
   C.   
Figure 18.03-3: Building Height.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
Figure 18.03-1 
Average Finished Grade 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4398.png]
 
Figure 18.03-2 
Basement and Story
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4400.png]
 
Figure 18.03-3
Building Height
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4402.png]
 
Chapter 18.05
ZONES, MAPS AND BOUNDARIES
Sections: 
18.05.010   Zones.
18.05.020   Maps.
18.05.030   Determination of boundaries.
18.05.010   Zones.
   A. Establishment. For the purpose of this code, the following types of zones
are hereby established:
1. Rural:               IR    Institutional reserve zone;
                        RH    Rural homestead zone;
                        GR-1  Rural residential zone;
                        SR    Suburban ranch zone;
                        SR-2  Suburban ranch estate zone;
                        SH    Suburban homestead zone;
2. Residential:         TH    Trailer homesite zone;
                        ML    Mount Lemmon zone;
                        CR-1  Single residence zone;
                        CR-2  Single residence zone;
                        CR-3  Single residence zone;
                        CR-4  Mixed-dwelling type zone;
                        CR-5  Multiple residence zone;
                        TR    Transitional zone;
                        CMH-1 County manufactured and mobile home-1 zone;
                        CMH-2 County manufactured and mobile home-2 zone;
3. Businesses:          MR    Major resort zone;
                        RVC   Rural village center zone;
                        CB-1  Local business zone;
                        CB-2  General business zone;
4. Industrial:          MU    Multiple use zone;
                        CPI   Campus Park industrial zone;
                        CI-1  Light industrial/ware-housing zone;
                        CI-2  General industrial zone;
                        CI-3  Heavy industrial zone;
5. Overlay:             AE    Airport environs and facilities;
                        BZ    Buffer overlay zone;
                        GC    Golf course zone;
                        GZ-1  Gateway overlay zone — urban;
                        GZ-2  Gateway overlay zone — public preserve;
                        H-1   Historic district zone-1;
                        H-2   Historic district zone-2;
                        HL    Historic landmark zone;
                        HD    Hillside development zone;
                        I-1   Kleindale/Dodge infill overlay zone-1;
                        I-2   Benson Highway/Palo Verde Road infill overlay
                              zone-2;
6. Specific plan zones.
 
B. Restrictiveness. The following zones are given the following values, from
most to least restrictive:
1.  IR      Institutional reserve zone;
2.  GC SR   Golf course zone; Suburban ranch zone;
3.  RH SR-2 Rural homestead zone; Suburban ranch estate zone;
4.  CR-1 ML Single residence zone; Mount Lemmon zone;
5.  GR-1    Rural residential zone;
6.  CR-2    Single residence zone;
7.  CR-3    Single residence zone;
8.  SH      Suburban homestead zone;
9.  CR-4    Mixed-dwelling type zone;
10. CR-5    Multiple residence zone;
11. CMH-1   County manufactured and mobile home-1 zone;
12. CMH-2   County manufactured and mobile home-2 zone;
13. TR      Transitional zone;
14. TH      Trailer homesite zone;
15. MR      Major resort zone;
16. RVC     Rural village center zone;
17. CB-1    Local business zone;
18. CB-2    General business zone;
19. MU CPI  Multiple use zone; Campus Park industrial zone;
20. CI-1    Light industrial/warehousing zone;
21. CI-2    General industrial zone;
22. CI-3    Heavy industrial zone;
23. SP      Specific plan zones.
 
C. Zones Without Values of Restriction. The following zones are not given
values of restrictiveness:
1. AE  Airport environs and facilities;
2. BZ  Buffer overlay zone;
3. H-1 Historic district zone-1;
4. H-2 Historic district zone-2;
5. HL  Historic landmark zone;
6. HD  Hillside development zone;
7. I-1 Kleindale/Dodge infill overlay zone-1;
8. I-2 Benson Highway/Palo Verde Road infill overlay zone-2.
 
(Ord. 2021-17 § 1, 2021: Ord. 2018-31 § 1, 2018: Ord. 2018-9 § 1, 2018: Ord.
2001-162 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1994-147 § 1, 1994; Ord. 1988-116 §§ 2, 3, 1988; Ord.
1987-64 § 1 (part), 1987; Ord. 1986-188 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-187 § 1
(part), 1985; Ord. 1985-153 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-152 § 1 (part), 1985;
Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.05.020   Maps.
   A.   Zoning Maps
      1.   The boundaries of zones are hereby established, as shown on maps
entitled Pima County zoning maps, and numbered and titled as follows:
         a.   Eastern Pima County and supplementary sheets;
         b.   Tucson region: #3, 6, 7, 10, 12, 13, 14, 16 through 33, 35
through 52, 54 through 80, 83 through 107, 109 through 117, 124 through 127,
130 through 139, 146 through 163, 175, 179 through 185, 189, 190, 196 through
199, 206 through 219, 236 through 240, 242, 243, 248, 249, 256 through 260, 268
through 283, 307 through 310, 315, 316, 323 through 329, 340 through 347, 350
through 354, 380, 381, 384 through 387, 390, 391, 398, 399, 422 through 425,
432, 433, 442, 462, 469, 470, 472 through 475, 481, 509, 510, 511, 519, 520,
529, 551, 552, 557, 558, 560, 563 through 566, 572, 656, 657, 664, 665, 771,
772, 886, 887, 1010, 1141, 1270, 1271, 1272, 1279, 1280, 1281, 1417, 1418,
1419, 1427, 1428, 1582, 1583, 2484, 2687, 2688;
         c.   Western Pima County;
         d.   Ajo region: #A-1, A-8, A-23.
   B.   Buffer Overlay Zone Maps.
      1.   The boundaries of the Buffer Overlay Zone are shown on maps entitled
Pima County Buffer Overlay Zone maps, and numbered and titled as follows:
         a.   Eastern Pima County: e1112-ne, e1113-ne, e1113-nw, e1113-sw,
e1114-ne, e1114-nw, e1114-se, e1114-sw, e1116-ne, e1117-nw, e1117-se, e1117-sw,
e1211-se, e1212-se, e1212-sw, e1213-se, e1214-nw, e1214-sw, e1217-ne, e1217-se,
e1218-sw, e1311-ne, e1311-nw, e1311-sw, e1312-ne, e1312-nw, e1312-se, e1312-sw,
e1313-nw, e1313-sw, e1314-ne, e1314-nw, e1315-ne, e1315-nw, e1316-nw, e1316-se,
e1316-sw, e1318-nw, e1318-se, e1318-sw, e1411-ne, e1411-se, e1412-ne, e1412-se,
e1412-sw, e1413-nw, e1413-se, e1413-sw, e1416-ne, e1416-nw, e1416-sw, e1516-ne,
e1516-nw, e1516-se, e1517-ne, e1517-nw, e1517-se, e1517-sw, e1608-se, e1609-sw,
e1616-ne, e1616-se, e1617-ne, e1617-nw, e1617-se, e1617-sw, e1618-ne, e1618-nw,
e1618-sw, e1708-ne, e1708-nw, e1714-se, e1714-sw, e1715-se, e1715-sw, e1716-se,
e1716-sw, e1717-ne, e1717-nw, e1717-se, e1717-sw, e1718-nw, e1718-se, e1718-sw,
e1807-ne, e1807-se, e1808-sw, e1809-se, e1809-sw, e1810-sw, e1813-ne, e1813-se,
e1814-nw, e1814-sw, e1815-ne, e1815-se, e1816-ne, e1816-se, e1817-ne, e1817-nw,
e1817-sw, e1818-ne, e1818-nw, e1907-se, e1908-ne, e1908-nw, e1908-se, e1908-sw,
e1909-nw, e1910-nw, e1910-sw, e1913-ne, e1913-se, e1914-nw, e1914-se, e1914-sw,
e1918-ne, e1918-nw, e1918-se, e1918-sw, e2008-ne, e2008-se, e2008-sw, e2009-ne,
e2009-se, e2010-nw, e2010-sw, e2011-se, e2107-ne, e2107-se, e2108-nw, e2109-ne,
e2109-se, e2110-nw, e2110-se, e2110-sw, e2111-ne, e2111-se, e2111-sw, e2207-ne,
e2207-se, e2208-sw, e2210-ne;
         b.   Western Pima County: w1106-nw, w1106-sw, w1109-ne, w1109-se,
w1109-sw, w1110-se, w1110-sw, w1206-nw, w1206-sw, w1306-nw, w1306-sw, w1405-ne,
w1405-nw, w1406-ne, w1406-nw.
      2.   Lands within a mile of designated public preserves, in accordance
with Section
18.67.030A, are shown with the map notation "BZ." Lands within a mile of
designated rural public preserves are given the map notation "RBZ."
(Ord. 1999-35 § 2, 1999; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.05.030   Determination of boundaries.
   A.   Where uncertainty exists, the boundary of any zone shall be determined
as follows:
      1.   Where a boundary is indicated as approximately following a street or
alley line, or the centerline thereof, or a lot line, such line shall be
construed to be such boundary.
      2.   Where a boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundary,
unless indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by referencing the adopted
ordinance map and/or legal description of approved rezoning case for exact
dimensions.
      3.   Where a public street, alley, railroad or other right-of-way is
vacated or abandoned, the zone applied to abutting property shall thereafter be
deemed to extend to the center line of such vacated or abandoned right-of-way.
   B.   Questions concerning the exact location of boundaries not covered shall
be determined by the board of adjustment, in accordance with
Chapter 18.93 (Boards of Adjustment and Appeals).
(Ord. 1986-41 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
Chapter 18.07
GENERAL REGULATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
18.07.010   Purpose.
18.07.020   Lots and parcels.
18.07.030   Land use regulations.
18.07.040   Land use exceptions.
18.07.050   Development standards exceptions.
18.07.060   Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
18.07.070   Modification of setback requirements or lot coverage limits.
18.07.080   Modification of development standards in riparian areas.
18.07.010   Purpose.
   Reserved.
18.07.020   Lots and parcels.
   A.   Splitting of Lots.
      1.   No lot or parcel of land held under one ownership on February 16,
1953, shall be reduced in size below the minimum lot area or lot width required
by this code; and
      2.   No building or use permit shall be issued for such deficient lot or
parcel or portion thereof, except that on one street frontage of any one block
of a subdivision, where lots having less than the minimum lot area or lot width
existed prior to February 16, 1953, and existing unimproved lots so that
minimum-size building lots may be used if split in accordance with the pattern
previously established for the block; provided, that any new lot or building
site so formed has not less than eighty percent of the minimum lot area and lot
width required in the zone.
   B.   Exceptions for Lots of Records.
      1.   This subsection shall apply to any lot:
         a.   Shown upon an official subdivision map duly approved and recorded
prior to February 16, 1953; or
         b.   For which a bona fide deed is on record in the office of the
county recorder; or
         c.   For which a valid, bona fide contract of sale was in full force
and effect on February 16, 1953, and said map, deed or contract of sale was of
record on said date; or
         d.   Split in accordance with the exception of Section
18.07.020A.
      2.   Any such lot may be used as a building site; provided:
         a.   The yard and other requirements of this code are complied with;
or
         b.   If private subdivision restrictions or regulations were of record
and unexpired on February 16, 1953, establishing less restrictive yard and area
requirements for said lot, and at least one lot in said subdivision was
improved in compliance with said private restrictions prior to said effective
date, the zoning inspector may issue a permit under said private restrictions
as to yard and area requirements for any use permitted by this code for said
lot, but no permit shall be issued for more than one dwelling unit on any lot
having less than the minimum area per dwelling unit of the zone in which said
lot is located;
      3.   Each minimum side yard may be reduced by two inches for each one
foot by which such lot is narrower than fifty-five feet; provided, that no
minimum side yard shall be narrower than five feet;
      4.   The minimum rear yard may be reduced three inches for each one foot
by which such lot is less than one hundred twenty-five feet in depth; provided,
that no minimum rear yard shall be less than twenty feet.
   C.   Area, Screening and Setback Credits for Trails Access Dedications.
      1.   The area of a lot or parcel dedicated to the county for public
trails access shall be credited to the lot or parcel to satisfy any area,
screening or setback requirement of a rezoning, this code or any permit issued
thereunder.
      2.   Requests for the implementation of an area, screening or setback
credit for public trails access shall be initiated by or submitted for approval
to the director of the parks and recreation department.
      3.   Dedications and requests so approved by the director of the parks
and recreation department shall be forwarded to the board of supervisors for
acceptance.
(Ord. 1993-80 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1985-188 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part),
1985)
18.07.030   Land use regulations.
   A.   Filling Stations, Repair Shops and Public Garages.
      1.   No gasoline filling station or automobile repair shop shall have an
entrance for exit for vehicles on the same side of the street within thirty-
five feet of a residential zone, nor shall any part of a gasoline filling
station or automobile repair shop be within fifty feet of the grounds of any
school, public playground, church, hospital, sanatorium, public library or
institution for dependents or for children.
      2.   No gasoline filling station or public garage shall have any oil
draining pit or visible appliance for such purpose, other than filling caps,
located within twelve feet of any street lot line or within fifty feet of any
residential zone, unless such appliance or pit is within a building and at
least twelve feet distant from any vehicular entrance or exit of such building.
   B.   Maintenance of Stock-Tight Fences. All livestock, ratites, and poultry
kept in any rural, residential, business or industrial zone shall be kept
confined by fences or other restraints of sufficient strength and durability to
prevent such livestock, ratites, and poultry from roaming at large. Ratites
shall be confined within minimum six-foot-high, stock-tight corrals. In the IR,
RH, SR, SR-2 zones and unsubdivided parcels zoned GR-1, SH and CR-1, such
fences may be constructed of barbed wire. Use of barbed wire in any rural or
residential zone is limited to containment of livestock, ratites, and poultry.
      1.   Use of Barbed Wire. Barbed wire may be used on fences or walls for
security purposes in the CB-2 general business district, and the MU, CI-1, CI-
2 and CI-3 industrial districts, provided the wire is more than six feet above
ground level.
   C.   Junk Storage in Residential and Commercial Zones. There shall be no
open storage of used materials, appliances, furniture, machinery, etc., in any
required yard in rural, residential, RVC, or CB-1 zones.
   D.   Swimming Pools.
      1.   Private swimming pools: All private swimming pools shall be
regulated according to the following requirements:
         a.   Swimming pools shall be subject to the front yard requirements of
that zone in which they are permitted and shall be located no closer than four
feet from any side or rear property line of said zone.
         b.   Outdoor lighting shall be in accordance with the county outdoor
lighting code (Title 15).
      2.   Public, semi-public and commercial swimming pools: All public, semi-
public and commercial swimming pools shall be regulated according to the
following requirements:
         a.   Swimming pools shall be subject to the front, side and rear yard
requirements of that zone in which they are permitted.
         b.   Outdoor lighting shall be in accordance with the county outdoor
lighting code (Title 15).
         c.   No mechanical device for the reproduction or amplification of
sounds and in connection with swimming pools shall create a nuisance to
adjacent residential properties through the emission of noises, voices or music
which is loud enough to cause complaints from adjacent residential property
owners.
   E.   Beekeeping is permitted in all zones subject to the requirements of
this section:
      1.   Density. Except in the Institutional Reserve (IR), Rural Homestead
(RH) and industrial zones (CPI, CI-1, CI-2, CI-3) wherein one colony is allowed
per two thousand five hundred square feet, the following maximum number of
colonies per lot area apply:
         a.   One-quarter acre or less: Two colonies.
         b.   More than ¼ acre to less than ½ acre: Four colonies.
         c.   One-half acre to less than 36,000 square feet: Six colonies.
         d.   36,000 square feet to one acre: Eight colonies.
         e.   Greater than one acre: Eight colonies plus one colony per
additional two thousand five hundred square feet of lot area above one acre.
      2.   Bee hives shall be kept a minimum of thirty feet from any exterior
lot boundary line.
      3.   Except for lots with an area greater than one acre, a barrier shall
be erected that will prevent bees from flying through it. Such barrier shall:
         a.   Be at least six feet in height and shall consist of a dense plant
or hedge or any opaque constructed material;
         b.   Extend at least eighteen feet beyond the hive(s) in both
directions.
      4.   Fresh, clean watering facilities for bees shall be provided on said
premises.
      5.   Upon determination by a zoning inspector that a property owner is
not in compliance with the zoning standards for beekeeping, the Pima County
health department shall be notified. If the same property owner is determined
to be keeping a colony or colonies deemed a nuisance or hazard by the health
department, the course of action shall be determined by the health inspector in
cooperation with the zoning inspector.
      6.   Exceptions:
         a.   An exception to the provisions of this subsection shall be
permitted for a period not to exceed sixty days for bees actively participating
in commercial agricultural activities.
         b.   Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed or construed to
prohibit the keeping of bees located or kept within a government facility, a
school, or a university facility for the purpose of study or observation.
   F.   Minor Resort Regulations.
      1.   Scope: This subsection shall be applicable to minor resorts in any
zone where permitted as a conditional use;
      2.   Intent: These regulations are intended to allow for minor resorts
which meet the lodging, convention and recreational needs of short-term
visitors to Pima County and are not intended to allow for the development of
residential units for permanent or long-term residential use;
      3.   Accessory uses:
         a.   Permitted uses:
            1)   Meeting rooms;
            2)   Restaurants and drinking establishments;
            3)   Retail and service establishments, provided that the total
floor area of all such establishments does not exceed five percent of the total
floor area of the minor resort;
            4)   Swimming pools and spas;
            5)   Game courts such as tennis and racquetball;
            6)   Fitness and exercise centers; and
            7)   Equestrian facilities, provided:
               a)   There is not more than one horse for each ten thousand
square feet of the site area; and
               b)   No stable or corral is within one hundred feet of any
property line or within three hundred feet of any existing structure on an
adjacent property.
         b.   Other provisions:
            1)   Accessory uses shall be operated primarily for guests of the
minor resort;
            2)   No sign identifying an accessory use shall be visible from a
public street; and
            3)   No entrance to an accessory use shall face a public street.
            4)   Development standards:
               a)   Minimum site area: ten acres.
               b)   Other development standards: In accordance with the zone
where located.
   G.   Fire Stations.
      1.   Scope:
         a.   Fire stations and related facilities are permitted in all zones,
subject to the requirements of this subsection.
         b.   The location of any proposed fire station shall be discussed with
county staff prior to proceeding with the provisions of this subsection.
      2.   A Type 2 Conditional Use Permit with a hearing notification area of
five hundred feet is required in accordance with
Chapter 18.97.
      3.   Development standards.
         a.   Fire stations shall meet the requirements of the zone in which
located, except that the minimum site area in:
            1)   CR-2 zoning shall be thirty-six thousand square feet;
            2)   CR-3, CR-4, CR-5, TR, CMH-1 and CMH-2 zoning shall be ten
thousand square feet.
         b.   All fire station sites shall have a minimum one hundred feet of
frontage for primary access on a road shown on the Major Streets and Scenic
Routes Plan.
      4.   Performance standards:
         a.   Off-street parking: All parking for employees and visitors shall
be off-street and shall be provided in accordance with
Chapter 18.75 (Off-street Parking and Loading Standards).
         b.   Screening: An aesthetically pleasing visual screen shall buffer
all outdoor facilities, including parking areas, when the site is either zoned
for, or adjacent to, rural or residential zoning.
         c.   Traffic safety: The provision of access for emergency vehicles
shall include appropriate methods to minimize the endangerment of passing
vehicles.
      5.   Development review: A development plan shall be submitted and
reviewed in accordance with
Chapter 18.71 (Development Plan Standards).
   H.   Communication towers:
      1.   Purpose:
         a.   To regulate the placement, construction and modification of
communications towers and related equipment areas in order to protect the
health, safety and welfare of the public in accordance with the guidelines and
intent of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and other applicable federal,
state and local ordinances;
         b.   To minimize the total number of communication towers throughout
unincorporated Pima County by maximizing the use of existing communication
towers in order to reduce the number of new towers needed;
         c.   To maintain and preserve the existing unique attributes of
community character including, but not limited to, architecture, historic and
cultural features, historic development patterns, landscape, hardscape and the
size, scale and spacing of buildings and other structures that define the
community identity of rural and residential neighborhoods, and to preserve
property values in those neighborhoods;
         d.   To encourage the location of communication towers in business and
industrial zones and in areas of compatible uses;
         e.   To minimize the adverse impacts of communications towers and
related equipment areas on visually sensitive areas including, but not limited,
to skylines, rock outcroppings, foothills, mountain backdrops, unique
vegetation, streams and natural drainageways through the careful design,
siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques utilizing
current and future technologies;
         f.   To promote and encourage shared use or co-location of
communication towers and antenna support structures;
         g.   To protect the aesthetic quality of neighborhoods by encouraging
the siting of communication towers to minimize negative aesthetic impacts and
ensure to the extent possible that communications towers and related equipment
areas are compatible with surrounding land uses;
         h.   To allow unincorporated Pima County access to the latest in
wireless techonologies by collaborating with the wireless industry in
developing sound siting policy.
      2.   Applicability:
         a.   Communication towers are permitted in any zone subject to the
requirements of the Pima County Zoning Code.
         b.   Lattice-type communication towers intended for commercial uses
are not permitted within public rights-of-way.
         c.   Towers over two hundred fifty feet in height are permitted only
in business or industrial zones and shall comply with FAA painting and lighting
(over one hundred ninety-nine feet in height) standards to provide for aircraft
safety.
         d.   New communication towers in rural and residential zones, in
gateway overlay zones and within two hundred feet of a designated scenic route
shall be stealth design so as to minimize or mitigate the adverse visual impact
through proper design and aesthetics to ensure that the communication tower is
compatible with the built environment in which it is located. Because of
differing circumstances specific to each site, a communication tower that is
considered to be stealth in one location may not be considered to be stealth in
a different location. Methods of stealth design include, but are not limited
to:
            1)   Design that mimics surrounding existing vegetation such as
palm trees (monopalms), pine trees (monopines) and Saguaro cacti not to exceed
forty feet in height. If monopalms are used in areas where palm trees are not
naturally prevalent in the vicinity of the communication tower location, two
palm trees shall be planted on the site. Each palm tree shall be equal to one-
half of the height of the monopalm at planting but must be a species that will
grow to a minimum height of thirty feet. Monopalms and monopines are not
permitted in buffer overlay zones.
            2)   Mounting antennas on existing structures that blend with the
architecture of the structure on which the antennas are located.
            3)   Using color schemes that make the communication tower less
noticeable.
            4)   Using church steeples, clock towers, bell towers, roof
features or other such vertical architectural elements to conceal antennas and
equipment.
            5)   Placing antennas on new or existing street signs, outdoor
lighting poles, flag poles, windmills (both functional and faux), chimneys,
cupolas, silos, smokestacks and utility poles which are designed to match the
context and color of the host structure.
         e.   Communication towers in all zones require approval of a Type III
conditional use permit, except for the following:
            1)   A new communication tower in the CB-2, CI-1, CI-2 and CI-
3 zones.
            2)   A new communication tower monopole in the CB-1 and CPI zones
requires a Type I conditional use permit.
            3)   A new communication tower in the MU zone shall be permitted
through the MU zone special use procedure as set forth in Section
18.37.020.
            4)   An antenna attached to an existing, non-residential building
with a maximum height of sixteen feet (above roof line or highest point of the
building), and a communication tower equipment area obscured from public view.
The total height of the structure, including the antenna, shall not exceed two
hundred feet.
            5)   A co-located, flush-mounted antenna attached to an existing
utility pole, or attached to an existing, conforming structure within a public
right-of-way, provided the co-located antenna does not increase the height of
the existing structure more than sixteen feet. If a new communication tower
equipment area is added or an existing communication tower equipment area is
expanded, a Type I conditional use permit is required. Equipment placed inside
a vault, or equipment placed inside an existing walled or existing screened
compound (e.g. utility substation or existing, previously approved
communication tower equipment area) or equipment placed in the right-of-way of
a street with a designation of an arterial or collector street or higher is
exempt from the conditional use permit requirement.
            6)   A co-located antenna attached to an existing permitted
communication tower, provided the tower height is not increased and the co-
located antenna does not increase the height of the tower by more then two
feet. And provided that the co-located antenna does not extend from the tower a
distance that is greater than that of the existing antennas, or the co-located
antenna is flush mounted. If a new communication tower equipment area is added
or an existing communication tower equipment area is expanded, a Type I
conditional use permit is required. Equipment placed inside a vault, or
equipment placed inside an existing walled or existing screened compound (e.g.
utility substation or existing, previously approved communication tower
equipment area) or equipment placed in the right-of-way of a street with a
designation of an arterial or collector street or higher is exempt from the
conditional use permit requirement.
            7)   A new communication tower replacing an existing communication
tower or utility pole provided the new tower meets all the following
conditions:
               a)   Replaces the existing tower or pole;
               b)   Is located not more than six feet from the existing tower
or pole foundation, and is within the same alignment relative to property
boundaries and adjacent poles;
               c)   Is no higher than the existing tower or is no more than
sixteen feet beyond the height of the existing utility pole, not to exceed a
maximum total height of two hundred feet;
               d)   Antenna(s) are flush-mounted or does not extend from the
communication tower a distance that is greater than that of the existing
antennas.
               e)   If a communication tower equipment area is added or
expanded, a Type I conditional use permit is required. Equipment placed inside
a vault, or equipment placed inside an existing walled or existing screened
compound (e.g. utility substation or existing, previously approved
communication tower equipment area) or equipment placed in the right-of-way of
a street with a designation of an arterial or collector street or higher is
exempt from the conditional use permit requirement.
            8)   A communication tower together with any antenna and associated
communication tower equipment area used solely for internal communication
purposes at a utility substation as long as the height of the communication
tower was specified in the legal advertisement and public notice for any
required utility substation permit hearing. The structure and its height shall
be shown on the substation site plan.
            9)   New antennas replacing existing antennas located on a
permitted communication tower or utility pole as long as no changes are being
made to the existing tower or pole, the communication tower equipment area is
not being expanded or added, and the replacement antennas are of the same type
as the existing antennas.
            10)   A new communication tower fifty feet or less in height with
flushed mounted antennas requires a Type I conditional use permit.
            11)   A new communication tower that places communication tower
equipment inside a vault requires a Type I conditional use permit.
            12)   New antenna added to a communication tower that are not flush
mounted or extend from the communication tower a distance that is greater than
that of the existing antennas requires a Type I conditional use permit.
            13)   Any communication tower that does not qualify for exemption
from the Type III conditional use permit requirement under subparagraphs 1
through 12 above and that is increased in height by less than five feet
requires a Type I conditional use permit.
            14)   Speculative communication towers are not permitted.
            15)   Communication tower structures and additions that are exempt
under A.R.S. Title 11 Chapter 13, Article 1.
            16)   A new communication tower thirty feet or less may be approved
through the communication tower notice permitting process.
      3.   Application procedures:
         a.   A site plan is required for a communication tower and
appurtenances and a communication tower equipment area.
         b.   The applicant shall submit documentation detailing that
applicable Federal Communications Commission and Federal Aviation
Administration regulations have been reviewed and that the regulations are
being complied with or that the communication tower is exempt from regulation
prior to the issuance of the building permit.
         c.   The applicant shall submit with the site plan before and after
photo simulations showing the tower and surrounding area.
         d.   Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall
submit a license agreement to use the public right-of-way and approval from the
department of transportation as conditions of site plan approval for any
communication tower or co-located antenna and associated communication tower
equipment area to be located in a public right-of-way.
         e.   The minimum notification area for communication towers requiring
a conditional use permit hearing is one thousand feet in the IR zone.
         f.   For new towers the applicant shall submit a narrative explanation
describing the community necessity for the new tower and resulting increase in
coverage. The narrative shall list, and include a discussion of, the pros and
cons of each prospective new tower site and co-location opportunity considered
(along with maps showing the locations of each site) and shall state the
reasons why each of the alternative sites and co-locations was not considered
to be feasible. The narrative report shall be accompanied by before and after
propagation maps prepared and signed by a radio frequency engineer evidencing
that a gap in coverage exists and demonstrating how the proposed tower will
eliminate the existing gap.
         g.   Applicants for a communication tower for cellular phone antennas
must provide evidence in writing that at least one cellular phone provider is
committed to locate on the tower.
         h.   Upon completion of the construction of any communication tower
activity requiring a permit or right-of-way license, the applicant shall submit
two sets of as-built photographs of the completed project as evidence of
compliance with the provisions of the permit or right-of-way license.
      4.   Development standards:
         a.   Lattice-type communication tower and associated equipment area
not within the public right-of-way:
            1)   Minimum site area: None.
            2)   Minimum lot setbacks: A distance equal to the height of the
tower.
         b.   Monopole communication tower and associated communication tower
equipment area within the public right-of-way:
            1)   Minimum site area: None.
            2)   Minimum setbacks - tower: A distance equal to the height of
the tower from a residence.
         c.   Monopole communication tower and associated communication tower
equipment area not within the public right-of-way:
            1)   Minimum site area: None.
            2)   Minimum lot setbacks - tower:
               a)   Adjacent to a residential zone or use, or within the IR
zone: A distance equal to the height of the tower.
               b)   Adjacent to a non-residential zone: A minimum of fifty feet
to all lot lines except internal lot lines within the boundaries of an approved
development plan. Exceptions to this requirement for side and rear setbacks may
be obtained through an approved modification of setback requirements request.
Monopole communication towers adjacent to an industrial zone shall meet the
setback requirements of the zone in which the tower is located.
            3)   Minimum lot setbacks - communication tower equipment area: The
communication tower equipment area shall meet the setback requirements for
accessory structures in the zone in which the tower is located.
         d.   Co-located antenna(s) attached to an existing, conforming
structure including replacement poles and associated communication tower
equipment area within the public right-of-way:
            1)   Minimum site area: None.
            2)   Minimum site setbacks: None.
         e.   An antenna(s) attached to an existing, permitted structure,
including replacement poles, and associated communication tower equipment area
not located within the public right-of-way:
            1)   Minimum site area: None.
            2)   Minimum lot setbacks: None.
         f.   Communication monopoles and lattice towers located within two
hundred feet of a designated scenic route shall be stealth design, so long as
this is not in conflict with FAA standards. If a new utility pole is used for
the communication tower and the new utility pole replaces an existing utility
pole which is one of a line of utility poles, then the color of the replacement
utility pole and the new antennas shall match the color of the adjacent utility
poles.
         g.   Towers shall be located with access to a publicly maintained
road.
         h.   Landscaping shall be in accordance with
Chapter 18.73 and shall screen the communication tower equipment area from
adjacent residential uses and public streets. This requirement is not
applicable within public rights-of-way.
         i.   Barbed wire may be used on fences and walls for security purposes
in nonresidential zones if the wire is a minimum of six feet above ground
level.
         j.   The light source of any outdoor security lighting shall not be
visible from adjoining residential properties and shall be arranged to
eliminate glare towards adjoining residential properties.
         k.   A minimum of one parking space shall be provided for each tower
either within the site area or off-site if demonstrated to be safe and
reliable.
      5.   Termination of Use. Any tower, structure or antenna that ceases
operation for a period of twelve consecutive months shall be deemed to have
terminated use and shall be removed within ninety days at the property owner's
expense.
      6.   Communication Tower Notice Permitting Process.
         a.   Applicability. New communication towers thirty feet or less may
be permitted by the zoning inspector in accordance with the provisions of this
subsection.
         b.   Application. Applications for communication towers shall be made
on forms provided by the development services department and shall include all
information in Section
18.07.030(H)(3) of the Pima County Zoning Code.
         c.   Notice to owners of affected properties.
            1)   The zoning inspector shall mail notice of the application,
including a site plan and photo simulation, to property owners within one
thousand feet for requests in RH, GR-1, SR and SR-2 zones, and property owners
within three hundred feet for all other zones.
            2)   The zoning inspector may waive the sending of notice to any
property owner that provides written consent to the request.
         d.   Action by the zoning inspector.
            1)   The zoning inspector shall review all submitted information
and provide a written response to the applicant.
            2)   If no protest has been received, approval may be granted and
building permits may be issued for the tower in accordance with Section
18.93.050 of the Pima County Zoning Code.
            3)   If a written protest is received from a property owner in the
notice area within fifteen days of the date of the mailing of notice the
application shall be denied and the applicant shall be informed of the protest.
The applicant may submit a conditional use application for the communication
tower.
      7.   Administrative Waiver Process (A.R.S. § 11-1803(C)).
         a.   An applicant may apply for an administrative waiver for a small
wireless facility as defined by A.R.S. § 11-1801(17). An administrative waiver
may only be requested for items listed in A.R.S. § 11-1803(B)5, 6, or 7.
         b.   The zoning inspector will consider the purpose statement found in
Section
18.07.030(H)(1) of the Pima County Zoning Code when determining whether to
grant an administrative waiver.
         c.   For requests to waive an undergrounding requirement and allow a
utility pole in the right-of-way on a scenic route under A.R.S. § 11-1803(C),
the zoning inspector will permit the pole when the proposed utility pole is
within twenty feet of an existing utility pole, street light or similar
structure and the proposed utility pole is no higher than the existing
structure that is within twenty feet.
   I.   Adult Activities Facility Standards.
      1.   Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to provide for the
uniform regulation of adult activities facilities by limiting the concentration
of adult activities facilities through the imposition of spacing requirements,
thereby mitigating crime, maintaining property values, protecting retail trade
and preserving the quality of life in rural and residential neighborhoods.
      2.   Enclosure. An adult activities facility shall be conducted solely
within an enclosed structure or building.
      3.   Spacing. An adult activities facility shall be at least:
         a.   One thousand feet from another adult activity facility;
         b.   Five hundred feet from a public, private, parochial, charter,
dramatic, dancing, music, or other similar schools where children may be
enrolled;
         c.   Five hundred feet from a public park;
         d.   Five hundred feet from a church;
         e.   Five hundred feet from a zoning district other than CB-2, CI-1,
CI-2, and CI-3.
      4.   Method of Measurement. The spacing requirement set by this
subsection shall be measured from the lot line of the proposed facility to a
zoning district boundary line or to the lot line of a church, school, park, or
another adult activities facility.
      5.   There shall be no more than one adult activities facility per lot.
   J.   Holiday Outdoor Sales.
      1.   Holiday outdoor sales of pumpkins and Christmas trees are permitted
in business and industrial zones subject to issuance of a temporary use permit
by the zoning inspector.
      2.   The permit shall be valid for no more than sixty days from the date
of issuance and shall be valid only for the uses as approved by the zoning
inspector.
   K.   Environmental Hazards.
      1.   Applicability. Due to the potential for adverse environmental
impact, nuisance or hazard greater than that of other permitted uses, the
following uses of land and erection, moving, alteration or enlargement of a
building or other structure for such uses shall comply with the provisions of
this subsection:
         a.   Facilities requiring Class I or Class II air quality permits
pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-426, § 49-479 or Pima County code Section
17.12.140;
         b.   Hazardous waste treatment, storage and disposal facilities,
hazardous waste transporters and hazardous waste generators required by A.R.S.
§ 49-929 to register annually with the Arizona Department of Environmental
Quality pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-929;
         c.   Hazardous waste resource recover facilities as defined in A.R.S.
§ 49-930;
         d.   Septic tank cleaners, liquid waste haulers and industrial waste
haulers required to be permitted pursuant to Pima County code Section
7.21.150;
         e.   Uses which require an industrial wastewater discharge permit as
required by
Chapter 13.36 of the Pima County code and which are subject to categorical
pretreatment standards as described in Pima County code Section
13.36.040.C;
         f.   Landfills;
         g.   Facilities with underground storage tanks subject to annual fees
pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-1020, except gasoline filling stations, repair shops
and public garages, which shall be regulated pursuant to Subsection
18.07.030K.1.a.
      2.   Exception. This subsection does not apply to uses located in the CI-
3 zone. Within the CI-3 zone, the uses listed in Subsection
18.07.030K.1 above shall be governed by the requirements of
Chapter 18.55 of this code.
      3.   Conditional use permit required. The uses listed in subsection
18.07.030K.1 above shall require a Type 1 conditional use permit in accordance
with
Chapter 18.97 if any of the following apply:
         a.   The use is situated less than one thousand three hundred twenty
feet from the boundary of any zone other than CPI, CI-1, CI-2, or CI-3;
         b.   The use is situated less than one thousand three hundred twenty
feet from a public, private or parochial school, adult assisted care facility,
or day care center;
         c.   For purposes of this subsection only, the Type 1 conditional use
permit process shall be modified as follows:
            1)   In lieu of meeting Subsection
18.97.030I, the applicant shall submit a site plan in accordance with
18.91.030E (Preliminary development plan);
            2)   The use shall meet all standards listed in
18.97.030F. The hearing administrator shall give special considerations to the
health and safety of neighboring residents in the hearing administrator's
review of the permit.
   L.   Factory-built (modular) buildings.
      1.   A nonresidential factory built building is permitted in any zone,
provided that the use of the building is a permitted use in the zone.
      2.   A residential factory built building is permitted as provided in
Section
18.09.020K of this code.
   M.   Off-road vehicle facilities:
      1.   Purpose:
         a.   To maintain residential property values, preserve the comfort,
enjoyment, and privacy of residents of the county, and reduce the potential for
dust and noise pollution, erosion, and destruction of vegetation caused by off-
road vehicle use.
         b.   To regulate the construction and use of off-road vehicle
facilities, requiring such facilities to meet development standards.
         c.   To restrict the zones in which off-road vehicle facilities are
permitted.
      2.   Scope:
         a.   An off-road vehicle facility shall be permitted only in CB-2 or
less restrictive zoning classifications subject to the development standards of
the zone in which the facility is located and obtaining the proper permit and
in the RH, GR-1, and SR zones as Type I conditional uses. The minimum
notification area shall be one thousand three hundred and twenty feet from the
subject property.
         b.   Conditional use permit approval for an off-road vehicle facility
shall be valid for a period of three years. A renewal of the off-road vehicle
facility permit shall be subject to the same application procedures as a first-
use permit. The hearing administrator shall renew the permit if he determines
that the off-road vehicle facility is in compliance with the initial permit
standard requirements and conditions. The renewal fee shall be the same as the
fee for a first-use Type I conditional use permit.
      3.   Development Standards for an off-road vehicle facility in the RH,
GR-1, and SR zones. The development standards contained in this section
constitute the minimum requirements which must be met for off-road vehicle
facilities. The hearing administrator may on a case-by-case basis impose
additional and/or more stringent conditions than those contained in subsections
3b through 3f if he or she determines such conditions to be warranted given the
surrounding environment and neighborhood concerns about a specific facility.
The hearing administrator shall, as a component of his or her decision, state
the reasons why such conditions are necessary and appropriate. Such additional
conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: restricting the
hours of operation, imposing additional setback requirements, limiting the size
and location of a facility, limiting the number of off-road vehicles permitted
to use a facility at any one time, restricting the time duration of each use of
the facility and requiring landscape screening of the facility.
         a.   Minimum lot size: Ten acres.
         b.   Minimum setbacks: Two hundred feet from any lot line. A setback
of less than two hundred feet shall be permitted on the side and rear yards
where the adjacent property owners have provided a written, recorded document
agreeing to the reduced setback.
         c.   Use of the off-road vehicle facility shall be restricted to the
hours of ten a.m. to seven p.m. seven days per week March 15th through
September 14th, and the hours of ten a.m. to six p.m. seven days per week
September 15th through March 14th. However, in no event shall the use exceed a
total of three hours per day during the allowable time frames.
         d.   There shall be no outdoor lighting or other illumination of the
facility.
         e.   There shall be no public address or other announcing or broadcast
system allowed in conjunction with the off-road vehicle facility.
         f.   The off-road vehicle facility shall be for personal, non-
commercial use only.
         g.   A site plan shall be submitted which clearly depicts how the
development standards are being met. The site plan sheet size shall be 24' ×
36' and shall be drawn at a standard engineering scale that will show all
required details. A development plan in accordance with
Chapter 18.71 is not required for the Type I conditional use permit.
         h.   The applicant for a conditional use permit for an off-road
vehicle facility shall contact all property owners and affected neighborhood
associations within the notification area and shall hold a meeting, with a
specified date, for review of the proposed conditional use request. Notice of
the meeting shall be mailed, via first class mail, to all property owners and
homeowners associations of record with the development services department
within the notification area ten business days before the meeting. At such
meeting, the applicant shall review the proposed use and any measures designed
to mitigate any adverse consequences of the use. The applicant shall provide
written proof of the meeting to the zoning inspector at least thirty days prior
to the date of the public hearing by the hearing administrator. The conditional
use request shall not be set for public hearing without such written proof.
         i.   All standard zoning requirements and special conditions placed on
the facility by the hearing administrator shall be posted on the property at a
location and in a manner and that is easily visible to facility users.
         j.   The permit holder shall comply with all applicable Pima County
ordinances regarding noise and dust control.
         k.   The holder of an off-road vehicle facility permit shall meet with
neighboring property owners on an annual basis. The meeting shall be held
within thirty days of the permit anniversary date. Notice of the meeting shall
be sent to property owners and homeowners associations of record with the
development services department within the notification area. The notice shall
be sent by first class mail ten business days before the meeting. The meeting
notice shall contain at a minimum the following wording:
            1)   This notice is provided pursuant to Section
18.07.030(M)(3)(j) of the Pima County Zoning Code regarding an established off-
road vehicle facility on my property located at (property address).
            2)   The terms of the conditional use permit require the permit
holder to offer to meet annually with property owners within one quarter mile
of the facility.
            3)   The purpose of the meeting is to gather feedback from
neighbors regarding the operation of the facility.
            4)   If you feel that the facility is not being operated in
compliance with the terms of the conditional use permit, you may file a zoning
complaint with the Pima County development services zoning enforcement
division.
            5)   Copies of the conditional use permit will be available at the
meeting or may be obtained from the Pima County development services
department. The permit holder shall provide Pima County development services
with a written summary of the meeting within ten days of the meeting.
      4.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to a vehicle being
used for:
         a.   Ranching or agricultural purposes;
         b.   Access to hunting, fishing, camping, and other similar areas;
         c.   Grading, construction or building trade purposes;
         d.   Mining purposes;
         e.   Licensed business operations which require off-road travel such
as land surveying, public utility companies, sand and gravel operations and
other similar enterprises;
         f.   Authorized emergency purposes including towing services;
         g.   Governmental purposes by government employees;
         h.   Transportation on a golf course.
   N.   Cargo Container.
      1.   Cargo containers are permitted in all zones only in conjunction with
an approved permitted commercial development plan.
   O.   Commercial Vehicle Parking. Parking commercial vehicles is permitted in
all zones only in conjunction with a permitted use and commercial development
plan or with a permitted home occupation subject to Section
18.09.030(A)(10).
   P.   Ancillary Scale Renewable Energy System.
      1.   Purpose:
         a.   To encourage energy self-sufficiency on an individual scale
through the use of ancillary scale renewable energy systems;
         b.   To minimize to the extent possible adverse visual effects and any
possible audio effects of renewable energy systems through appropriate
development standards;
         c.   To provide clear regulations for the use of ancillary scale
renewable energy systems.
      2.   Applicability: Primarily intended for on-site use only to off-set
part or all of a property owner's or occupant's electrical requirements;
selling excess energy produced is incidental to the primary use. Ancillary
scale renewable energy systems are considered accessory uses to be allowed in
all zones subject to the following development standards.
      3.   Development Standards—Ancillary Scale Solar Energy Systems:
         a.   Minimum site area: In accordance with the underlying zone.
         b.   Setbacks:
            1)   Ground-mounted solar energy systems six feet in height or
less:
               i)   Front: In accordance with the minimum front yard
requirements for a main structure or building of the underlying zone.
               ii)   Side: In accordance with the minimum side yard
requirements for an accessory structure or building of the underlying zone.
               iii)   Rear: In accordance with the minimum rear yard
requirements for an accessory structure or building of the underlying zone.
            2)   Ground-mounted solar energy systems greater than six feet in
height:
               i)   Front: In accordance with the minimum front yard
requirements for a main structure or building of the underlying zone.
               ii)   Side: In accordance with the minimum side yard
requirements for a main structure or building of the underlying zone plus two
feet.
               iii)   Rear: In accordance with the minimum rear yard
requirements for a main structure or building of the underlying zone.
            3)   Roof-mounted solar energy panels: In accordance with the
minimum yard requirements for the applicable structure (main or accessory) to
which the panel is attached.
            4)   Solar energy panels co-located on existing utility poles: In
accordance with the underlying requirements for the existing pole.
         c.   Height:
            1)   Ground-mounted solar energy systems: Maximum ten feet, with
the following exception that systems up to sixteen feet shall be allowed in the
IR (institutional reserve), RH (rural homestead), GR-1 (rural residential), SR
(suburban ranch), and SR-2 (suburban ranch estate) zones and all commercial and
industrial zones.
            2)   Roof-mounted solar energy panels:
               i)   Parapet or flat roof: The highest point of the solar device
structure shall be no more than eight feet above the top of the parapet or roof
line, and the combined height of the solar device structure and the structure
to which it is attached shall comply with the maximum height of the underlying
zone allowed for the applicable structure (main or accessory) to which the
solar device structure is attached.
               ii)   Gable, hip or gambrel roof: The highest point of the solar
device structure shall be no more than six feet above the roof, and the
combined height of the solar device structure and the structure to which it is
attached shall comply with the maximum height of the underlying zone allowed
for the applicable structure (main or accessory) to which the solar device
structure is attached.
Figure 18.07-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4410.png]
            3)   Solar energy panels co-located on existing utility poles: In
accordance with the underlying requirements for the existing pole.
            4)   Height is calculated as measured to the highest point of the
solar device structure from the finished grade.
         d.   Ground-mounted solar energy systems located within the single
residence zone (CR-1) or single residence zone (CR-2), and ground-mounted solar
energy systems within the suburban ranch zone (SR) and suburban ranch estate
zone (SR-2) if the system is set back less than fifty feet from the abutting
properties, shall require a wall or opaque fence (no chain link fencing) on the
side abutting the neighbor(s) or that portion of the side affecting the
abutting neighbor as determined by the chief zoning inspector or their
designee, equal to the height of the system up to six feet or vegetative
screening capable of growing up to or greater than the height of the system, be
provided to help obscure the solar system from the abutting neighbors' ground-
level views. The applicant may obtain an exception from this screening
requirement to allow no fencing or chain link fencing with written consent from
all abutting property owners submitted to the chief zoning inspector or their
designee. The applicant must specify to the abutting property owners whether
the exception is for no fencing or chain link fencing.
         e.   Lot coverage: Accessory structure maximum lot coverage shall not
apply.
         f.   Solar energy panels co-located on existing utility poles are
limited to sixteen square feet per pole.
         g.   An accessory structure proposed for roof-mounted solar energy
panels must serve some other function (e.g. carport, shed) than to mount solar
panels, otherwise the system is defined as "ground-mounted" and subject to
Sections
18.07.030 (P)(3)(b)(1) or (2) and
18.07.030(P)(3)(c)(1).
      4.   Solar energy systems shall be located such that prolonged and/or
substantial concentrated solar radiation or glare shall not be directed onto
abutting properties or roadways.
      5.   Energy production: The chief zoning inspector or designee may
request prior to issuing permits that the property owner provide written
certification that the energy produced by the renewable energy system(s) is
reasonably equivalent to the electrical usage of the property; any selling of
excess energy is incidental.
      6.   An exception to the setback requirements may be made subject to
approval of a modification of setback requirements (MSR) request in accordance
with Section
18.07.070.
      7.   Any renewable energy system which becomes inoperable shall at the
owner's expense be made operational or shall be removed from the property
within one year of the date the system became inoperable.
   Q.   Utility Scale Renewable Energy System.
      1.   Purpose:
         a.   To encourage the use of renewable energy systems;
         b.   To provide clear regulations for utility scale renewable energy
systems;
         c.   To minimize to the extent possible adverse visual effects of
renewable energy system structures through appropriate development standards.
      2.   Applicability: A solar energy system that generates energy primarily
intended for off-site consumption; selling energy produced is the primary
purpose of the system. The facility may include accessory uses such as
buildings associated with electrical operational infrastructure such as
inverters and transformers.
      3.   Development Standards:
         a.   Utility scale solar energy systems are considered primary uses
and are permitted in the general business zone (CB-2), light industrial/
warehousing zone (CI-1), general industrial zone (CI-2), and heavy industrial
zone (CI-3) subject to the following requirements:
            1)   The equivalent development and performance standards as for a
main structure or building of the underlying zone, with the exception of
maximum lot coverage restrictions;
            2)   The submittal of an approved solar site development plan with
the exception of roof-mounted systems; and
            3)   Subject to the general requirements listed in Section
18.07.030(Q)(4) below.
         b.   Utility scale solar energy systems are considered primary uses
and are permitted in the multiple use zone (MU), local business zone (CB-1),
and campus park industrial zone (CPI) subject to the following requirements:
            1)   Approval of a Type 1 conditional use permit;
            2)   Adherence to the performance standards in Section
18.43.020(B)(1);
            3)   The equivalent development standards as for a main structure
or building of the underlying zone with the exception of maximum lot coverage
restrictions and unless further expanded in setback or restricted in height in
accordance with Section
18.07.030(Q)(4)(g);
            4)   Submittal of an approved solar development plan with the
exception of roof-mounted systems; and
            5)   General requirements listed in Section
18.07.030(Q)(4) below.
         c.   Utility scale solar energy systems are considered primary uses
and are permitted in the institutional reserve zone (IR), rural homestead zone
(RH), rural residential zone (GR-1), suburban ranch zone (SR), suburban ranch
estate zone (SR-2), and suburban homestead zone (SH) subject to the following
requirements:
            1)   Approval of a Type I conditional use permit if the facility
site is not within any of the following conservation land categories
established in the regional environmental element of the comprehensive plan, as
may be amended:
               Important riparian area,
               Biological core management area,
               Multiple use management area,
               Special species management area,
               Scientific Research Area, or
            2)   Approval of a type II conditional use permit if the facility
site is within any of the following conservation land categories established in
the regional environmental element of the comprehensive plan, as may be
amended:
               Important riparian area,
               Biological core management area,
               Multiple use management area,
               Special species management area,
               Scientific research area;
            3)   Adherence to the performance standards in Section
18.43.020(B)(1);
            4)   The equivalent development standards for a main structure or
building of the underlying zone with the exceptions of maximum lot coverage
restrictions not being applicable, a minimum site area of two acres for the SH
zone, and unless further expanded in a setback or restricted in height in
accordance with Section
18.07.030(Q)(4)(g);
            5)   Submittal of an approved solar development plan with the
exception of roof-mounted systems; and
            6)   Subject to the general requirements listed in Section
18.07.030(Q)(4) below.
      4.   General requirements for all utility scale solar energy systems:
         a.   The minimum required fencing for a ground-mounted system is a
perimeter chain link fence (unless Section
18.49.040(G) applies, in which case another type of fencing/wall is required)
meeting minimum setback requirements, however, the hearing administrator may
recommend additional or alternative specific types of fencing, screening, and/
or walls appropriate to the site and surrounding land use(s) and not otherwise
prohibited by this title.
         b.   The site's permanent building, if any, shall utilize a
southwestern color palette (desert tans, browns, rusts, greens) for those
opaque surfaces that are not of indigenous or natural building materials. If
the property is subject to the scenic route regulations of
Chapter 18.77, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.
         c.   Solar energy systems shall be located such that prolonged and/or
substantial concentrated solar radiation or glare shall not be directed onto
abutting properties or roadways.
         d.   Suitable warning signs containing a telephone number for
emergency calls shall face all access approaches to the facility. No
advertising on the signs is allowed.
         e.   The site shall be maintained in a trash and debris free manner.
         f.   Any renewable energy system which becomes inoperable shall at the
owner's expense be made operational or shall be removed from the property
within one year of the date system became inoperable. An appropriate
reclamation and closure plan, including recycling, subject to the planning
director's approval shall be required prior to removal.
         g.   Any additional special conditions deemed necessary by the hearing
administrator or the board of supervisors may be added.
      5.   An exception to the setback requirements may be made subject to
approval of a modification of setback requirements (MSR) request in accordance
with Section
18.07.070.
      6.   Barbed wire may be used on fences or walls for security purposes
provided the barbed wire is greater than six feet above ground level. The
barbed wire shall not count towards the maximum fence or wall height.
   R.   Rainwater Harvesting System.
      1.   Rainwater harvesting systems are permitted in all zones, subject to
the requirements and exceptions of this subsection:
         a.   Exposed openings to cisterns shall be screened with a corrosion
resistant metallic fine mesh to prevent mosquitoes from entering.
         b.   Large openings in cisterns shall be securely fastened to prevent
accidental drowning.
         c.   Overflow or discharge from rainwater harvesting systems must not
have an adverse impact on adjacent property or rights-of-way.
         d.   Cistern setbacks:
            1)   Front: In accordance with the minimum front yard requirements
for a main structure or building of the underlying zone.
            2)   Side: In accordance with the minimum side yard requirements
for an accessory structure or building of the underlying zone, except that zero
lot line siting is permissible for cisterns eight feet or less in height,
excluding piping, on lots of eight thousand square feet or less.
            3)   Rear: In accordance with the minimum rear yard requirements
for an accessory structure or building of the underlying zone.
         e.   Exceptions for cisterns:
            1)   Cisterns forty-eight inches or less in height and width
excluding piping are exempt from minimum yard distance setback requirements of
the underlying zone.
            2)   Cisterns are exempt from maximum lot coverage requirements of
the underlying zone.
            3)   For single detached or one-family dwellings on lots of less
than seventy-two thousand square feet, if more than two cisterns are visible
within a front or side yard from a single point on an abutting street, the
cisterns must be screened with a minimum five-foot-high wall, fence, or hedge.
   S.   Stormwater Harvesting System.
      1.   Purpose. The use of stormwater harvesting systems can:
         a.   Increase on-site stormwater infiltration to reduce run-off and
soil erosion;
         b.   Improve stormwater quality by absorption, filtration and uptake
of pollutants into natural systems;
         c.   Provide a low-cost, sustainable source of irrigation to augment
and reduce use of groundwater resources;
         d.   Support landscaping to create shade, lessen urban heat island,
improve air quality and beautify local development;
         e.   Provide wildlife habitat and preserve and enhance existing
riparian corridors; and
         f.   Reduce the burden on and cost of building public stormwater
control structures.
      2.   Stormwater harvesting systems are permitted in all zones, subject to
the requirements and exceptions of this subsection:
         a.   Design, installation and use of stormwater harvesting systems
should use as guidance, where applicable, Pima County Code Title 16-Floodplain
Management, the Regional Flood Control District Manual "Design Standards for
Stormwater Detention and Retention," the City of Tucson/Pima County "Low Impact
Development-Green Infrastructure Guidance Manual," and other accepted
stormwater harvesting principles and guidelines for arid climates approved by
the floodplain administrator and planning official.
         b.   Stormwater harvesting shall be reviewed in conjunction with site
improvement plan review.
         c.   Stormwater harvesting systems shall be designed to:
            1)   Collect stormwater from all on-site paved, impervious or
disturbed surfaces, but may also collect off-site non-regulatory stormwater;
            2)   Drain directly into bufferyards, off-street parking, and other
required landscape and screening areas, as well as detention basins and areas
that augment existing riparian habitat; and
            3)   Allow the flow of stormwater between harvesting elements
across the site — walls, hardscaping, and other structures shall also be
designed to facilitate stormwater flow.
   T.   Safety standards for existing tall commercial structures. On any parcel
with a tall commercial structure, excluding buildings, measuring 24 feet or
taller and is subject to a development plan, subdivision plat or Type II
grading permit, pedestrian access, parking area access lanes and loading zones
shall not be located, under the structure, or within eight feet of a vertical
line intersecting the ground and the outer perimeter of any elevated structural
element extending from the existing structure, including but not limited to,
such as overhangs, cantilevered beams, and walkways.
   U.   Mobile Homes. Mobile homes imported, installed or relocated within Pima
County shall be rehabilitated and certified to Arizona Manufactured Housing
Division standards, as amended, for units constructed on or before June 15,
1976.
   V.   Trail-oriented development: to provide incentives to encourage economic
development and business opportunities through retail and services and small-
scale residential for users who commute and recreate on established county
trails.
      1.   Guidelines - Establishments should:
         a.   Be located to provide safe access for pedestrians and bicyclists
to and from trails;
         b.   Provide outdoor seating, shade, landscaping, and be oriented
toward trails to the extent practicable;
         c.   Provide a diversity of housing types including workforce housing
in conveniently located areas;
         d.   Use elements of green building, sustainability, water harvesting,
and green infrastructure / low impact development in project design and
construction;
         e.   Promote and complement the region's long historic, cultural and
natural heritage, and existing specific site characteristics (such as shade
trees, vegetation, or viewsheds) where possible.
      2.   Location:
         a.   Non-residential or mixed-use development - Any parcel within
five-hundred feet of the Chuck Huckelberry Loop Trail or any county-identified
Loop Trail spur segment, excluding any parcels west of N. Silverbell Road.
         b.   Residential - Any parcel within 2,640 feet of the Chuck
Huckelberry Loop Trail or any county-identified Loop Trail spur segment,
excluding any parcels west of N. Silverbell Road.
      3.   Uses:
         a.   Non-residential or mixed-use development:
            i.   Food and beverage service, such as coffee shop, café,
delicatessen, ice cream store, juice bar, refreshment stand, brew pub,
restaurant (with or without alcohol sales);
            ii.   Retail, such as bicycle shop, farm products stand, farmers
market, grocery, convenience store, or similar small retail establishment;
            iii.   Services, such as bank or personal services;
         b.   Platted residential development connected to sanitary sewer:
         c.   Other trail-oriented development: all uses which are similar in
type, scale or intensity to other uses listed and which are, in the opinion of
the zoning inspector, not otherwise unlawful, injurious to the general health
and welfare or specifically excluded.
      4.   Requirements for permanent structures and establishments:
         a.   Non-residential development or mixed-use development:
            i.    Maximum floor area in RH, GR-1 and SR zones: 10,000 square
feet;
         b.   Residential development:
            i.   Minimum site area: Seven thousand square feet;
            ii.   Average area per dwelling unit: in accordance with the
appropriate zone;
            iii.   Minimum lot size: One thousand square feet;
            iv.   Minimum site setbacks: in accordance with the yard setbacks
of the appropriate zone;
            v.   For subdivisions of 10 lots or less:
               a)   May develop per section 2.2. Commercial and Industrial
Developments of the 2016 Subdivision and Development Street Standards (as
amended from time to time).
               b)   May design wastewater infrastructure in accordance with the
international plumbing code if the system is private, no manholes are proposed,
3,000 gallons per day (gpd) or less, and no force main is proposed.
         c.   Setbacks on parcels that abut trails and onsite vehicle parking
may be reduced to less than required, with Planning Official approval, when
demonstrated that the minimum necessary to support onsite use is provided;
         d.   Shall provide sufficient and secure bicycle parking.
      5.   Signage - Section
18.79.040 of the zoning code notwithstanding, temporary and portable
advertising signs for establishments along trails shall be permitted:
         a.   Free-standing single-sided or two-sided sandwich board type signs
only permitted;
         b.   Signs shall not exceed sixteen square feet in area per side;
         c.   Signs shall be placed during business hours only and removed at
close of the business day;
         d.   Signs shall be located and secured so as not to cause safety
hazards. Signs shall not be placed within trail rights-of-way, obstruct
congested areas, obstruct entrances, obstruct line-of-sight down the trail, or
otherwise obstruct trails;
         e.   Signs shall not be illuminated;
         f.   Signs may be placed on public property.
   W.   Transit oriented development: To provide incentives to encourage
housing development on previously developed properties located along major
transportation corridors.
      1.   Guidelines - New housing should:
         a.   Be located within previously developed land excluding single-
family residential development;
         b.   Provide a variety of housing sizes including a range of studios,
one bedroom and multi-bedroom options;
         c.   Consider rentals or ownership products;
         d.   Consider a mix of uses by continuation of and maintaining
existing uses;
         e.   Consider parking reduction as prescribed in Section
18.75.050C.;
         f.   Consider preservation of potentially eligible historic resources
and consider compatibility with adjacent eligible historic resources as
prescribed in Chapter
18.63.
      2.   Location: At least a portion of the project site:
         a.   Must be within the CR-4, CR-5, MU, TR, CB-1 or CB-2 zones;
         b.   Must be located with direct access to a designated arterial
street. That portion of the street must also be no more than eighty-five
percent (85%) capacity as determined by Pima County Transportation Department
or similar entity, and if at an intersection, primary access shall be designed
to arterials under eighty-five percent (85%) capacity;
         c.   Must be located within 2,640 feet of a transit stop;
         d.   Must connect to sewer;
         e.   Must be located within a water service area of a provider that
has a renewable water source and must have access to that source;
         f.   Must be developed within previously developed site.
      3.   Uses:
         a.   Single family dwellings, duplex, condominium, townhouse,
apartment, multifamily dwelling, if allowed within the underlying zoning and
not specifically prohibited if the property was rezoned;
         b.   The continuation of any uses that were previously established.
      4.   Development standards:
         a.   Minimum site area, average area per dwelling unit, and minimum
lot size in accordance with underlying zone;
         b.   Minimum setbacks in accordance with underlying zone, except the
front yard setback may be reduced to zero feet provided parking is available
elsewhere on-site and sufficient right-of-way has been provided as identified
in the Major Streets Plan;
         c.   Height: 50 feet and up to four stories. May be increased to 60
feet and five stories for any portion of the structure located at least 100
feet from any existing single-family residence;
         d.   Designed in accordance with the Subdivision and Development
Street Standards.
(Ord. 2024-7, § 1, 2024; Ord. 2023-4, § 1, 2023; Ord. 2020-24, § 1, 2020; Ord.
2018-17 § 1, 2018; Ord. 2018-15 § 1, 2018; Ord. 2017-36 § 8, 2017; Ord. 2017-
3 § 1 (part), 2017; Ord. 2015-7 § 2, 2015; Ord. 2013-42 § 3, 2013; Ord. 2012-72
§ 1, 2012; Ord. 2012-15 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2011-45 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2011-2 § 3
(part), 2011; Ord. 2009-101 § 2, 2009; Ord. 2008-70 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2006-85 §
2, 2006; Ord. 2005-87 § 2, 2005; Ord. 2005-85 § 2, 2005; Ord. 2002-67 § 2,
2002; Ord. 1999-78 § 2, 1999; Ord. 1999-34 § 1, 1999; Ord. 1998-53 § 1, 1998;
Ord. 1997-40 § 2, 1997; Ord. 1996-58 § 4 (part), 1996; Ord. 1994-147 § 2, 1994;
Ord. 1994-114 § 2, 1994; Ord. 1993-150 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1992-6 § 1 (part), 1992;
Ord. 1988-153 § 1 (part), 1988; Ord. 1986-19 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-153 §
1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.07.040   Land use exceptions.
   A.   Additional Permitted Uses. The following accessory uses shall be
permitted in any zone when the principal use itself is permitted:
      1.   The operation of necessary facilities and equipment in connection
with schools, colleges, universities, hospitals and other institutions;
      2.   Recreation, refreshment and service buildings in public parks,
playgrounds and golf courses.
   B.   Public Utilities Permitted. Except as provided in
Chapter 18.57:
      1.   Nothing in this code shall prevent the location, erection,
alteration or maintenance of pipes, poles, wires, and similar installations
necessary to distribute public facilities;
      2.   In addition to other provisions of this code, the uses of this
subsection shall be permitted in any zone and shall not be subject to the
minimum lot area requirements. Barbed wire may be used on fences and walls for
security purposes, provided the wire is more than six feet above ground level;
      3.   Water pumping and storage facilities operated as part of a system
serving two or more properties as a public, private or community utility:
         a.   Subject to the requirements for accessory buildings in the zone
in which located,
         b.   Provided a wall or hedge is used to screen the site,
         c.   Where a tower more than twenty feet in height is used in
conjunction with such facilities, its center shall be located a distance from
any lot line equal to not less than one-half its height;
      4.   Telephone, telegraph or power substations:
         a.   Any building housing such substation shall be in keeping with the
character of the zone in which located,
         b.   A substation not enclosed within a building shall be subject to:
            1)   The minimum front and side yards of the zone in which located;
and
            2)   Appropriate screen planting along any street frontage, which
planting and any necessary fencing shall be set at a distance not closer to a
street lot line than the minimum front and side yards of the zone;
      5.   Power substations with an input voltage of one hundred fifteen
kilovolts or greater shall be subject to the following requirements:
         a.   Setback: That the facility, including walls or equipment, is
located no closer than two hundred feet to any existing residential property
line,
         b.   Screening:
            1)   That the facility include a ten-foot high wall in an earth
tone and vegetative landscaping when contiguous to a residential zone,
            2)   Vegetative landscaping shall be located to preclude attracting
athletic activities in the setback area,
         c.   Height: That the facility observe the height restriction of the
zone in which located,
         d.   Notification: When the utility purchases land with the intent of
constructing a power substation facility, the property must be posted stating
that intent,
         e.   Noise emissions:
            1)   That the sound level emitted by the facility shall not exceed
forty-five DBA at the property line,
            2)   That there shall not be any TVI (television interference) or
RIV (radio interference) on a continuous basis,
         f.   The board of supervisors may waive the minimum requirements of
Section
18.07.040(B)(5)(a) through (e), or impose more restrictive requirements at an
advertised public hearing if the supervisors determine such an action is in the
public interest,
         g.   Power substation permit issued by the supervisors after a public
hearing:
            1)   Notice shall be given by mail to all owners of record within
six hundred feet of the substation and by posting the substation site,
            2)   An applicant for a permit shall pay a fee in accordance with
the development services fee schedule.
         h.   The supervisors may approve or deny an application and may impose
reasonable conditions upon the issuance of a substation permit and shall
consider the following factors:
            1)   Existing plans of the state, local government and private
entities for other developments at or in the vicinity of the proposed site,
            2)   Fish, wildlife and plant life and associated forms of life
upon which they are dependent,
            3)   Noise emission levels and interference with communication
signals,
            4)   The proposed availability of the site to the public for
recreational purposes, consistent with safety considerations and regulations,
            5)   Existing scenic areas, historic sites and structures or
archaeological sites at or in the vicinity of the proposed site,
            6)   The total environment of the area,
            7)   The technical practicability of achieving a proposed objective
and the previous experience with equipment and methods available for achieving
a proposed objective,
            8)   The estimated cost of the facilities and site as proposed by
the applicant and the estimated cost of alternative facilities and sites,
recognizing that any significant increase in costs represents a potential
increase in the cost of electric energy to the customers or the applicant,
            9)   Any additional factors which require consideration under
applicable federal, state and Pima County laws,
            10)   The supervisors shall give special consideration to the
safety and health of neighboring residents,
         i.   The requirements of Section
18.07.040(B)(5)(g) and (h) shall be eliminated on those sites which are
considered by the Arizona Power Plant and Transmission Line Siting Committee
when that committee contains adequate local representation. The determination
of adequate local representation on the committee shall be made by the
supervisors at a public hearing.
   C.   Clay, Sand or Gravel Pits, Rock or Stone Quarries, Gas or Petroleum
Drilling Permitted. Clay, sand or gravel pits, rock or stone quarries and
drilling for petroleum or natural gas may be permitted in any zone, except MU;
provided, that said use is designed and located so as not to create any unusual
hazard or nuisance in the immediate neighborhood of the proposed site of said
use, and the zoning inspector is hereby authorized to issue a permit for said
uses under the conditions set forth in Section
18.53.020(C) (CI-2 General Industrial Zone).
(Ord. 2011-2 § 3 (part), 2011; Ord. 2008-118 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2004-59 § 3, 2004;
Ord. 1988-153 § 1 (part), 1988; Ord. 1985-117 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82
(part), 1985)
18.07.050   Development standards exceptions.
   A.   Individual Lot-size Reductions. The provisions for the lot reduction
option (Section
18.09.050—General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions) shall not affect the
power of the board of adjustment to allow reduction of individual lot sizes on
the standards provided in Section
18.93.030 (Board of Adjustment Variances, Temporary Use Permits and
Interpretations).
   B.   Exceptions for Walls and Fences. The yard and setback requirements of
this code shall not apply to perimeter walls, fences, pedestrian entry
architectural features built into a wall or fence, or vehicular entry
architectural features as follows:
      1.   Walls or fences seven feet or less in height and designed as
security, privacy or screening elements of the site or lot; or
      2.   Walls or fences eight feet or less in height, located on the side or
rear yard, on one acre lots or greater in size; or
      3.   Pedestrian entry architectural feature eleven feet or less in
height; or
      4.   Vehicular entry architectural features twenty feet or less in
height, on one acre lots or greater in size; or
      5.   Walls or fences of any type or dimension when required or permitted
in accordance with
Chapter 18.73, Landscaping, Buffering and Screening Standards.
   The location and height of any wall or fence shall meet all applicable sight
visibility standards and requirements.
   C.   Projections Into Yards.
      1.   Stairways, unroofed and unenclosed above or below floor or steps,
must not project more than three feet into any minimum side or rear yard. Roof
eaves or overhangs, shade structures, and roofed porches must not project more
than three feet into any minimum front, side, or rear yard for main structures,
main buildings, and guest houses provided drainage from roofs and shade
structures does not fall onto adjacent property. The projection is measured
from the face of the supporting structure or wall.
      2.   Open terraces not over three feet high above the average natural
grade and distant at least five feet from every lot line, may project into any
minimum side or rear yard.
      3.   In any business or industrial zone, a marquee, canopy or awning,
suspended or cantilevered from a building, either for the purpose of, or for
giving the appearance of shelter or shade, may project not more than ten feet
into any minimum front yard.
   D.   Exception for Slope. Parking spaces or detached garages may be occupied
or built to within five feet of the street line on any lot where:
      1.   The slope of the front half of the lot is greater than one-foot rise
or fall in a seven-foot run from the established street elevation at the
property line; or
      2.   The elevation of the front half of the lot is more than four feet
above or below the established street elevation at the property line.
   E.   Front Yard Exceptions for Existing Alignment.
      1.   In any rural or residential zone: Where a lot adjoins lots having
existing front yards less than the minimum required by this code, the minimum
front yard on said lot shall be the average of the existing front yards on the
two adjoining lots, or, if only one of the lots is built upon, such front yard
shall be the average of the existing front yard of the adjoining lot and the
minimum front yard of the zone, provided no such front yard shall be less than
ten feet.
      2.   In any CB-1 or CB-2 zone: Where one or more buildings used for
commercial or industrial purposes and located on interior lots have existing
front yards less than the minimum required by this code, the minimum front yard
required on all other lots within the same block front and not more than five
hundred feet from said existing building need not be greater than the least
front yard existing.
      3.   In any zone: Any property fronting or abutting on a turnaround at
the end of a cul-de-sac, or a similar increased radii of the street property
line at the angle in a street, the minimum front yard required shall be one-
half of the front yard required in the particular zone.
   F.   Rear Yard Adjoining Alley.
      1.   A minimum rear yard may be measured to the centerline of an alley
adjoining such rear yard; provided, that the required rear yard shall not be
reduced more than ten feet.
      2.   In any CR-2 or denser residential zone where a ten-foot half right-
of-way for an alley is provided, the first five feet of such half right-of-way
multiplied by the width of any lot where it abuts on the alley may be included
as part of the overall lot area for the purpose of meeting the minimum lot area
requirements; provided, that the net rear yard is not less than seventeen feet.
   G.   Rear Yard Exception on Corner Lot. On any corner lot in a CR-3, CR-4,
CR-5, TR or CB-1 zone, the minimum rear yard may be reduced to not less than
ten feet from the rear property line, provided the minimum side yard on the
side street is increased by ten feet and the off-street parking provisions of
Chapter 18.75 (Off-Street Parking and Standards) are complied with.
   H.   Height Limit Exceptions. The height limits of this code shall not apply
to:
      1.   Barns, chimneys, conveyors, cupolas, derricks, flagpoles, parapet
walls extending not more than four feet above the height limit of the building,
silos, smokestacks, power transmission towers, windmills, power transmission
poles, and vegetated roof systems beginning at the height above the waterproof
membrane including safety railings, enclosed access stairway or elevator with a
minimum twenty-foot setback from roof edges, vegetative containers, and
vegetation;
      2.   Churches, hospitals, sanatoriums, schools or other public and semi-
public buildings. Any such building may be erected to a height not exceeding
forty-four feet, provided the minimum side and rear yards are increased by an
additional foot in width or depth for each foot by which the height of such
building exceeds the maximum height permitted in the zone in which such
building is to be located;
      3.   Bulkheads, elevator penthouses, monitors, scenery lofts and water
tanks; provided, that:
         a.   Such structures above the height limits specified for the zone
shall not in the aggregate occupy more than twenty-five percent of the area of
the lot, and
         b.   No linear dimension of any such structure shall be greater than
one-half of the length of the corresponding street lot line if the structure is
within twenty-five feet of such street lot line;
      4.   Towers, restricted to fire and hose towers, cooling towers for
industrial operations, gas holders, grain elevators, sugar refineries or other
structures where the manufacturing process requires a great height; provided,
that such structures above the height limit specified for the zone shall:
         a.   Not in the aggregate occupy more than twenty-five percent of the
area of the lot,
         b.   Be a distance not less than twenty-five feet from every lot line
not a street lot line, and
         c.   Be not less than one foot from the opposite side of each abutting
street for each foot of the vertical height;
      5.   Natural convection towers except as provided in this subsection. A
Type II conditional use permit shall be obtained for the tower and the proposed
tower height must be approved by the board of supervisors at the conditional
use public hearing. For the purpose of this paragraph, a "natural convection
tower" means a chimney-like structure, which can be integrated with a main
building and its HVAC (heating, ventilating and air conditioning) system, and
uses natural convection to move air up or down the tower with the designed
purpose and effect of cooling or heating the building with only limited,
secondary use of fans or blowers. The following restrictions shall apply to
such towers:
         a.   A minimum of seventy-five percent of the height of the tower must
be used for the natural convection chimney effect,
         b.   A minimum of fifty percent of the cross-sectional area of the
tower must be dedicated to airflow for the cooling operation,
         c.   The minimum setback of the tower from any scenic route shall be
three feet of horizontal distance for every foot of vertical tower height, with
the setback measured from the edge of the street right-of-way as designated on
the Major Streets and Scenic Routes Plan;
         d.   The minimum setback of the tower from any property line shall be
twenty-five feet, unless a greater building setback is required by the
applicable zone, the Major Streets and Scenic Routes Plan, or subdivision (c)
of this subsection.
(Ord. 2017-3 § 1 (part), 2017; Ord. 2013-42, § 3, 2013; Ord. 2008-70 § 3
(part), 2008; Ord. 2006-92 § 2 (part), 2006; Ord. 1996-58 § 4 (part), 1996;
Ord. 1994-112 § 1 (part), 1994; Ord. 1988-89 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1985-188 § 1
(part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.07.060   Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
   A.   Accessory building adjacent to main building. When any portion of an
accessory building is three feet or less from the main building, the accessory
building shall comply in all respects with the development standards for the
main building as if it were part of the main building.
   B.   Accessory building on corner lot.
      1.   On any corner lot an accessory building shall be not closer to the
street side lot line than the width of the side yard required for the main
building on that lot.
      2.   Where the rear of a corner lot adjoins a key lot, no part of an
accessory building within ten feet of the rear lot line shall be nearer the
street side lot line than the depth of the front yard required on the key lot.
   C.   Accessory structure height limits in Level II Protected Peak and Ridge
areas. No accessory structure in a Level II Protected Peak and Ridge area may
exceed the building height required by Level II Protected Peak and Ridge design
standards.
   D.   Accessory building and accessory structures specifically regulated.
When a specific type of accessory building or accessory structure is regulated
by this code with development standards specific to that type of building or
structure, those development standards supercede the general accessory building
and accessory structure development standards for the zone in which the
accessory building or accessory structure is located.
   E.   Exceptions for private aircraft hangars:
      1.   On lots zoned IR, RH, GR-1, SR, SR-2 or SH, the accessory structure
size limitations shall not apply to private aircraft hangars that have recorded
access to a private airport facility, ultra light facility, or general aviation
strip.
(Ord. 2008-70 § 3 (part), 2008; Ord. 2006-92 § 2 (part), 2006; Ord. 2004-59 § 3
(part), 2004; Ord. 1988-188 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.07.070   Modification of setback requirements or lot coverage limits.
   A.   Applicability. Front yard when the setback is not reduced to less than
twenty feet, side and rear yard setbacks, distances between structures or
buildings, or lot coverage limits by accessory structures or accessory
buildings required by this code may be modified by the zoning inspector in
accordance with the provisions below. The approval of a modification under this
section does not waive or modify building code or fire code regulations.
   B.   Application. Requests for modification of setback requirements or lot
coverage limits for accessory structures or accessory buildings shall be made
on application forms provided by the development services department.
      1.   The application shall include:
         a.   Legal description,
         b.   Signatures of the property owners of record or the authorized
agent of the owner,
         c.   A letter of authorization if the property owner is represented by
an agent,
         d.   A sketch plan showing existing and proposed buildings and
structures, access, parking, and distances from buildings and structures to
property lines and to other buildings and structures,
         e.   An elevation drawing, if determined necessary by the zoning
inspector, showing the existing and proposed building or structure,
         f.   A statement describing the ability and intent of the property
owner to apply for necessary county permits within nine months of receiving
approval of the modification of the setback requirements or lot coverage limits
for accessory structures or accessory buildings, and
         g.   A statement describing how the proposal complies with the
standards in subsection D of this section,
         h.   Any other information reasonably necessary to evaluate the
application which is required by the zoning inspector,
         i.   Applicable fee: The board of adjustment standard base fee in
accordance with the adopted fees schedule. No public hearing fee shall apply to
a modification of setback requirements or lot coverage limits application.
   C.   Notice to owners of affected properties.
      1.   Mailed notice including a sketch plan shall be sent to:
         a.   Property owners adjacent to the applicant's property,
         b.   Property owners within one hundred feet of the applicant's
property line but separated by a public or private road or private common area,
and
         c.   Property owners determined by the zoning inspector to be affected
by the request.
      2.   The zoning inspector may waive the giving of notice if the applicant
submits written consents to the modification signed by all owners of affected
property as defined in paragraph 1 above.
   D.   Standards. The zoning inspector shall grant a modification of the
setback requirements or lot coverage limits for accessory structures or
accessory buildings only after a finding is made that the following standards
have been met:
      1.   The reduced setback or increased lot coverage by accessory
structures or accessory buildings will not substantially reduce the amount of
privacy that would be enjoyed by nearby residences;
      2.   Significant views of prominent land forms, unusual stands of
vegetation, or parks from nearby properties will not be obstructed any more
than would occur if the setback was not modified or if the lot coverage limits
for accessory structures or accessory buildings were maintained;
      3.   Traffic visibility on adjoining streets will not be adversely
affected;
      4.   Drainage from proposed buildings and structures will not adversely
affect adjoining properties and public rights-of-way;
      5.   Proposed buildings and structures will not interfere with the
optimum air temperature/solar radiation orientation of buildings on adjoining
properties;
      6.   The location or lot coverage of proposed buildings and structures,
and the activities to be conducted therein, will not impose objectionable noise
levels or odors on adjoining properties.
   E.   Action by the Zoning Inspector.
      1.   The zoning inspector shall review all the submitted information and
provide a written response to the petitioner of the action.
      2.   The response shall state the reasons for the decision if the request
is denied.
      3.   If granted, building permits may be issued for the building or
structure and shall be in accordance with Section
18.93.050(A) and (B).
   F.   Appeals or Referral to the Board of Adjustment.
      1.   The applicant may elect to file directly to the board of adjustment
for a variance.
      2.   The applicant may appeal the decision of the zoning inspector to the
board of adjustment and be heard in accordance with Section
18.93.030.
      3.   If a protest to a setback modification or a modification to lot
coverage limits for accessory structures or accessory buildings is submitted in
writing within fifteen days of the date of the mailing of notice by an owner of
affected property as defined in this section, the zoning inspector shall refer
the application to the board of adjustment to be heard in accordance with
Section
18.93.030. Protests may be based only upon characteristics of the development
that would not be allowed by the zoning code without the modification.
      4.   The zoning inspector may refer an application to the board of
adjustment to be heard in accordance with Section
18.93.030.
   G.   Specific Plans. The modification of setback requirements and lot
coverage limits processes may be applied to specific plan development standards
subject to the requirements of Section
18.07.070(A) through (F) and the following:
      1.   Modification of the development standard does not meet the
definition of a substantial change as defined in Section
18.90.080(C);
      2.   The development standard is not a specific plan ordinance condition;
      3.   A request to waive a subdivision plat note may also be required if
the development standard is stated on a subdivision plat for reasons other than
for convenient reference during staff review;
      4.   Each application shall apply for an individual lot or parcel or, at
most, to two contiguous lots or parcels.
(Ord. 2017-3 § 1 (part), 2017; Ord. 2011-2 § 3 (part), 2011; Ord. 2008-70 § 3
(part), 2008; Ord. 1991-32 § 1, 1991)
18.07.080   Modification of development standards in riparian areas.
   A.   Applicability. Whenever development requires a floodplain use permit to
promote the protection of riparian habitat as defined by the Pima County flood
control district pursuant to
Chapter 16.30 of the Pima County Code, development standards may be modified in
accordance with this section. Any such modification shall be consistent with
the purpose of
Chapter 16.30, and may only be allowed:
      1.   When a mitigation plan required by
Chapter 16.30 would be unnecessary if the modification is granted; or
      2.   When development within the riparian habitat area cannot reasonably
be avoided and an application for modification is submitted as part of a
mitigation plan submitted pursuant to
Chapter 16.30.
   B.   Types of Modifications. Development standards may be modified
consistent with section A above, including but not limited to the following:
      1.   Setbacks. The zoning inspector may modify any minimum setback or
distance between structures. The modification shall be processed pursuant to
the procedures and standards of Section
18.07.070, except that no fee shall be charged.
      2.   Subdivision Lot Size. Minimum lot size requirements for subdivision
lots in the CR-l, CR-2, CR-3, GR-1 and CMH-1 zones may be modified at the time
of plat approval in order to promote the protection of riparian habitat and
undisturbed natural areas. Additional undisturbed natural area may be included
in the preserved area if at least one acre or ten percent of the total
preserved area is riparian habitat as defined in
Chapter 16.30 of the Pima County Code. Such lot size modifications are
available only where an area of riparian habitat and undisturbed natural areas
will be owned by a homeowners association and preserved from alteration by
recorded covenants running with the land enforceable by the county. The sum
total of square feet by which the area of each lot in the subdivision is
reduced shall not exceed the square feet of the preserved area. No more lots
shall be allowed by the reduction than would be allowed without the reduction.
         a.   Minimum lot size requirements for lots in a CR-1 or GR-
1 subdivision may be reduced from thirty-six thousand square feet to eighteen
thousand square feet;
         b.   Minimum lot size requirements for lots in a CR-2 subdivision may
be reduced from sixteen thousand square feet to twelve thousand square feet;
         c.   Minimum lot size requirements for lots in a CR-3 or CMH-
1 subdivision may be reduced from eight thousand square feet to seven thousand
square feet.
      3.   Off-Street Parking. The subdivision and development review committee
may modify off-street parking requirements, pursuant to
Chapter 18.75, when it is demonstrated that such adjustment will not result in
a danger to persons or property or in increased traffic.
      4.   Bufferyard Requirements. The number of trees in bufferyards required
pursuant to
Chapter 18.73 may be reduced up to fifty percent when riparian habitat in an
area regulated by the Pima County flood control district pursuant to
Chapter 16.30 is preserved. The number of required bufferyard trees may be
reduced at the rate of one bufferyard tree per three hundred square feet of
preserved riparian vegetation. Measurement of the riparian vegetation shall be
done by aerial canopy coverage or an alternative means acceptable to the
county. The measurement of the square footage of the riparian vegetation shall
be rounded up or down to a whole number using three hundred as the base number.
(For example, four hundred thirty square feet shall equal one tree, while seven
hundred eighty square feet shall equal three trees.)
      5.   An owner or a developer may request additional development standard
modifications which promote the purposes of
Chapter 16.30. Any such request shall be reviewed subject to statutory or
ordinance provisions, including the appeals process or a development agreement
approved by the board.
(Ord. 1998-52 § 1, 1998; Ord. 1994-113 § 1, 1994)
Chapter 18.09
GENERAL RESIDENTIAL AND RURAL ZONING PROVISIONS
18.09.010   Purpose.
18.09.020   General requirements and exceptions.
18.09.030   Home occupations.
18.09.040   Cluster development option.
18.09.050   Lot reduction option.
18.09.060   Lot development option.
18.09.070   Multisectional manufactured home subdivision option.
18.09.080   Reserved.
18.09.090   Model home permits.
18.09.100   Conservation subdivision.
18.09.110   Two-story residential buffer setback.
18.09.010   Purpose.
   Reserved.
18.09.020   General requirements and exceptions.
   A.   Uses Permitted in All Rural and Residential Zones.
      1.   The following uses shall be permitted in all rural and residential
zones (except as noted in subsection (A)(2) of this section), subject to the
requirements of the zone and any special conditions, as may be noted:
         a.   Single detached or one-family dwelling;
         b.   Duplex dwelling;
         c.   Triplex dwelling;
         d.   Accessory building or use;
         e.   Church, providing the minimum off-street parking requirements, as
set forth in
Chapter 18.75 (Off-street Parking and Loading Standards), are met;
         f.   Home occupation (refer also to Section
18.09.030);
         g.   Public park;
         h.   Public school;
         i.   Parochial and private schools are permitted subject to the
following development standards:
            1)   Conditional use permit:
 
Parochial and private schools Type I permit
 
            2)   Minimum site area: Five acres in all zoning districts except
in the TR and MU zoning district, in which the minimum site area is one acre.
            3)   Maximum student population density: Fifty-five students per
acre.
            4)   Maximum site coverage: Thirty percent of the site.
            5)   Minimum setback for playgrounds or athletic fields: One
hundred feet from all property lines.
            6)   Screening and buffering: Bufferyard "D" along all property
lines.
            7)   All driveways shall be dust proofed.
            8)   All outdoor lighting used in conjunction with the school use
shall be in accordance with the county outdoor lighting code (Title 15).
            9)   All lighting for outdoor recreational areas shall cease no
later than ten p.m.
            10)   As required by state statute, A.R.S. Section 15-189.01, an
application for a charter school shall receive final determination from the
county within ninety days of the beginning of the process.
            11)   Schools should be located as close as possible to residential
areas. All schools should be built on site in a manner that promotes safe
routes or similar pedestrian and bicycle oriented design.
         h.   Charter Schools:
            1)   On vacant lots or on lots with a single family residence
greater than one acre or larger.
            2)   Charter schools on lots less than one acre with a single
family residence require a Type I conditional use permit.
      2.   Exceptions. TH zone: All uses listed in subsection (A)(1) of this
section are prohibited.
   B.   Parking of Unoccupied Trailers.
      1.   Any trailer not in use for residential purposes may be stored or
parked in any SR, SR-2, CR-1, CR-2, CR-3, CR-4 or CR-5 zone only if said
trailer is located to the rear of the principal dwelling on the lot, parcel or
tract where said trailer is to be stored, and is stored in a garage or ramada
or behind planting of sufficient height to shield said trailer from view from
the adjoining properties; and
      2.   No more than one such trailer may be parked on any such residential
lot, parcel or tract.
   C.   Requirements for Townhouses and Condominiums.
      1.   Townhouse developments shall be subject to covenants, conditions,
and restrictions which shall, among other things, provide for the establishment
of a homeowner's association which shall be responsible for the maintenance of
building exteriors, landscaping, and common areas.
      2.   Condominium developments shall be subject to the formation of a unit
owner's association pursuant to A.R.S. Section 33-1241 et seq., which shall,
among other things, provide for the maintenance of building exteriors,
landscaping, and common areas.
      3.   Building setback requirements shall be same as the setback
requirements in the zone where the lots are created and shall be determined
from the boundaries of the proposed development.
   D.   Rear Dwelling Requirements. In addition to other requirements of this
code, the following shall apply to any dwelling in the rear of a principal
building:
      1.   There shall be provided an unoccupied and unobstructed access way to
a street, which access way shall have a width of at least fifteen feet for one
dwelling unit and at least twenty feet for two or more dwelling units;
      2.   For the purpose of determining the front yard for a rear dwelling in
any CR-1, CR-2, or CR-3 zone, the rear line of the rear yard required for the
building in the front shall be considered the front lot line for the building
in the rear.
   E.   Group Homes.
      1.   Scope: Group homes shall be permitted in the RH, GR-1, ML, SR, SR-2,
SH, CR-1, CR-2, CR-3, CR-4, CR-5, CMH-2, MU, TR and CMH-1 zones, subject to
issuance of a use permit by the zoning inspector showing compliance with the
requirements of this subsection;
      2.   Requirements:
         a.   The establishment must be licensed to operate as a group home by
the state of Arizona;
         b.   The establishment must obtain a certificate of occupancy if
required by county building codes.
   F.   Operative Builder's Yard Provisions.
      1.   Any licensed residential building contractor may apply for a
temporary and revocable permit for a builder's yard, warehouse, or real estate
office, in any subdivision of record in any residential zone in which the
applicant owns or controls ten or more commercial acres, provided the use is
used exclusively to service a residential building project in the subdivision
of that land.
      2.   The permit shall be for a period of twelve months, but the permit
may be extended or renewed for an additional period of twelve months if fifty
percent or more of the project area has been completely developed during the
original permit period.
      3.   At the expiration of the permit period or any extension thereof, the
builder's yard, warehouse, or real estate office shall be removed from the
premises where located within sixty days from the date of expiration.
   G.   Guest House.
      1.   Shall be permitted on any residential or rural lot which has a
minimum lot size of four thousand square feet;
      2.   Permitted coverage: In accordance with accessory building standards
      3.   Only one guest house per lot shall be allowed;
      4.   Minimum yard requirements:
         a.   Front, side and rear: In accordance with accessory building
standards of the appropriate zone;
         b.   Distance to main structures: Three feet
      5.   Shall use the same access which serves the main dwelling;
      6.   The guest house and the main dwelling shall not be served by
separate utility meters; and
   H.   Child Care Center.
      1.   Child care centers in conjunction with existing church, private
school or community service agency shall be a Type I conditional use permitted
in all rural and residential zones, and subject to the issuance of a
conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 18.97;
      2.   Requirements:
         a.   A decorative masonry wall, fence, or combination, at least four
feet in height, shall be provided for the enclosure of the outdoor play area,
         b.   Existing off-street parking and loading areas may be utilized,
however, they shall be in accordance with
Chapter 18.75 (Off-street Parking Standards),
         c.   Hours of operation shall be between six a.m. to nine p.m.,
         d.   License: The child care center shall be licensed to operate as a
child care center by the Office of Child Day Care of the Arizona Department of
Health Facilities.
   I.   Assisted Living Home.
      1.   License: That the establishment is licensed to operate as an
assisted living home by the state of Arizona.
      2.   Gross floor area: An assisted living home shall have a minimum gross
floor area of two thousand square feet for six to ten residents.
      3.   Compliance review:
         a.   An assisted living home shall obtain a certificate of occupancy
if required by county building codes.
         b.   An assisted living home is subject to issuance of a zoning use
permit or zoning construction permit by the zoning inspector which establishes
compliance with the requirements of this section.
   J.   Secondary Dwelling.
      1.   Application: In RH and GR-1 zones, a property owner may apply for a
permit to allow a secondary dwelling for the use of an ill, handicapped, or
elderly person in need of special care or supervision, or a care provider for
such person, if the ill, handicapped or elderly person is the owner or resident
of the main dwelling or a relative of the owner or resident of the main
dwelling. The application shall include:
         a.   Legal description,
         b.   Signatures of the property owners of record or the authorized
agent of the owner,
         c.   A letter of authorization if the property owner is represented by
an agent,
         d.   A sketch plan of the subject property showing existing and
proposed structures, access, parking, and distances from structures to property
lines and to other structures,
         e.   The names of persons who will occupy the secondary dwelling and a
statement signed by a physician that special care or supervision is required by
the ill, handicapped or elderly relative,
         f.   Any other information reasonably necessary to evaluate the
application which is required by the zoning inspector,
         g.   A fee per subsection (J)(7) of this section.
      2.   Standards: A secondary dwelling permit shall be subject to the
following standards:
         a.   Property owner shall provide a statement signed by the physician
of the ill, handicapped, or elderly relative stating that special care or
supervision is required by the affected person,
         b.   Only one secondary dwelling per lot is permitted,
         c.   Secondary dwelling shall meet the minimum setback requirements
prescribed in the development standards—general of the property's zoning
classification,
         d.   The same access which serves the main dwelling shall be used for
the secondary dwelling,
         e.   The owner shall record a covenant running with the land stating
that the secondary dwelling unit shall be removed from the property within
ninety days of the date the secondary dwelling is no longer occupied by the
person specified in the secondary dwelling permit, and
         f.   The secondary dwelling will not cause adverse effects to
surrounding properties.
      3.   Additional conditions: The zoning inspector may attach additional
conditions to the permits to mitigate possible adverse effects to surround
properties.
      4.   Appeals: Prior to the issuance of a secondary dwelling permit,
property owners within three hundred feet of the subject property shall be
notified by mail and given fifteen days from the date of mailing of notice to
file written protest with the zoning inspector.
         a.   The notification shall include the approved sketch plan and the
procedure and requirements for submitting an appeal;
         b.   The written protest shall include the name and address of the
person submitting the appeal and reasons why the application does not meet the
secondary dwelling standards in subsection (J)(2) of this section;
         c.   The board of adjustment shall hear the appeal in accordance with
Chapter 18.93 (Board of Adjustment Variances, Temporary Use Permits, and
Interpretations).
      5.   Action by the zoning inspector: A secondary dwelling permit may be
issued by the zoning inspector if no written protest is received and the
standards in subsection (J)(2) above are met. The secondary dwelling permit
shall be in accordance with Section
18.93.050(A) and (B).
      6.   Validity and renewal of permit: A secondary dwelling permit shall be
valid for up to three years and may be renewed by the zoning inspector. A
property owner requesting renewal of the permit shall submit to the zoning
inspector evidence that the secondary dwelling is still needed and that
conditions of the permit have been met.
      7.   Fee: The fee shall be in accordance with the standard fee for
variances as specified in the board of adjustment filing fee of the development
services fee schedule.
   K.   Factory-built (modular) buildings. Except as otherwise restricted by
this code, residential factory-built buildings are permitted in all zones in
which residential uses are permitted, except as follows:
      1.   Factory-built residential buildings are permitted in the SR, SR-2,
CR-1, CR-2, CR-3, CR-4, CR-5, TR, ML, SP, CB-1 and CB-2 zones, subject to the
following standards:
         a.   The building shall not be designed to be moved once installed on
the foundation.
         b.   The building shall be designed only for installation on a site-
built permanent foundation.
         c.   The permanent foundation shall be constructed prior to placement
of the building on the site, and inspected and approved by the county for
compliance with this section.
      2.   Within the SR, SR-2, CR-1 and CR-2 zones, a factory built building,
other than a caretaker's unit used in conjunction with a nonresidential use,
shall not be used for residential purposes, unless the building is located
within a subdivision approved after a public hearing by the board of
supervisors for modular building development. Notice of hearing shall be sent
by mail to all owners of record within three hundred feet of the exterior
boundaries of the proposed subdivision, or, in the case of an existing
subdivision, to all owners of record within the subdivision and within three
hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision.
   L.   Bed and breakfast establishments.
      1.   Bed and breakfast establishments are permitted in the TR, CB-1 and
CB-2 zones and as a conditional use in the RVC zone and all rural and
residential zones.
         a.   Mailed written notice shall be sent to all property owners within
one thousand feet of the proposed use when a conditional use permit is
required.
         b.   The hearing administrator shall approve the floor plan and site
plan for the bed and breakfast establishment to be in compliance with the
standards in subsection L of this section. A development plan in accordance
with
Chapter 18.71 is not required.
      2.   There shall be no alteration to the exterior residential appearance
of the dwelling and subject property, including the creation of separate or
exclusive business entrances.
      3.   Bed and breakfast establishments containing up to four guest
bedrooms shall require a Type I conditional use permit in all rural and
residential zones. Bed and breakfast establishments containing five to eight
guest bedrooms shall require a Type II conditional use permit in all rural and
residential zones.
      4.   There shall be two off-street parking spaces for permanent residents
and one space per guest room. An additional parking space shall be provided if
the bed and breakfast establishment has a non-resident employee. Spaces within
garages and carports shall be counted toward the total number of spaces. All
guest parking shall be screened from view from any adjacent properties by
natural features, landscaping, fencing, or walls no more than six feet in
height.
      5.   Not more than one full-time equivalent nonresident of the premises
shall be employed in the bed and breakfast establishment use in addition to
typical household contract labor.
      6.   Bed and breakfast establishments shall be located a minimum of
twelve hundred feet apart as measured between the closest points of each
property.
      7.   No social activities such as receptions, weddings, private parties,
retreats or other similar events shall be held at bed and breakfast
establishments for attendance by anyone other than overnight guests.
      8.   One free standing identification sign shall be permitted on the
property. The sign area shall not exceed two square feet and the sign structure
shall not exceed four feet in height.
      9.   Bed and breakfast establishments permitted as a home occupation
prior to the adoption of this ordinance shall be legal nonconforming uses.
      10.   Except in the CB-1, CB-2, TR, RVC and ML zones, bed and breakfast
establishments shall have a minimum lot size of one acre.
   M.   Wildlife Rehabilitation Facilities.
      1.   Scope: Wildlife rehabilitation facilities are permitted in any zone.
      2.   Requirements:
         a.   The facility must be operated, maintained, and under the direct
supervision of an individual who possesses a valid license from the state of
Arizona to operate a wildlife rehabilitation facility or to operate a facility
to hold wildlife for purposes of education, scientific or humane treatment when
the animal is unable to meet its own needs in the wild.
         b.   The facility must be in compliance with the development standards
of the zone in which the facility is located.
   N.   Animal Rescue and Sanctuary Facilities.
      1.   Scope:
         a.   Animal rescue and sanctuary facilities are allowed as conditional
uses in the following zones: IR, RH, GR-1, SR, SR-2, SH, CR-1, CR-2, and MU. MU
facilities shall be limited to dogs, cats and small household pets.
         b.   Animal rescue and sanctuary facilities are allowed as a permitted
use in CI-1 and CI-2. CI-1 and CI-2 facilities shall be limited to dogs, cats
and small household pets.
      2.   Requirements:
         a.   Facilities in the IR, RH, GR-1, SR, SR-2, SH, CR-1 and CR-2 zones
must obtain a Type I conditional use permit in accordance with
Chapter 18.97.
            1)   With the exception of animal limits under the applicable
zoning district altered by the hearing administrator, the facility must be in
compliance with the development standards of the zone in which the facility is
located, or obtain approval for a variance or modification of setback
requirements prior to submittal of the conditional use permit application.
            2)   A site plan shall be submitted which clearly depicts how the
development standards will be met. A site plan of approximately 24 × 36 should
be drawn at a standard engineering scale and show, at a minimum, the following
information:
               a)   All existing and proposed structures on the property;
               b)   All animal housing, exercise, training and containment
areas;
               c)   Setback distances for existing and proposed structures in
the front, side and rear yards;
               d)   Animal waste handling and storage areas.
               e)   Any screening or buffering from adjacent properties.
   A development plan in accordance with
Chapter 18.71 is not required for the Type I conditional use permit.
            3)   The applicant is required to provide information that is
sufficient for the hearing administrator to evaluate the following:
               a)   Type and number of animals proposed. The hearing
administrator has the authority to: (i) set a limit on the number of animals
cared for at the facility; and (ii) approve reasonable exceedances in the
number of animals allowed under the applicable zoning district after
considering the proposal in its entirety, its effect on surrounding land uses,
and compliance with other sections of the Pima County Code, including Title 6,
"Animals."
               b)   Any known space requirements and care standards for the
type of animal(s) to be cared for on the property.
               c)   Possession of, or plans to acquire, accreditation or
certification.
               d)   Facility operating procedures, including hours and
staffing.
               e)   A disposal plan for animal waste that describes how waste
will be handled, stored, and disposed of for the maximum number of animals at
the facility. The plan shall include (i) frequency of animal habitat cleaning;
(ii) methods of waste containment; (iii) storage capacity; (iv) odor control;
(v) vector control; (vi) drainage protection; (vii) disposal method; and (viii)
disposal frequency.
               f)   Size of the property.
               g)   Existing land uses within the required hearing notification
area.
               h)   Potential impacts to surrounding areas (e.g., noise and
odor).
               i)   Procedures and measures that will be employed to mitigate
potential impacts.
               j)   Information about other land uses on the property,
including all animal-related uses.
               k)   Any other information that the hearing administrator
determines necessary for evaluating the application in relation to Pima County
Code requirements.
         b.   Facilities in the MU zone must obtain a conditional use permit in
accordance with
Chapter 18.37. Applications shall include the information required in
subsection
18.09.020(N)(3) above.
         c.   Facilities in the CI-1 and CI-2 zones must obtain approval for a
development plan in accordance with
Chapter 18.71. Development plan submittals shall include the information
required in subsection
18.09.020(N)(3) above.
      3.   Eligibility:
         a.   Any person who has been convicted of animal abuse, cruelty,
neglect or abandonment, whether as a misdemeanor or felony, is prohibited from
owning or operating an animal rescue and sanctuary facility.
         b.   To demonstrate eligibility to obtain a conditional use permit or
development plan approval for an animal rescue or sanctuary facility, owners
and operators must submit a notarized affidavit certifying that they have no
misdemeanor or felony convictions for animal abuse, cruelty, neglect or
abandonment.
      4.   Recordation of Conditional Use Approval. The applicant shall record
the conditional use approval document with the county recorder and provide
proof of such recordation prior to the issuance of the conditional use permit.
      5.   Change of Ownership or Operation:
         a.   A conditional use permit or development plan approval for an
animal rescue and sanctuary facility shall continue to be valid upon a change
of ownership or operation provided that the new owners and operators
successfully demonstrate that they meet the eligibility requirements of
subsection
18.09.020(N)(3). Prior to continuing the use of the premises as an animal
rescue and sanctuary facility, the new owners and operators must provide a
notarized affidavit to the chief zoning inspector certifying that they have no
misdemeanor or felony convictions for animal abuse, cruelty, neglect or
abandonment. If a new owner or operator does not meet the eligibility
requirements of subsection
18.09.020(N)(3), the conditional use permit or development plan approval for
the Animal Rescue and Sanctuary Facility shall become null and void.
   O.   Combined Wildlife Rehabilitation/Animal Rescue and Sanctuary
Facilities. Should any premises operate as both a wildlife rehabilitation
facility and an animal rescue and sanctuary facility, the requirements of
18.09.020(N) apply to the extent that care is provided for domestic animal(s)
and/or any other animal(s) not under the jurisdiction of the Arizona Game and
Fish Department.
   P.   Home Auto Repair.
      1.   Non-commercial home auto repair of motor vehicles is permitted in
TH, RH, GR-1, SR, SR-2, SH, CR-1, CR-2, CR-3, CR-4, CR-5, TR, CMH-1, CMH-2, and
MU zones as an accessory use to a dwelling unit provided that the vehicle being
repaired belongs to the resident of the dwelling unit and further provided that
the vehicle and property are in compliance with this section.
      2.   No more than one unscreened, inoperable motor vehicle can be stored
on a lot containing less than eight thousand square feet of lot area.
      3.   No more than two unscreened, inoperable motor vehicles can be stored
on a lot containing more than eight thousand square feet of lot area.
      4.   An unscreened, inoperable motor vehicle may be stored for a period
of time not to exceed sixty calendar days.
      5.   Inoperable motor vehicles stored longer than one period of sixty
calendar days shall be screened by either mature vegetation as defined below or
screened by a built or assembled self-supporting enclosure which has no
openings through which a spherical object of one inch in diameter can pass. The
screening must effectively block the view of the stored objects from an
observer at adjacent grade five feet from the enclosure. For the purposes of
this section an enclosure or screen must meet one or more of the following
requirements:
         a.   Be any mature non-deciduous vegetation.
         b.   Be a built or assembled self-supporting structural screen or
fence that is maintained and that is composed of one or more of the following
materials:
            i.   Slatted materials through which a one-inch sphere cannot pass,
including: ocotillo, chain link with wood, metal or plastic slats, wood
fencing, or metal fencing.
            ii.   Masonry, rock or other material that would comply with Pima
County building codes for fences over six feet in height.
         c.   Tarps, hardware cloth, expanded metal, car covers, tires, or
vehicle parts are not permitted as fence or screening materials.
      6.   Any motor vehicle fully enclosed within a garage is exempt from the
requirements of this section.
      7.   Any motor vehicle subject to the provisions in Section
18.09.020(P) or (Q) shall remain locked or shall be rendered incapable of being
locked.
      8.   Screened inoperable motor vehicles may be kept on a property in
addition to the two hundred square feet of allowed open storage,
notwithstanding Section
18.03.020(J)(1) provided that the following requirements have been met:
         a.   The parcel is larger than one acre in size;
         b.   No more than two screened inoperable motor vehicles may be kept
per acre;
         c.   No more than five screened inoperable motor vehicles are kept on
any property regardless of its size.
   Q.   Open Storage.
      1.   The use of up to two hundred square feet of area of any lot for the
storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap
or used materials, or for the dismantling, demolition, abandonment of
automobiles, inoperable motor vehicles or other motor vehicles or machines or
parts thereof; provided that the items are screened as defined in this section
by an enclosure that has no openings through which a spherical object of one
inch in diameter can pass. The screening must effectively block the view of the
stored objects from an observer at adjacent grade five feet from the enclosure.
      2.   For the purposes of this section an enclosure or screen must meet
one or more of the following requirements:
         a.   Be any mature non-deciduous vegetation.
         b.   Be a built or assembled self supporting structural screen or
fence that is maintained and that is composed of one or more of the following
materials:
            i.   Slatted materials through which a one-inch sphere cannot pass,
including: ocotillo, chain link with wood, metal or plastic slats, wood
fencing, or metal fencing.
            ii.   Masonry, rock or other material that would comply with Pima
County building codes for fences over six feet in height.
         c.   Tarps, hardware cloth, expanded metal, car covers, tires, or
vehicle parts are not permitted as fence or screening materials.
   R.   Adaptive Reuse.
      1.   Purpose. Adaptive Reuse allows the reuse of a one-family dwelling
located on a lot abutting a major street, as designated on the major streets
and scenic routes plan, while:
         a.   Protecting existing neighborhoods through the provision of low
intensity uses as buffers between neighborhoods and major streets;
         b.   Preserving the residential aesthetic along major streets; and
         c.   Allowing, but not requiring, the continued one-family dwelling
use in conjunction with the adaptive reuse.
      2.   Adaptive Reuse is permitted on any lot in all rural and residential
zones abutting a major street, as designated on the major streets and scenic
routes plan, as a Type I conditional use.
      3.   Development Standards.
         a.   One-family dwelling located on a lot abutting a major street, as
designated on the major streets and scenic routes plan.
         b.   Minimum lot size: Thirty-six thousand square feet.
         c.   Parking.
            i.   Parking is limited to no more than six spaces;
            ii.   All parking in conjunction with the use must be on the lot;
            iii.   Parking spaces must retain a residential character and shall
not include wheel stops, paving, parking lanes or striping;
            iv.   No more than one commercial vehicle is permitted in
conjunction with the use. Any commercial vehicle must comply with home
occupation vehicle standards in Section
18.09.030.
         d.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, one unlit,
non-illuminated sign is permitted if the maximum sign area does not exceed four
square feet and the maximum sign height does not exceed four feet. Any sign
must be monument style.
      4.   Conditions.
         a.   The adaptive reuse shall not cause any sustained, unpleasant, or
unusual noises or vibrations, or noxious fumes or odors, or cause any traffic
congestion in the immediate neighborhood.
         b.   The residential character of the existing one-family dwelling and
property shall not be changed by the adaptive reuse.
         c.   Substantial remodeling of the existing one-family dwelling and
accessory structures are prohibited unless it is in keeping with the existing
residential architecture of the existing one-family dwelling.
         d.   Removal of existing vegetation is not permitted unless removal is
necessary for safety or general maintenance. Existing vegetation may be
enhanced with drought tolerant vegetation.
         e.   Equipment or material associated with the adaptive reuse must be
stored in compliance with requirements for the zone and in a way that maintains
the residential aesthetic of the property.
         f.   The hearing administrator may impose limitations on business and
delivery hours of operation.
         g.   The hearing administrator may require submittal of a development
plan.
      5.   Adaptive Reuse Review Procedure.
         a.   Adaptive reuse requires a Type I conditional use permit, obtained
in accordance with
Chapter 18.97.
         b.   Submittal of a development plan in accordance with
Chapter 18.71 is not required for the adaptive reuse unless it is required as a
condition by the hearing administrator.
         c.   Compliance Certification. From the issuance of certificate of
occupancy, every three years thereafter, the applicant must send a
certification demonstrating that the terms of the conditional use permit are
being complied with to the chief zoning inspector. The chief zoning inspector
may revoke the adaptive reuse conditional use permit if a timely compliance
certification is not received, or if there is evidence that the applicant is
not in compliance with the terms of the conditional use permit.
   S.   Animal Shade Structure. An animal shade structure or shelter under two
hundred square feet completely located in a corral is subject to the same
setback as a corral located in that zone provided that the shade structure be
located as far as possible within the corral from the neighboring properties.
   T.   Food Access.
      1.   Keeping chickens in the TH, CR-4, CR-5, CMH-1, CMH-2, and MU zones:
         a.   Keeping female chickens to provide eggs for personal food
production is permitted in conjunction with a permitted residential use in the
TH, CR-4, CR-5, CMH-1, CMH-2, and MU zones,
         b.   Cockerels and roosters are not permitted,
         c.   The number of chickens permitted shall not exceed the following:
            i.   One-family dwelling lots or manufactured home dwelling unit
area of six thousand square feet and greater in area: Eight female chickens per
dwelling unit; or,
            ii.   One-family dwelling lots or manufactured home dwelling unit
area of less than six thousand square feet in area, or duplex or multiple
dwelling property: Four female chickens per dwelling unit,
         d.   The numbers of chickens may be increased by half the number
permitted upon the submittal of a written recorded agreement of the adjacent
property owners abutting side and rear yards,
         e.   Any structures used to shelter chickens are prohibited in front
yards, but allowed in other perimeter yards under the accessory building and
structure development standards for that zone. Requests to increase lot
coverage or reduce setbacks for accessory structures for chickens may be made
through the modification of setback requirements or lot coverage limits process
(Section
18.07.070).
      2.   Community food pantries shall be permitted in the following zones:
         a.   Type I conditional use permit in accordance with Chapter
18.97 in the RH, GR-1 and SH zones;
         b.   Permitted use in the TR zone;
         c.   Permitted use under the MU special use permit in the MU zone.
   U.   Accessory Dwelling Units.
      1.   Accessory dwelling units are permitted on any residential or rural
lot which allows a single-family dwelling.
      2.   Permitted coverage: Accessory dwelling unit square footage counts
toward the accessory structure lot coverage limits for the zone in which the
accessory dwelling unit is located and are permitted up to the maximum allowed
by Section 18.09.020.U.5. Accessory dwelling unit(s) are not restricted by the
accessory structure coverage but count toward the lot coverage limits.
      3.   One attached accessory dwelling unit and one detached accessory
dwelling unit per lot is allowed.
      4.   On lots or parcels one acre or greater in size: an additional
detached dwelling unit is allowed. The third unit must be restricted
affordable.
      5.   Size:
         a.   Detached and attached accessory dwelling unit(s) may be developed
up to seventy-five percent of the gross floor area of the main dwelling or one
thousand two hundred fifty square feet, whichever is less.
      6.   Minimum yard setback requirements:
         a.   Front: In accordance with accessory building standards of the
appropriate zone.
         b.   Side and Rear: five feet.
         c.   Minimum distance to main structures:
            i.   Lots one acre and greater: ten feet.
            ii.   Lots less than one acre: three feet.
      7.   Height: In accordance with single-family dwelling standards of the
appropriate zone.
      8.   Accessory dwelling unit(s) shall use the same access which serves
the main dwelling.
      9.   Accessory dwelling unit(s) may be used as a short- or long-term
rental.
      10.   The owner of a vacation rental or short-term rental of thirty days
or less must reside on the property if the property contains an accessory
dwelling unit.
      11.   No additional parking is required for accessory dwelling units to
accommodate an accessory dwelling unit.
      12.   All Pima County Code regulations still apply, including, but not
limited to, Protected Peaks (
18.61), Hillside Development Zone (
18.61), Historic Preservation (
18.63), Grading Limits (
18.61), Native Plant Preservation (
18.72), Buffer Overlay Zone (
18.67), Pima County Flood Control District requirements, and Scenic Routes.
      13.   This section does not apply to lots or parcels that are located on
tribal land, on land in the territory in the vicinity of a military airport or
ancillary military facility as defined in A.R.S. Section 28-8461, on land in
the territory in the vicinity of a federal aviation administration commercially
licensed airport or a general aviation airport or on land in the territory in
the vicinity of a public airport as defined in A.R.S. Section 28-8486 that has
a noise level of greater than sixty-five decibels.
(Ord. 2025-27 § 2, 2025; Ord. 2025- 8 § 2, 2025; Ord. 2023-19 § 1, 2023; Ord.
2019-5 § 2, 2019; Ord. 2017-36 § 1, 2017; Ord. 2012-71 § 2, 2013; Ord. 2012-22
§ 2, 4-17-12; Ord. 2011-60 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2011-2 § 4 (part), 2011; Ord. 2009-
98 § 2 (part), 2009; Ord. 2009-70 § 2, 2009; Ord. 2008-70 § 4, 2008; Ord. 2007-
81 § 2, 2007; Ord. 2007-3 § 2, 2007; Ord. 2005-1 § 1, 2005; Ord. 2004-59 § 4
(part), 2004; Ord. 2003-85 § 2, 2003; Ord. 2003-72 § 1, 2003; Ord. 2003-42 § 2
(part), 2003; Ord. 1999-78 § 3, 1999; Ord. 1998-36 § 2, 1998; Ord. 1994-147 § 3
(part), 1994; Ord. 1991-46 § 1, 1991; Ord. 1991-33 § 1 (part), 1991; Ord. 1990-
11 § 1 (part), 1990; Ord. 1989-1 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 1986-125 § 1 (part),
1986; Ord. 1986-43 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-187 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-
82 (part), 1985)
18.09.030   Home occupations.
   A.   General Standards. Home occupations are permitted so long as they meet
the following standards:
      1.   A home occupation permit is required to be obtained from the chief
zoning inspector:
         a.   The home occupation permit shall apply only to a full time
occupant of the dwelling.
         b.   If there is a change in use, a new home occupation permit shall
be required.
      2.   The home occupation must be conducted and visible only from within a
dwelling or an accessory building of not more than two hundred square feet.
      3.   There shall be no exterior public display of stock-in-trade upon the
premises.
      4.   Not more than one nonresident of the premises is employed.
      5.   Not more than one-fourth of the floor area and one story of the main
dwelling or an accessory building of not more than two hundred square feet in
area shall be used for the home occupation.
      6.   No equipment or material associated with the home occupation shall
be stored outdoors.
      7.   Any new structure or proposed changes to an existing structure used
in conjunction with the home occupation must be in keeping with the residential
character of the dwelling.
      8.   Such occupation shall not cause any sustained, unpleasant, or
unusual noises or vibrations, or noxious fumes or odors, or cause any traffic
congestions in the immediate neighborhood.
      9.   All parking used in conjunction with the home occupation shall be on
site and shall not include commercial parking features such as wheel stops,
parking lanes or striping.
      10.   No more than one vehicle shall be used in conjunction with the home
occupation. This vehicle shall not exceed eighteen feet in overall length and
seven feet in overall height and must be parked on the private property. If the
vehicle displays any advertising or other indication of the home occupation or
any product or service, it shall be stored in a carport or garage, or shielded
from view from any adjoining properties and the street by landscaping, fencing
or any other suitable material.
      11.   Home occupations shall not provide overnight accommodations.
      12.   Home occupations shall serve no more than five clients (including
deliveries) in one day and no more than two clients at any one time.
      13.   In accordance with Section
18.79.070(A).
      14.   The following uses shall not be permitted as home occupations:
         a.   Auto repair and service.
         b.   Veterinarian service, kennels, and pet grooming.
         c.   Commercial food preparation.
         d.   Mortuary or embalming service.
         e.   Tattoo parlor.
         f.   Welding service.
         g.   Any commercial use not customarily associated with home
occupations as a secondary use.
   B.   Child care home service and adult care home service conditions. A child
care home service or adult care home service shall meet all of the conditions
of subsection A of this section, except as modified as follows:
      1.   Child care home services or adult care home services shall be
provided for no more than ten persons.
      2.   During the hours of activity of the child care or adult care use,
the total amount of floor area of the dwelling and outdoor areas and equipment
may be devoted to the use.
      3.   No more than two vehicles may be used in conjunction with the use.
The vehicles must meet the requirements for a vehicle used in conjunction with
a home occupation use.
      4.   For services providing care and supervision for seven to ten
persons, or when additional employees up to a maximum of four, beyond the one
allowed under Section
18.09.030(A) are required, the following additional requirements shall be met:
         a.   The applicant shall apply to the office of the zoning inspector
for approval.
         b.   The application shall include the following:
            1)   Signature of the property owners of record or the authorized
agent of the owner,
            2)   A letter of authorization if the property owner is represented
by an agent,
            3)   Legal description of the property,
            4)   Site plan,
            5)   Proposed hours of operation of the home service,
            6)   County assessor's map showing the property and all properties
within three hundred feet,
            7)   Verification of ownership,
            8)   Fee, in accordance with the standard fee for hearings before
the board of adjustment.
         c.   The area where outdoor activities and equipment will be located
shall be shown on the site plan submitted with the application. If this area is
less than twenty-five feet from an adjacent residential use, it shall be
screened by an opaque five-foot fence or wall.
         d.   No more than one child or adult care home service shall be
permitted per lot.
         e.   If the zoning inspector determines that the application meets
both the general home occupation and the specific home service requirements of
this section, the zoning inspector shall send notice of the intent to issue the
use permit for the proposed use to property owners within three hundred feet of
the subject property.
         f.   If written protest is received within fifteen days of the date of
mailing the notice, the application shall be heard by the board of adjustment
to determine whether the application meets all requirements for a home service.
         g.   The zoning inspector may issue the permit fifteen days after the
date of mailing the notice, if no written protest is received.
         h.   Upon receipt of a license, or certification from the state of
Arizona, a copy of the license or certification shall be provided to the zoning
inspector. The child care or adult care provider shall comply with the state of
Arizona licensing or certification requirements and provide proof of compliance
to Pima County at or before the time of completing the zoning approval process.
(Ord. 2020-41, § 1, 2020; Ord. 2016-21, § 2, 2016; Ord. 2011-59 § 2, 2011; Ord.
2004-59 § 4 (part), 2004; Ord. 2003-42 § 2 (part), 2003; Ord. 1997-74 § 2,
1997; Ord. 1988-78 § 1 (part), 1988; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.09.040   Cluster development option.
   A.   Purpose.
      1.   The purpose of the cluster development option is to provide:
         a.   Site planning and unity of design in harmony with the natural
features and constraints of specific sites, and particularly on sites
possessing unique or severe topographic or hydrologic features;
         b.   Protection of natural, historic and man-made elements of scenic,
environmental or cultural significance;
         c.   Design innovation;
         d.   Flexibility in the siting of structures and roadways;
         e.   More cost-effective development due to decreased grading and more
efficient servicing of the development with utilities, roads and other
essential services;
         f.   Additional open space for private or community purposes;
         g.   Protection of existing neighborhoods through the provision of
open space buffers and the location of structures;
         h.   A preferred planning tool for the development of land within the
buffer overlay zone,
Chapter 18.67.
   B.   Definitions. Certain terms used in this section shall be defined, for
purposes of this section only, as follows:
      1.   Cluster grouping: A designed contexture of residential units and
their accessory facilities which may be used as a repetitive motif to form a
cluster pattern. Each cluster grouping shall be separated by landscaped areas
or natural open space to form the larger cluster development.
      2.   Cluster open space: Open space, either natural or functional,
provided to compensate for lot size reductions from minimum lot area
requirements in the applicable zone.
      3.   Common open space: Land area within a development, not individually
owned or dedicated for public use, which is designed and intended for the
common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development. Common open space
may be either natural open space or functional open space, as defined in this
section.
      4.   Contexture: A body or structure made by the interweaving or putting
together of parts where the arrangements and union of the constituent parts
form a characteristic, unified whole.
      5.   Public open space: Open space owned by a public agency, such as Pima
County, and maintained by it for the use and enjoyment of the general public.
      6.   Review committee: Review committee means design review committee
(refer to Section
18.99.030, DRC).
   C.   Scope: The cluster development option is permitted in the following
zones:
      1.   RH: Refer also to Section
18.13.070 (RH rural homestead zone);
      2.   GR-1: Refer also to Section
18.14.060 (GR-1 rural residential zone);
      3.   ML: Refer also to Section
18.15.060 (ML mount lemmon zone);
      4.   SR: Refer also to Section
18.17.060 (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      5.   SR-2: Refer also to Section
18.18.050 (SR-2 suburban ranch estate zone);
      6.   SH: Refer also to Section
18.19.050 (SH suburban homestead zone);
      7.   CR-1: Refer also to Section
18.21.050 (CR-1 single residence zone);
      8.   CR-2: Refer also to Section
18.23.050 (CR-2 single residence zone);
      9.   CR-3: Refer also to 18.25.050 (CR-3 single residence zone);
      10.   CMH-1: Refer also to Section
18.33.060 (CMH-1 county manufactured and mobile home—1 zone).
   D.   Permitted uses and accessory structures.
      1.   Uses:
         a.   Residential subdivided lots and units, as permitted in the zones
listed in Section
18.09.040(C),
         b.   Cluster open space, as defined in Section
18.09.040(B);
      2.   Accessory buildings and structures:
         a.   In individual, subdivided lots:
            1)   Permitted coverage: Ten percent of lot area,
            2)   Maximum height: Fifteen feet,
            3)   Minimum setback: In accordance with applicable county building
codes (Title 15),
         b.   In functional open space areas:
            1)   Permitted coverage: Three percent of required area,
            2)   Maximum height: Thirty-four feet,
            3)   Minimum setback: In accordance with applicable county building
codes (Title 15).
   E.   Development standards.
      1.   Minimum site area: None, all permitted zones.
      2.   Average site area per dwelling unit (maximum density factor):
         a.   ML/CR-1/GR-1: Thirty-six thousand square feet;
         b.   SR: One hundred forty-four thousand square feet;
         c.   SH: Eighteen thousand square feet;
         d.   SR-2: Seventy-two thousand square feet;
         e.   CR-2: Sixteen thousand square feet;
         f.   CMH-1: Eight thousand square feet;
         g.   CR-3: Eight thousand square feet;
         h.   RH: One hundred eighty thousand square feet.
      3.   Minimum lot area per dwelling unit (minimum allowable lot size):
         a.   Sewered lots: No minimum lot size, as may be approved by the
review committee.
      4.   Minimum setback requirements: As may be approved by the review
committee, consistent with the requirements of major streets and scenic routes
plan and the Arizona Department of Health Services.
      5.   Maximum height: Thirty-four feet.
      6.   Minimum distance between buildings: As may be approved by the review
committee.
      7.   Minimum distance between cluster groupings: As may be approved by
the review committee.
      8.   Cluster groupings:
         a.   All residential units may be common-walled or detached, but shall
not be formed into cluster groupings that exceed six common-walled residential
units each, unless approved by the review committee.
         b.   Cluster groupings shall be separated by cluster open space to
provide spatial definition between groupings, and shall be as approved by the
review committee.
      9.   Utilities:
         a.   Utilities and sewers shall be located within the developed
portion of the site wherever possible to reduce the future impact of
maintenance and repair activities on cluster open space.
         b.   Public sewers shall be designed such that manholes are located in
paved areas which have paved access, unless otherwise approved by the director
of the wastewater management department.
      10.   Excess cut and fill material shall be disposed of in accordance
with
Chapter 18.81 (Grading).
      11.   Roads: All streets and highways must have horizontal and vertical
alignment consistent with an approved design speed, and roadway geometrics
consistent with an approved design vehicle, as specified in criteria available
from the department of transportation and flood control district.
      12.   Landscaping: In accordance with
Chapter 18.73 (Landscaping Standards).
      13.   Buffers:
         a.   Buffers shall be provided to protect existing neighborhoods by
mitigating the adverse impacts of sound, visibility and traffic.
         b.   Buffers may include landscaping, walls, fences, pathways,
drainageways, natural features, existing vegetation and natural open space
(refer to
Chapter 18.73, Landscaping Standards).
      14.   Exterior lighting: Any lights used to illuminate parking spaces,
drives and recreation facilities shall be in accordance with the county outdoor
lighting code (Title 15).
   F.   Open space requirements.
      1.   Cluster open space area and ratio requirements: Cluster open space
shall comprise at least thirty percent of the gross site area and be equal to
or greater than the difference between the total area of the residential lots
to be subdivided and the required average site area per dwelling unit total in
the applicable zone.
      2.   Cluster open space ownership and control shall be only:
         a.   As part of an individual, private lot with recorded covenants
running with the land;
         b.   By a homeowner's association, as specified in this section; or
         c.   By Pima County, as legally dedicated to and approved by the board
of supervisors.
      3.   Third-party ownership of cluster open space shall not be allowed.
The association may enter into contracts or lease agreements to allow third-
party operation of uses permitted within functional open space, as defined in
this option.
      4.   Natural open space adjacent to public parks, preserves or county-
maintained stream channels may be deeded to Pima County as public open space,
if approved by the board of supervisors.
      5.   Cluster open space shall be an integral part of the site design and
shall be within the boundaries of the cluster development it serves.
      6.   Phased developments shall provide cluster open space for each phase,
so that each phase may stand alone in conformance with Section
18.09.040(K).
      7.   Cluster open space shall not include public or private streets,
driveways, parking areas, channelized drainageways, and disturbed, unvegetated
areas.
      8.   Final plats shall be delineated and annotated to reflect the cluster
open space requirements.
   G.   Cluster development plan requirements.
      1.   A cluster development procedures checklist, to aid in the
preparation of the plan, shall be available from the planning and development
services department.
      2.   The development plan for cluster review shall include:
         a.   A site analysis, in accordance with county "Site Analysis
Requirements" document, Section IV, A through L;
         b.   A preliminary development plan, in accordance with Section
18.91.030(E) (Zoning Code Amendments and Zone Changes);
         c.   An evaluation of the effect of the proposed development, in
accordance with county "Site Analysis Requirements" document, Section V, B
through P;
         d.   Architectural renderings, elevations and perspectives, as
required, to present the style, color, materials and context of proposed
structures;
         e.   Delineation of cluster open space and calculations for its
derivation;
         f.   Landscape plan, in accordance with Section
18.73.030 (Landscaping Standards); and
         g.   Any descriptive data that may be appropriate, including drafts of
the proposed covenants, conditions and restrictions that will apply to the
cluster project.
   H.   Review committee. Proposed plans in a cluster development shall be
reviewed by the design review committee (refer to Section
18.99.030, DR).
   I.   Cluster development review procedures.
      1.   Preliminary review:
         a.   Preliminary review by the development services department is
required for all proposals prior to the submittal of a cluster development
plan. The preliminary review procedures shall be as listed in the cluster
development checklist in accordance with Section
18.09.040(G).
         b.   The developer shall consult with other agencies and parties
potentially interested in the development, such as other county departments,
all affected utility companies, and homeowners' and neighborhood associations,
and property owners within the notice area as required by Section
18.09.040(I)(4)(a).
      2.   Submittal: Application for cluster development plan review shall be
subject to the procedures and requirements listed in the checklist prepared by
the development services department and submitted in writing together with
required fees to the development services department, along with the required
number of copies of the plan, as prepared in accordance with Section
18.09.040(G).
      3.   Compliance review: The development services department shall review
the plan for compliance with the cluster development checklist and this
section, and shall, in writing, either accept or reject the plan for further
review within thirty days of plan submittal:
         a.   If accepted, copies of the plan shall be transmitted to
appropriate county staff for review and comment. The plan shall be scheduled
for the next regularly scheduled review committee meeting that is scheduled to
occur at least thirty days after the date of acceptance. Notice of the public
hearing shall be provided as required in this section.
         b.   If rejected, the developer may:
            1)   Resubmit the plan with the appropriate corrections and
development services department staff shall, in writing, either accept or
reject the plan for further review within thirty days of plan submittal; or
            2)   Appeal to the review committee at a regularly scheduled
meeting. The review committee may then either accept or reject the resubmitted
plan for review at a future meeting.
      4.   Review Committee notice and hearing:
         a.   Notice of the review committee hearing shall be mailed, at least
fifteen days prior to the meeting, to owners of property within three hundred
feet of the applicant's property line, except that notice shall be expanded to
include owners of property within 1,000 feet if the existing zoning of the
applicant's property is RH, SR, SR-2, GR-1 or CR-1. In addition, notice shall
be sent to any affected neighborhood association and to any affected
homeowners' association, as defined by section
18.99.020(A)(1). Notice shall also be provided at least fifteen days prior to
the meeting by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county seat.
         b.   The review committee shall hold a public hearing on the request.
      5.   Review committee decision:
         a.   The review committee shall review the cluster development plan
for conformance with the purpose and requirements of this section and of this
code, and refer to design guidelines and standards contained in the cluster
design review manual. In acting on a proposed cluster plan, the review
committee shall give particular consideration to the following criteria:
            1)   Individual lots, buildings, streets, and parking areas shall
be designed and situated to minimize alteration of the natural and historic
site features and structures to be preserved.
            2)   The utility of functional open space shall be determined by
the size, shape, topographic, and location requirements of the particular
purpose proposed for the functional open space.
            3)   Cluster open space shall include irreplaceable natural
features if located in the site (such as, but not limited to, watercourses,
significant stands of vegetation and trees, individual trees and cacti of
significant size, rock outcroppings, peaks, ridges and slopes).
            4)   Cluster open space intended for a recreation or common use
shall be easily accessible to pedestrians, and accessibility shall meet the
needs of the handicapped and elderly.
            5)   The suitability of cluster open space intended for scenic
purposes shall be determined by its visual impact and quality as seen from a
significant number of units, buildings or by its visibility along the nearest
lengths of public or private streets, and shall be validated in the site
analysis.
            6)   Suitability of individual building types and designs shall be
determined by how well they function and relate to the natural constraints of
the site.
            7)   Individual lots, buildings, and units shall be arranged and
situated to relate to surrounding properties, to improve the view of buildings,
and to minimize the land area devoted to motor vehicle access.
            8)   Individual lots, buildings, units, and parking areas shall be
situated to avoid the adverse effects of pollution, noise, lighting and traffic
on the residents of the site.
            9)   Sites, structures and landmarks having a potential for
historic preservation shall be identified and, where possible, be integrated
into the development plan as a designed feature of the project.
         b.   The review committee may deny the proposed project design; or
approve the proposed project design, or approve the proposed project design
with conditions; or continue the hearing until a future meeting pending
submittal of additional information.
         c.   If the review committee approves the cluster development plan
with conditions the design review committee shall specify the general
conditions and revisions that shall be met before the plan can be approved.
         d.   If approved without modification, the developer shall comply with
Chapter 18.69 (Subdivision Standards) and submit the required documents and
fees to the development services department subdivision coordinator.
         e.   If approved subject to modification, the developer may:
            1)   Submit the revised plan to the development services department
for final compliance review; or
            2)   Appeal any review committee requirements in accordance with
Section
18.09.040(I)(6).
         f.   If the plan approved by the review committee constitutes a
substantial change from a preliminary development plan previously approved by
the board of supervisors, the following applies:
            1)   The planning director shall schedule a duly noticed public
hearing at which the board of supervisors shall be requested to consider the
cluster development option plan in lieu of the previously approved preliminary
development plan.
            2)   The request shall be at the fee established by the board of
supervisors for an unadvertised public hearing and shall specifically cite the
substantial change or difference between the two plans. The request shall
provide the rationale for the review committee's recommendation.
            3)   The supervisors' directions shall be applied to the cluster
option plan, which shall be further processed in accordance with Section
18.09.040(I).
         g.   Projects requiring a rezoning:
            1)   A cluster project requiring a rezoning shall first be heard by
the planning and zoning commission at public hearing before being heard at a
public hearing before the review committee.
            2)   Following a decision by the review committee, the board of
supervisors shall review the project at a public hearing. If the board approves
the rezoning with the design of the project per the review committee decision,
the project shall comply with all requirements for approved rezonings. If the
board approves the rezoning with modifications to the review committee
decision, the board may remand the project back to the review committee for
review at a regularly scheduled public meeting prior to approval of the final
plat for conformance with the direction of the board and the requirements of
Section
18.09.040.
         h.   Written decisions of the review committee shall be available
within five working days of the meeting.
      6.   Appeal of review committee decision:
         a.   Decisions, conditions and requirements specified by the review
committee may be appealed to the board of supervisors by the developer, by
owners of property abutting (or across the street from) the project site, or by
a homeowners' or neighborhood association of record that includes those
properties abutting (or across the street from) the project site. A written
appeal shall be directed to the planning director within ten working days of
the review committee decision for scheduling of a noticed public hearing.
Reasons for and evidence to support the appeal shall be stated in the written
notice of appeal. Notice of the appeal hearing shall be provided to all who
received notice of the review committee meeting at which the decision,
conditions or requirements being appealed were established. The public hearing
shall be scheduled for the next regularly scheduled board meeting that is
scheduled to occur at least thirty days after the date the appeal is submitted.
         b.   The fee for the appeal before the board of supervisors shall be
the same as for an advertised public hearing and shall be paid at the time the
written request for appeal is submitted for review.
         c.   At the hearing to review the appeal, the board of supervisors may
approve the design, conditions, or requirements of the project appealed,
approve subject to modifications the design, conditions, or requirements of the
project being appealed, or deny the design of the project being appealed.
         d.   If the board of supervisors approves the project design subject
to modifications, the board may remand the project back to the review committee
for review at a regularly scheduled public meeting prior to approval of the
final plat for conformance to the directions of the board of supervisors and
the requirements of Section
18.09.040.
         e.   If the board of supervisors denies the appeal, the applicant may
resubmit a new application for a cluster project at any time, provided that the
new submittal substantially differs from the project denied by the board. The
new submittal must include a statement showing how the new project differs
substantially from the project denied by the board. Review of the new submittal
shall conform to all requirements of Section
18.09.040.
      7.   Final compliance review: All plans revised in conformance with the
decisions of the review committee or the supervisors shall be submitted to the
development services department for final compliance review prior to submittal
of a tentative plat. A compliance decision shall be provided within five
working days of the revised plan submittal.
      8.   Tentative plat submittal: Following final cluster development option
compliance approval, the developer shall submit to the planning and development
services department the following:
         a.   A tentative subdivision plat for review, in accordance with
Chapter 18.69 (Subdivision Standards);
         b.   Approved cluster arrangements and schematic elevations, keyed to
the approved cluster site plan;
         c.   A type 2 grading plan, in accordance with Section
18.81.060 (Grading);
         d.   Delineation of cluster open space;
         e.   Landscape plan, in accordance with Section
18.73.030 (Landscaping Standards);
         f.   Proposed covenants for the development; and
         g.   Documentation outlining the proposed percentage of development to
be accomplished prior to the homeowners' association assuming responsibility
for the maintenance of common areas and property (reference Section
18.09.040J2).
      9.   Time limits:
         a.   Approval of a cluster development plan shall be effective for two
years from the date of final compliance approval, unless a tentative plat has
been approved in accordance with
Chapter 18.69 (Subdivision Standards).
         b.   Failure to record a final plat within four years of the review
committee approval date shall require a project feasibility review and approval
to proceed by the planning and development services director, who shall
determine the need for additional cluster option review, based on land use
changes surrounding the site area during the four-year period.
   J.   Homeowners' Association. The applicant shall submit for recording a set
of covenants, running with the land, providing for the creation of a
homeowners' association. The covenants shall contain the following provisions:
      1.   A hold-harmless clause assuring that Pima County is not responsible
for maintenance or liability of the private and common areas of the
development, which shall include, but not be limited to:
         a.   Cluster open space,
         b.   Parks,
         c.   Buffers,
         d.   Landscaping,
         e.   Recreational facilities,
         f.   Streets and trails, and
         g.   Private sewers, utilities and septic systems;
      2.   The association's structure and its operating rules and regulations
must be documented and approved before any lots or residential units are sold.
The developer shall present, for design review committee approval, a plan for
the transfer of all common areas and facilities control to the homeowners. The
transfer of control may be based on an elapsed time period or the number or
percentage of lots sold.
      3.   All common open space and improvements shall be established and
maintained in accordance with the following requirements:
         a.   The applicant or developer shall provide for and establish a
nonprofit organization or other legal entity under the laws of Arizona for the
ownership, care, and maintenance of all such lands and improvements,
         b.   Such organization shall be governed by covenants running with the
land and shall be composed of all persons having ownership within the
subdivision. Such organization shall be responsible for the perpetuation,
maintenance and function of all common lands, uses, and facilities,
         c.   All common open space and improvements shall be described and
identified as to location, size, use, and control in the covenants, and such
covenant shall set forth the method of assessment for the maintenance of such
land. The covenants shall be written so as to run with the land and be in full
force and effect for a period of not less than twenty-five years, and shall be
automatically extended for successive periods of twenty-five years unless
terminated in a manner set forth hereinafter. The covenants shall become part
of the deed to each lot or parcel within the development,
         d.   Such restrictive covenant and organization shall continue in
effect so as to control the availability of the facilities and land thereby
provided, to maintain the land and facilities for their intended function, and
to protect the development from additional and unplanned densities or uses.
Such organization shall not be dissolved, nor shall such organization dispose
of any common open space, by sale or otherwise,
         e.   No common open space shall be denuded, defaced, nor otherwise
disturbed in any manner not previously approved without the approval of the
board of supervisors,
         f.   The covenants shall provide that in the event the homeowners'
organization established to own and maintain such common open space and
improvements shall at any time after establishment of the development fail to
maintain the common open space and improvements in reasonable order and
condition in accordance with the approved plans, the county may serve notice in
writing upon such homeowners' organization or upon the homeowners within the
development setting forth the manner in which the homeowners' organization has
failed to maintain the common open space and improvements in reasonable
condition, and said notice shall contain a demand that such deficiencies of
maintenance be cured within thirty days thereof, and shall state the date and
place of a public hearing thereon which shall be held within twenty days of the
notice,
         g.   At such hearing the county may modify the terms of the original
notice as to the deficiencies and may grant an extension of time within which
they shall be cured,
         h.   If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the
modifications thereof shall not be cured within said thirty days or any
extension thereof, the county, in order to preserve the taxable values of the
properties within the development and to prevent the common open space and
improvements from becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon said common open
space and maintain the same for one year,
         i.   Said entry and maintenance shall not vest in the public any
rights to use the common open space and improvements, except when the same is
voluntarily dedicated to the public by the owners,
         j.   Before the expiration of said one-year period, the county shall,
upon its initiative or upon the request of the homeowners' organization
responsible for the maintenance of the common open space and improvements, call
a public hearing upon notice in writing to such organization or to the
homeowners within the development, to be held by the supervisors, at which
hearing the organization shall show cause why such maintenance of the county
shall not, at the election of the supervisors, continue for a succeeding one-
year period,
         k.   If the supervisors determine that such organization is ready and
able to maintain the common open space and improvements in reasonable
condition, the county shall cease to maintain the common open space and
improvements at the end of said one-year period,
         l.   If the supervisors determine that such organization is not ready
and able to maintain the common open space and improvements in a reasonable
condition, the county may, in its discretion, continue to maintain the common
open space and improvements during the next succeeding year, and subject to a
similar hearing and determination in each year thereafter,
         m.   The covenants shall further provide that the cost of such
maintenance by the county shall be assessed ratably against the properties
within the development that have a right of enjoyment of the common open space
and improvements, and shall become a charge on said properties, and such charge
shall be paid by the homeowners of said properties within thirty days after
receipt of a statement.
   K.   Phased development.
      1.   Approval may be given for the development of delineated phases of
the site, after submittal of a unified cluster site plan for the total project.
The phased portions shall be shown on the subdivision plat.
      2.   Open space requirements for each phase shall be the same as stated
in Section
18.09.040(F). Separate homeowners' associations with provisions for expansion
or consolidation may be created. Prior to the sale of any lot, site, unit or
dwelling in a phased portion, the open space and recreation areas in that
portion shall be designated, recorded and developed or maintained in
conformance with the approved development plan.
   L.   Amendments to final plan.
      1.   Unsubstantial changes in the location, siting or character of
buildings may be authorized by the planning and development services director,
if required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time of
the final subdivision plat approval.
      2.   Substantial changes to the approved cluster site plan shall require
a complete, new review of the entire project, to include additional fees, plan
submittals and meetings in accordance with this section.
(Ord. 2011-2 § 4 (part), 2011; Ord. 2009-3 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1998-51 § 2, 1998;
Ord. 1996-58 § 4 (part), 1996; Ord. 1994-147 § 3 (part), 1994; Ord. 1988-116 §
4, 1988; Ord. 1986-187 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-187 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord.
1985-111 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.09.050   Lot reduction option.
   A.   Scope:
      1.   Minimum lot size requirements for lots in a subdivision may be
approved by the board of supervisors for reduction where the conditions of
Section
18.09.050B exist and the planning and zoning commission finds and certifies
them to the supervisors.
      2.   The lot reduction option is permitted in the following zones:
         a.   CR-1: Refer also to Section
18.21.060;
         b.   CR-2: Refer also to Section
18.23.060;
         c.   CR-3: Refer also to Section
18.25.060.
   B.   Conditions:
      1.   That in total there are no more individual one-family lots than
provided for in the lot reduction option provisions of the individual zones;
      2.   That the subdivision and all park, recreation areas, and drainage
areas (CR-1 only) conform to this code, including area and neighborhood plans,
as supplemented and amended;
      3.   That full and adequate provision is made for surface drainage,
including dedication of rights-of-way for existing and natural watercourses;
and
      4.   Recreation areas must be provided in accordance with Chapter
18.69.090 Residential recreation areas.
   C.   Approved plat recordation required: No approval on a minimum lot size
reduction shall be effective until a subdivision plat complying with the
commission's findings and certification and approved by the commission and
supervisors is recorded in the office of the county recorder.
(Ord. 2003-16 § 2 (part), 2003; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.09.060   Lot development option.
   A.   Purpose. The purpose of this option is to:
      1.   Permit the efficient use of land;
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4414.png]
      2.   Encourage originality, flexibility and innovation in site planning
and architectural design; and
      3.   Permit building location and construction which conserve energy.
   B.   Yard Requirements.
      1.   Front and rear yards shall each be a minimum of twenty feet;
      2.   Side yards shall each be a minimum of eight feet; or
      3.   A main structure may be placed on a side lot line, if the distance
between main structures is sixteen feet.
   C.   Application.
      1.   This option shall apply only to new developments which take place
entirely under this option unless fifty percent of the owners of the developed
lots within the subdivision approve the use of this option.
      2.   It shall apply to properties zoned CR-2, CR-3, CR-4, CR-5, MU, CB-1,
and CB-2.
      3.   Structures shall be subject to all other setback requirements of the
zone they are in. This option shall not waive any provisions of the county
building codes (Title 15 of this code) or any other codes or policies.
   D.   Permits.
      1.   The zoning inspector shall issue lot development permits to
applicants fulfilling the requirements of this section.
      2.   The applicant shall submit to the zoning inspector:
         a.   A development plan showing to scale all proposed and existing
structures on the lot or parcel and all structures on abutting lots or parcels;
         b.   A covenant of record running with the land establishing the
rights and responsibilities of abutting property owners where a main structure
is on a common lot line; and
         c.   A covenant providing for review by the zoning inspector of
additions and modifications to structures in the development after the project
is completed.
      3.   No permit shall be issued if:
         a.   Drainage from the proposed structures will adversely affect
adjoining property or public rights-of-way;
         b.   Roofs will drain on abutting properties; or
         c.   The location of and activities in the proposed structures will
impose objectionable noise on adjoining property.
      4.   Structures other than patio walls shall not be placed on a lot line
with another property not a part of the same development.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.09.070   Multisectional manufactured home subdivision option.
   A.   Required Public Hearing.
      1.   Multisectional manufactured homes shall be permitted in all
residential subdivisions recorded after June 15, 1981, if the designation
"multisectional manufactured homes permitted" is approved by the board of
supervisors at the time of conditional rezoning and is placed on the plat at
the time of recording.
      2.   The provisions of Section
18.09.070(A)(1) shall not apply to subdivisions recorded to satisfy the
requirements of a conditional rezoning granted prior to June 15, 1981, unless
approval is granted by the supervisors at an advertised public hearing.
   B.   Required Notice: Notice of hearing shall be given by mail to all owners
of record within three hundred feet of the subdivision.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.09.080   Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-37, § 1, adopted October 17, 2017, repealed §
18.09.080, which pertained to small lot subdivision option and derived from
Ord. No. 1985-82, 1985 and Ord. 2003-16, 2003.
18.09.090   Model home permits.
   A.   Scope: Building permits for not more than ten model units may be issued
prior to the adoption of a rezoning ordinance if the property has been
conditionally approved for rezoning subject to acceptance of a subdivision plat
or development plan.
   B.   Issuance of permits. The permits may be issued when the following
conditions are met:
      1.   The tentative plat and model home landscape plan have been approved
by the subdivision review committee;
      2.   The site and setbacks of the model units are in conformance with the
approved tentative plat and the proposed rezoning;
      3.   Written approval has been granted by the directors or authorized
representatives of:
         a.   The planning and development services department,
         b.   The department of transportation and flood control district,
         c.   The wastewater management department, and
         d.   The property management division;
      4.   The applicant for such model permits shall acknowledge in writing
that:
         a.   Such permitted models shall not be sold or occupied for
residential purposes until the proposed zoning ordinance has been adopted by
the board of supervisors,
         b.   The issuance of model permits shall not be construed as a
commitment by the county to approve the subdivision plat or grant the proposed
zoning, and
         c.   The applicant is solely responsible for any financial
expenditures or obligations made as a result of the issuance of such model
permits.
(Ord. 1985-171 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.09.100   Conservation subdivision.
   A.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to encourage, and provide
incentives for, innovative site planning of residential subdivision lots that
are designed in harmony with the natural features and constraints of property.
This section establishes subdivision development standards which allow a
landowner to achieve full density under the existing zoning of the land, and
which also provide substantial preservation of natural open space and natural
and cultural resources.
   The goal of conservation site planning is to protect conservation features
such as designated peaks and ridges, riparian areas, native plants and plant
communities, areas near public preserves, wildlife habitat areas, biological
corridors, and sites of archaeological and cultural value. Conservation
subdivisions promote the establishment of conservation natural areas and, where
possible and practicable, support interconnected, continuous, and integrated
open space systems within an area, particularly when located contiguous to
public preserves.
   B.   Applicability. These standards may be used to develop subdivisions on
land containing undeveloped indigenous habitat and conservation features
identified by the property owner in a conservation subdivision plat through
aerials and supporting documentation, and certified as containing undeveloped
indigenous habitat by the planning official. Any dispute about applicability of
these standards to a particular parcel of land shall be reviewed at a public
hearing before the planning and zoning commission. Except as noted in this
section all other requirements of the Pima County Zoning Code shall apply.
   C.   Definitions. The following definitions apply to this section:
      1.   Conservation subdivision. A residential subdivision that is designed
according to the procedures set forth in this section. A conservation
subdivision allows a property to be developed to the full residential density
permitted under the existing zoning classification, while also providing for
the permanent conservation of substantial amounts of environmentally and
culturally valuable open space areas, such as designated peaks and ridges,
riparian areas, native plants and plant communities, areas near public
preserves, wildlife habitat areas, biological corridors, and sites of
archaeological and cultural value.
      2.   Conservation natural areas. Those areas within a conservation
subdivision that are permanently designated and deed restricted to natural open
space use by a conservation easement or owned in fee.
      3.   Conservation easement. A nonpossessory interest of a holder in real
property imposing limitations or affirmative obligations for conservation
purposes.
      4.   Conservation purposes. Any of the following activities which yield a
significant public benefit:
         a.   Protecting a relatively natural habitat of wildlife, plants,
similar ecosystem, or conservation natural area.
         b.   Preserving open space, including natural open space and
conservation natural area, if the preservation is either:
            1)   For the scenic preservation of the natural area.
            2)   Pursuant to a clearly delineated federal, state or county
governmental conservation policy.
         c.   Protection of archaeological and cultural resources.
      5.   Designated homesite area. That portion of a lot not restricted by a
conservation easement.
      6.   Disturbed, disturbance. Refers to a significant visible man-caused
change to an undisturbed natural area, site or conservation feature such as the
ground surface, geology, vegetation, riparian area, or nesting habitat; and
wherein such change results in (a) the degradation of the undisturbed natural
area, site or conservation feature and (b) a corresponding reduction in the
resource value of the natural area, site or conservation feature. Intrusive
activities which degrade undisturbed natural area, site or conservation
features, and reduce resource value include dumping, burning, toxic spills,
plant pruning and removal, planting invasive and/or high water usage plant
material that endangers or threatens the survivability of existing or
introduced native plants and low water use, drought tolerant plant material,
man caused erosion, grading, grubbing, scarifying, storage, vehicular,
motorized and wheeled activity, grazing, pasturing, farming, and other similar
intrusive activities.
      7.   Holder. Either:
         a.   A governmental body empowered to hold an interest in real
property under the laws of this state or the United States.
         b.   A homeowners association, nonprofit charitable corporation or
trustee of a charitable trust, the purposes or powers of which include
retaining or protecting the natural, scenic or open space values of real
property, and assuring the preservation, maintenance, and management of real
property, and protecting and enhancing the undisturbed character and quality of
conservation natural areas.
      8.   Indigenous habitat. Undeveloped areas consisting of plant
communities that grow naturally in and are native to Pima County.
      9.   Primary conservation features. Those parts of the site which contain
primary resource value natural features such as:
         a.   Lakes, ponds, wetlands, floodway and erosion hazard setback
areas;
         b.   Riparian areas, prominent hilltops, peaks or ridges, and
prominent rock outcroppings extending from public preserves;
         c.   Riparian habitat corridors and riparian areas of hydroriparian,
mesoriparian, and xeroriparian A, B, and C, and any segments of riparian areas
that are hydroriparian and mesoriparian according to Riparian Habitat
Regulations in Article X of the Pima County Floodplain and Erosion Hazard
Management Ordinance;
         d.   prominent vegetative and geologic features of a site, including
saguaros and ironwoods, mesquite bosques, prominent hilltops and prominent rock
outcrops, and peaks or ridges;
         e.   habitat with plant species listed as Highly Safeguarded by the
Arizona Native Plant Law;
         f.   areas of undisturbed native upland vegetative communities
adjacent to primary riparian area; and
         g.   slopes of twenty-five percent (25%) or greater.
      10.   Private living area. That portion of a designated homesite occupied
by buildings, walls, patios, vehicular parking and circulation areas, and
connecting pedestrian walks.
      11.   Riparian area. A geographically delineated area with distinct
resource values that is characterized by deep-rooted plant species that depend
on having roots in the water table or its capillary zone and that occurs within
or adjacent to a natural perennial or intermittent stream channel, or within or
adjacent to a lake, pond or marsh bed maintained primarily by natural water
sources, or in or adjacent to ephemeral stream channels. Riparian areas
routinely include hydroriparian, mesoriparian, and xeroriparian A, B, and C,
any segments of riparian areas that are hydroriparian and mesoriparian.
Riparian habit area does not include artificially created stockponds, man-made
storage reservoirs constructed primarily for conservation or regulatory
storage, municipal and industrial ponds or man-made water transportation,
distribution, off-stream storage and collection systems.
      12.   Restored, restoration, mitigation. The process of repairing a
previously disturbed, damaged, or graded site area or site feature and
replicating its previously undisturbed, undamaged, or ungraded condition of
vegetation, plant communities, geologic structures, grade, drainages, and
riparian area that historically existed on site or in the neighborhood.
Restoration of previously disturbed or graded areas will include revegetation,
and may include corrective grading, natural and artificial rock, and top
dressing.
      13.   Secondary conservation features. Those parts of a site which
contain the secondary resource value natural features such as:
         a.   Segments of riparian area not connected to or extending from a
public preserve;
         b.   Riparian areas not designated as primary conservation features;
         c.   Areas of undisturbed native upland vegetation communities;
         d.   Habitat with plant species listed as Salvage Restricted per the
Arizona Native Plant Law;
         e.   Areas between fifteen percent (15%) and up to but not including
twenty-five percent (25%) slopes;
         f.   One hundred year floodplain areas; and
         g.   Sites and features of archaeological and/or cultural value.
      14.   Third party right of enforcement. A right granted in a conservation
easement to enforce any of its terms granted to a governmental body, nonprofit
charitable corporation, charitable trust, or foundation, which, although
eligible to be a holder, is not a holder.
      15.   Wildlife friendly fencing. Shall be a maximum 42? high fence using
T-posts and 12-gauge wire as installed, maintained and further provided, and
revised in conformance with the requirements and specifications of the Arizona
Game and Fish Department for Standard Game Fence, or any subsequent revisions.
   D.   Permitted zones. This applies to subdivision development in the
following zones: IR, RH, GR-1, SR, SR-2, SH, and CR-1, and specific plan
development areas with land use designations that are comparable to IR, RH, GR-
1, SR, SR-2, SH, or CR-1 zones.
   E.   Development standards.
      1.   Maximum density yield: Maximum density yield is obtained by dividing
the minimum area per dwelling unit standard allowed under the zone of the
property into the gross area of the subdivision site. SH shall use the same
minimum area per dwelling unit as GR-1.
      2.   Minimum lot size:
         a.   GR-1, SH, and, CR-1: eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet,
however, twenty percent (20%) of the lots may be smaller than eighteen thousand
(18,000) square feet provided that the smaller lots are located on the interior
of the project and provided that no lot is smaller than twelve thousand
(12,000) square feet;
         b.   SR-2: thirty thousand (30,000) square feet;
         c.   IR, RH, SR: forty-three thousand five hundred and sixty (43,560)
square feet;
         d.   All lots using a septic system shall meet all county requirements
pertaining to lot size and septic use.
      3.   Minimum building setback:
         a.   Subdivision site setbacks for the entire subdivision are the same
as the setbacks permitted in the zone for a single lot, but in no case shall a
subdivision site setback be less than thirty feet (30');
         b.   Front yard setbacks of individual lots shall be a minimum of
twenty feet (20');
         c.   Rear yard setbacks of individual lots shall be a minimum of ten
feet (10');
         d.   Side yard setbacks along an internal subdivision street frontage
and between adjoining subdivision lots shall be a minimum of ten feet (10');
         e.   The provisions of Section
18.07.070 (modification of setback requirements) apply to a conservation
subdivision. For the purposes of this section, site setbacks and front yard
setbacks in a conservation subdivision may also be reviewed for modification.
      4.   Domestic animals: the subdivision plat shall have covenants
regulating the keeping of domestic animals as follows:
         a.   Domestic pets shall be confined to private living areas or
accompanied on a leash outside private living areas by a resident or trainer,
except as provided in the following subsection b. Domestic pets are domestic
animals whose nature is consistent with the residential character of the
neighborhood or the adjoining conservation natural area.
         b.   Fenced dog runs may be located outside private living areas
within the designated homesite area;
         c.   Livestock may be kept in SR, RH, & IR Conservation Subdivisions
and such livestock shall be confined in barns, sheds or fenced enclosures all
within the designated home site areas.
         d.   No wild animal, as defined in
Chapter 6.04 Pima County Code shall be kept.
         e.   The number of domestic animals on a lot shall be consistent with
the residential character of the neighborhood.
      5.   Fencing and walls are permitted as follows:
         a.   Fencing and walls in private living areas on individual lots;
         b.   Wildlife friendly fencing that is required to protect cultural
and natural resources from negative impacts such as human trespass and adjacent
grazing areas;
         c.   Fencing and walls for livestock enclosures in the designated
homesite area.
      6.   Driveway widths shall be limited to twelve feet (12') with a maximum
six-foot (6') graded area on each side of the driveway where required to
accommodate sloping site conditions.
   F.   Conservation natural area standards. The planning official, or the
planning official's designated representative qualified in such matters, shall
review the subdivision's conservation natural area to ensure that it protects
natural area connections and important habitat features. A conservation
subdivision shall comply with the following standards:
      1.   Minimum conservation natural area designation:
         a.   A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the area of the subdivision
site after deducting major streets and scenic routes rights-of-way dedications
shall be set aside and restricted to conservation natural areas. When the best
available scientific information confirmed by the planning official, or his
designated representative qualified in such matters, indicates that a higher
percentage of conservation natural area or conservation easement is required,
such additional area shall be provided to the maximum extent practicable.
Primary conservation features shall be the highest priority feature to be
included in conservation natural areas within the subdivision. After all
primary conservation features are designated as conservation natural area, any
remaining required percentage of natural area shall include secondary
conservation features.
         b.   On lots containing two (2) or more acres, or in low density
subdivisions with a density less than one (1) dwelling unit per two (2) acres,
up to thirty percent of the conservation natural areas required in the
preceding subsection 1.a. may be located within individual subdivision lots,
provided they are restricted to natural area use through recorded conservation
easements.
         c.   No graded or disturbed area shall be part of the conservation
natural area calculation.
      2.   Grading and conservation natural areas.
         a.   Grading of a subdivision site is permitted only for roadways,
utilities and within the approved development areas.
         b.   The maximum grading area on lots smaller than one (1) acre shall
be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet plus the area of a single lane twelve
foot (12') wide driveway that extends from the lot property line to the garage
or carport.
         c.   The maximum grading area on lots one (1) acre or larger shall be
thirty thousand (30,000) square feet plus the area of a single lane twelve foot
(12') wide driveway that extends from the lot property line to the garage or
carport.
         d.   To the fullest extent possible, improvements shall be sited to
minimize disturbance in conservation natural areas and of the primary and
secondary conservation features within them.
         e.   The design of the development area shall be done so the grading
has the least impact on the primary conservation features.
         f.   Mitigation of disturbed conservation features shall be done in
accordance with the purpose of this section, as approved by the planning
official, or his designated representative qualified in such matters.
         g.   Mitigated areas are not counted or included in the calculation of
the percent of conservation natural area required for a subdivision site.
         h.   Washes. Within washes that are primary or secondary conservation
features, only that grading for roadways and utilities that is necessary to
provide access to approved development areas is permitted in accordance with
Chapter 16.54 (Riparian Habitat Ordinance) of this code. Wash disturbance shall
be minimized and all utilities shall be installed within roadway easements,
except that where a roadway easement is not a practicable location for the
utility as confirmed by the planning official, or his designated representative
qualified in such matters, then the utility may cross a wash using the least
intrusive construction methodology and subject to mitigation and revegetation
of the wash disturbance. Wash areas so disturbed and subsequently mitigated
shall not be included as part of any open space or natural area requirement.
         i.   Native plants. To the fullest extent possible, buildings and
other improvements shall be sited so as not to disturb primary and secondary
conservation features such as saguaros and ironwood trees. Transplantation of
existing indigenous plant material shall be within the subdivision.
Transplanting or mitigation shall be conducted as follows:
            1)   Mitigation including transplanting and revegetation for
roadways, utilities, and siting of dwellings and private living areas must be
done in accordance with
Chapter 18.72 (Native Plant Preservation Standards).
            2)   Grading and disturbed areas in designated homesite areas
located outside private living areas, fenced dog runs, and livestock enclosures
shall be revegetated with plant material indigenous to the site or subdivision
that replicates the understory, midstory, and canopy of adjoining conservation
natural areas; except that native, drought-tolerant, low-water use plants
(including trees shrubs, cacti, ground cover, grasses and seed mixes) approved
by the planning official, or his designated representative qualified in such
matters, may also be used.
         j.   Except as otherwise provided in subparagraph i. above,
revegetation of graded or disturbed areas shall be with indigenous trees,
shrubs, and ground cover to simulate understory, midstory, and canopy of
adjoining natural areas.
         k.   Site development shall include reduction of runoff by means of
stormwater harvesting, erosion control through benign grade stabilization, and
careful siting of improvements to minimize negative impacts in conformance with
accepted local green infrastructure and low impact development practices and
concepts.
      3.   To assure the most beneficial natural area design, conservation
natural areas shall provide, where possible and practicable, connections to
public preserves, undisturbed riparian areas, and natural areas on adjoining
properties, and protection of undeveloped indigenous habitat.
      4.   Long thin strips of natural areas shall be avoided unless the
feature is linear, such as a wash or the configuration is necessary to connect
with other washes or trails. The conservation natural areas shall generally
abut existing or potential natural areas on adjacent parcels. Where possible,
such subdivision conservation natural areas shall be designed as part of a
larger contiguous and integrated open space system of undeveloped indigenous
habitat.
   G.   Infrastructure standards.
      1.   Conservation subdivisions may use the more flexible street
development standards established in the standards and policies of the
department of transportation and flood control district for conservation
subdivisions and shall emphasize protection of wildlife corridors and
minimization of traffic killings of wildlife.
      2.   Notwithstanding the restriction on the length of cul de sacs
contained in Section
18.69.040.A2.l (Subdivision Standards), there is no restriction on cul de sac
length in a conservation subdivision. However, no cul-de-sac may serve more
than one hundred dwellings or any use that would generate one thousand or more
average daily vehicle trips.
      3.   Existing ingress and egress easements adjacent to or within the
subdivision boundaries and which serve lots within the subdivision shall be
designated as common area. Existing ingress and egress easements within the
subdivision that do not serve lots within the subdivision but only serve
parcels outside the subdivision may remain as part of a subdivision lot.
Existing ingress and egress easements connected to subdivision boundaries may
serve subdivision lots.
   H.   Site planning procedure.
      1.   Pre-application meeting: Prior to the submittal of a tentative
subdivision plat, the applicant shall prepare a tentative plat sketch proposal
which shows the proposed conservation natural areas, the lot pattern, streets,
and trail linkages of development areas and to meet with the planning official,
or the planning official's designated representative, to discuss how the
conservation subdivision standards can be applied to the subject property.
      2.   Tentative plat. The tentative plat shall be prepared in compliance
with the following design process:
         a.   Determine the maximum density yield.
         b.   Identify conservation natural areas. All potential conservation
natural areas are to be identified. Lands shall be considered for designation
as conservation natural areas in the following order:
            1)   Areas which qualify as primary conservation features;
            2)   Areas which qualify as secondary conservation features;
            3)   Areas the property owner may want to preserve.
         c.   Identify development areas. The areas that are not identified as
conservation natural areas and are available for development.
         d.   Locate building sites. The approximate sites of individual
buildings are tentatively located.
         e.   Align streets. Streets shall be laid out in a way that avoids, or
at least minimizes, adverse impacts on conservation natural areas to the
greatest extent practicable. Wash crossings and streets traversing existing
slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%) are discouraged.
         f.   Draw the lot lines. The lot lines should, where possible, be
located approximately midway between house locations and may include L-shaped
lots which meet county standards.
      3.   County evaluation of tentative conservation subdivision plat.
Development services shall review the plat to ensure that the design is
appropriate to the site's natural, historic, and cultural features and the
purposes of this section. Diversity and originality in lot layout are
encouraged to achieve the best possible relationship between development and
conservation natural areas. To the greatest extent possible and practicable,
the layout of a tentative plat shall meet the following standards:
         a.   Protects and conserves riparian areas, slopes greater than
fifteen percent (15%), and designated peaks and ridges from clearing, grading,
filling, or construction except as may be approved for essential
infrastructure;
         b.   Creates buffer areas to minimize conflicts between residential
uses, public preserves, and wildlife habitat;
         c.   Locates development on the least environmentally sensitive areas
of the site with the least intrusion into primary and secondary conservation
features and is least disruptive to connections with public preserves and
surrounding undeveloped indigenous habitat;
         d.   Protects wildlife habitat areas of species listed as endangered,
threatened, or of special concern by the U. S. Fish and Wildlife Services,
Arizona Game and Fish Department, and the adopted Sonoran Desert Conservation
Plan.
         e.   Minimizes development impacts on ironwoods, saguaros and their
understory, and large clusters of sensitive plant groups protected by the
native plant preservation standards (Chapter. 18.72);
         f.   Avoids siting dwellings on prominent hilltops or ridges by taking
advantage of lower topographic forms;
         g.   Designs around and preserve sites of historic, archeological, or
cultural value and their environs insofar as needed to safeguard the character
and integrity of the feature;
         h.   Improves public safety and protects the character of scenic
routes by avoiding lot development which directly accesses onto scenic routes
that are also major routes;
         i.   Where trails are provided, they shall be designed as a pedestrian
circulation path system to ensure that pedestrians can walk safely and easily
on the site, between properties and activities or special features within the
neighborhood open space system;
         j.   Provides natural areas that are contiguous and whose
configuration minimizes fragmentation of natural areas within the development;
         k.   Incorporates a water harvesting plan.
         l.   Revegetation shall be indigenous trees, shrubs, and ground cover
to simulate when practicable understory, midstory, and canopy of adjoining
natural areas.
   I.   Lot development. Lots thirty-six thousand (36,000) square feet or
greater with grading areas greater than fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet
shall, at the time the lot is developed, incorporate a thirty percent natural
area set aside into the lot design, if not already delineated by the plat. The
natural area set aside should, when possible, provide connections to adjoining
common or individual lot conservation natural areas, and building area
footprints should be minimized. To the maximum extent possible, open space
areas adjacent to streets that are located on individual lots shall be left
natural.
   J.   Conservation natural areas ownership and maintenance. Conservation
natural areas shall be restricted to natural open space in perpetuity. The
conservation natural areas shall remain undivided. Conservation natural areas
located outside of individual residential lots shall be owned and managed by
either a homeowners' association, the county, or a recognized land trust or
conservancy.
      1.   Conservation natural areas located outside of individual lots shall
be preserved by one of the following methods:
         a.   Dedication. Conservation natural areas may be dedicated to the
county, either in fee simple or as a conservation easement, by a form of
instrument approved by the county. The county may, but is not required, to
accept conservation natural areas.
         b.   Transfer to a private conservation organization, land trust, or
conservancy. Conservation natural areas may be transferred either in fee or by
easement to a private nonprofit organization, among whose purposes it is to
conserve conservation natural areas and/or natural resources provided that:
            1)   The organization is acceptable to the county;
            2)   The organization is a bona fide conservation organization with
perpetual existence;
            3)   The conveyance contains appropriate provisions for the
transfer of the conservation natural area to the county, an appropriate
homeowners association, or another private nonprofit organization acceptable to
the county, if the original organization becomes unwilling or unable to
continue carrying out its function; and
            4)   A maintenance agreement approved by the county is entered into
by the owner of the subdivision site and the non profit conservation
organization.
         c.   Transfer to a homeowners' association and maintenance standards.
If the conservation natural areas are to be owned and maintained by the
homeowners' association of the subdivision, the subdivider shall record
covenants, conditions and restrictions including maintenance and preservation
standards, running with the land, providing for the creation of a homeowners'
association. The covenants shall contain the following provisions:
            1)   A clause assuring that Pima County is not responsible for
maintenance or liability of the common natural areas but that Pima County may
enforce the maintenance and preservation standards;
            2)   A clause stating the common areas designated natural area on
the subdivision plat shall be restricted to natural areas in perpetuity and
maintained by the homeowners association and a requirement that the county is a
third party beneficiary with a third party right of enforcement to such clause,
and that the clause cannot be amended or repealed without the written consent
of the county.
            3)   The developer shall present to the development services
department a plan for the transfer of control of all common natural areas to
the homeowners association;
      2.   Conservation natural areas on individual lots shall be preserved as
recorded conservation easements. The conservation easement shall include a
statement that all area within the conservation easement shall be preserved as
natural open space and shall not be graded or disturbed except that previously
graded or disturbed areas within the conservation easement shall be restored,
and revegetated in conformance with the provisions of the following subsection
3.
      3.   Maintenance of conservation natural areas on individual lots:
         a.   Conservation natural areas shall be preserved as natural open
space and shall not be graded or disturbed, except for restoration and the
mitigation of previously disturbed area.
         b.   Existing grading or disturbance within the conservation natural
area shall be restored, and mitigated subject to the following:
            1)   The existing grading and disturbance occurred two (2) years or
more before the effective date of the ordinance that establishes this
provision, and
            2)   The existing grading and disturbance was not created during
the current owner's ownership of the lot, parcel, or project site.
            3)   An application for a building or grading permit on a lot,
parcel, or project site that meets the preceding conditions in subparagraphs 1)
and 2) shall be accompanied by a mitigation and revegetation plan which
mitigates the existing grading and disturbance in conformance with the
revegetation requirements of Section
18.61.100.F.2.i.2)
            4)   If the existing grading and disturbance does not meet one (1)
or both of the preceding conditions in subparagraphs 1) and 2), then
supplemental mitigation requirements may be established by the planning
official or a hearing officer.
(Ord. 2015-7 § 3, 2015; Ord. 2001-22 § 1, 2001; Ord. 2000-66 § 1, 2000)
18.09.110   Two-story residential buffer setback.
   A.   Purpose.
      1.   To mitigate the impact of two-story development on adjoining one-
story residential development by reducing views into the side and rear yards of
existing adjoining developments.
      2.   To encourage less intrusive siting of two-story development in
residential zones.
   B.   Definitions. For purposes of this section only:
      1.   Existing dwelling: A permitted residence that has had a final
inspection.
      2.   Two-story residential buffer setback: The sixty-foot setback between
a proposed two-story development and existing one-story residential
development's property line. The setback shall be measured from the two-story
portion of the proposed new development.
   C.   Applicability.
      1.   A two-story residential buffer setback shall be required adjacent to
all two-story development adjoining to RH, GR-1, SH, SR, SR-2, CR-1, CR-2, CR-
3, MU residential and CMH-1 zones or adjacent to any zone in another
jurisdiction with a lot size approximately equivalent to the above named zones
where the lot or lots in question are adjacent to existing one-story dwellings.
The buffer setback applies to property zoned SP only when the SP lots are at
the edge of the SP zone.
      2.   A two-story residential buffer setback shall be required when a new
two-story dwelling is being constructed on a vacant lot in a subdivision that
was recorded more than ten years ago, and the subdivision contains existing
one-story dwelling units.
   D.   Exceptions. The following are exceptions to this section:
      1.   The applicant obtains an approved mitigation plan. The applicant
shall prepare a mitigation plan showing how the proposed two-story dwelling
units or buildings will not intrude on the privacy of existing one-story
residences. The mitigation plan is subject to review by, and must receive
approval from, the planning and zoning commission and thereafter must be
implemented subject to all conditions of approval; or
      2.   The applicant obtains the consent of adjacent property owners. The
applicant shall submit to the development services department a recorded
agreement among adjacent property owners of lots having an existing one-story
dwelling stating a two-story building is acceptable; or
      3.   The applicant provides documentation that non-consenting adjacent
property owners do not have an existing one-story home within 100 feet from the
proposed two-story development. The applicant shall submit a site plan prepared
by a registered surveyor, registered architect, or other similar registered
professional showing that the distance between the closest point of an existing
one-story dwelling on adjoining property and the proposed two-story dwelling is
at a minimum 100 feet, measured from the closest point of the two-story portion
only; or
      4.   The applicant shall demonstrate that the highest point of the
proposed two-story structure is equal to or below any non-consenting adjacent
property owner's existing one-story residence's finished grade; or
      5.   The proposed two-story development is on a lot within the internal
area of a subdivision when the subdivision is developed under the cluster
development option, lot reduction option, lot development option, or
conservation subdivision and both the two-story development and the existing
one-story residence are located on lots under one acre in size.
   E.   Mitigation Plan Review Process. The Mitigation Plan Review Process is
as follows:
      1.   Within the two-story residential buffer setback, a mitigation plan
shall be approved by the planning and zoning commission at a public hearing
after notice has been provided by mail fifteen days prior to the hearing to all
owners of property within three hundred feet. The mitigation plan shall be
submitted to the development services department and must meet department
submittal policies.
      2.   A mitigation plan shall include screening or siting elements as
needed that may include vegetative screening, walls, siting of buildings or
windows, and eliminating balconies or similar features to reduce views towards
the existing dwellings.
      3.   Appeal from a decision of the planning and zoning commission may be
made to the board of supervisors within thirty days of the decision.
      4.   If a two-story residential buffer setback mitigation plan is
approved by the board of supervisors as a condition of rezoning or of a special
action, then the two-story residential buffer setback requirement may be
satisfied so long as that plan is implemented.
   F.   Fees. A review fee that is the equivalent to the fee for a board of
adjustment variance is required for mitigation plan review.
(Ord. 2007-101 § 1, 2007; Ord. 2004-20 § 1, 2004)
Chapter 18.11
TH TRAILER HOMESITE ZONE
18.11.010   Purpose.
18.11.020   Permitted uses.
18.11.030   Accessory uses.
18.11.040   Development standards—General.
18.11.050   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
18.11.060   Nonconforming uses.
18.11.010   Purpose.
   A.   Purpose: To provide adequate areas for travel trailers, motor homes,
and campers for seasonal or temporary occupancy, that will also provide certain
necessary convenience services.
   B.   Scope: This zone shall be located on or near interstate, state, and
federal highways, or in such areas as may be designated by duly adopted area or
neighborhood plans.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.11.020   Permitted uses.
   A.   Uses permitted:
      1.   Trailer park;
      2.   Single-family dwelling, manufactured or mobile home or trailer on
lots in subdivisions which were approved prior to January 6, 1971. Such uses
shall conform to all other requirements of this chapter;
      3.   Keeping chickens in accordance with the restrictions in Section
18.09.020(T)(1) (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions).
(Ord. 2017-36 § 2 (part), 2017; Ord. 1993-171 § 1 (part), 1994; Ord. 1985-82
(part), 1985)
18.11.030   Accessory uses.
   A.   Uses conditionally permitted:
      1.   Accessory commercial uses for a trailer park, if located on the
premises of the park not closer than one hundred feet to any public street, and
intended, provided and operated primarily for the convenience of the trailer
park, as follows:
         a.   Food market, including package beer and wine,
         b.   Recreational facilities,
         c.   Soda fountain or soft drink stand,
         d.   Personal services,
         e.   Gasoline service station (no repairing),
         f.   Restaurant facilities;
      2.   Dwelling unit for the use of the manager or caretaker.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.11.040   Development standards—General.
   A.   Minimum lot area: Eighteen thousand square feet for uses permitted by
Section
18.11.020(A)(1); eight thousand square feet for uses permitted by Section
18.11.020(A)(2).
   B.   Minimum area per trailer: Two thousand square feet.
   C.   Minimum yard requirements:
      1.   Front: Thirty feet;
      2.   Side: Ten feet each;
      3.   Rear: Thirty feet.
   D.   Building height limitations:
      1.   Maximum height: Thirty-four feet;
      2.   Maximum stories: Two.
   E.   Minimum distance between main buildings or trailers: Twenty feet.
   F.   Off-street parking: There shall be one off-street parking space per
trailer in a trailer park.
   G.   Required bufferyards shall be in accordance with
Chapter 18.73 (Landscaping, Buffering and Screening Standards).
(Ord. 1993-171 § 1 (part), 1994; Ord. 1985-171 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82
(part), 1985)
18.11.050   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
   A.   Permitted coverage: Five percent of the lot area.
   B.   Maximum height: Twenty-four feet.
   C.   Minimum distance standards:
      1.   To front lot line: Sixty feet;
      2.   To side lot lines: Four feet;
      3.   To rear lot line: Four feet;
      4.   Accessory structures used to shelter chickens shall be a minimum of
twenty feet from any dwelling on adjoining properties.
(Ord. 2017-36 § 2 (part), 2017; Ord. 2004-59 § 4 (part), 2004; Ord. 1985-82
(part), 1985)
18.11.060   Nonconforming uses.
   A.   Nothing contained in the provisions of this chapter shall require any
change in the construction, alteration or intended use of any nonconforming
structure, under previous Article 21 (Ord. 1957-51) of the county zoning plan
(Ord. 1952-III), the construction or alteration of which is begun prior to two
years after January 5, 1971, and is diligently prosecuted according to plan as
submitted, and further providing that all setbacks and regulations of previous
Article 21, as adopted by Ord. 1957-51 and amended by Ord. 1958-7 shall apply.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
Chapter 18.12
IR INSTITUTIONAL RESERVE ZONE
18.12.010   Scope.
18.12.020   Permitted uses.
18.12.030   Conditional uses.
18.12.040   Development standards—General.
18.12.050   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
18.12.060   Institutional reserve exceptions.
18.12.070   Cluster development option.
18.12.010   Scope.
   A.   Scope: This zone shall only include federal, state, city, county,
Indian and other publicly owned lands. It is intended that these lands remain
as a reserve until such time they are released to the private sector, more
intensive development is appropriate and the Tucson water basin has been
balanced.
(Ord. 1985-187 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.12.020   Permitted uses.
   A.   Uses permitted:
      1.   Single detached dwelling;
      2.   Manufactured or mobile home or trailer;
      3.   Farm labor housing;
      4.   Guest dwelling: In accordance with Section
18.09.020(G) (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions) [proposed];
      5.   Accessory structures;
      6.   Crop production, used only for the purpose of propagation and
cultivation and not for retail sales, including field crops, truck gardening,
berry or bush crops, tree crops, flower gardening, nurseries, orchards, and
aviaries;
      7.   Reserved;
      8.   The raising or grazing of livestock and ratites;
      9.   The raising of hogs, provided:
         a.   There are no more than five hogs over six months of age,
         b.   There is compliance with all county health department
regulations;
      10.   The raising of poultry and other small animals;
      11.   Hog raising projects, which exceed the permitted number of hogs,
sponsored by the 4-H Club, Future Farmers of America or other similar nonprofit
organization, provided that a letter of authorization from the sponsoring
organization is submitted to the department of planning and development
services acknowledging that the project is in fact sponsored by the
organization, describing the project and stating its length of time;
      12.   Private stable;
      13.   Commercial stable or riding school, provided all buildings be set
back a minimum of one hundred feet from any property line;
      14.   Community stable: In accordance with Section
18.13.020(A)(13) (RH Rural Homestead Zone);
      15.   Farm products stand, provided:
         a.   The stand does not exceed three thousand square feet in area,
         b.   There is a minimum twenty-foot setback from any property line,
         c.   There is a minimum one hundred fifty-foot setback from any
intersection,
         d.   A designated parking area to be provided that is set back a
minimum of forty-five feet from the property line,
         e.   A designated driveway, no wider than thirty feet, be provided,
and
         f.   The parking and driveway areas shall be maintained to minimize
the generation of dust;
      16.   Animal hospital or commercial kennel, provided no structure,
shelter, animal run or fenced area be within one hundred feet of any abutting
property in a rural or residential zone;
      17.   Nature reserve or wildlife refuge;
      18.   Governmental uses;
      19.   Public park;
      20.   Public school;
      21.   Church;
      22.   Health clinic, provided:
         a.   There is a minimum one hundred-foot setback from any property
line, and
         b.   Access is from a paved public road with "collector"
classification or higher;
      23.   Temporary real estate office: In accordance with Section
18.17.010(A)(12) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      24.   Home occupation;
      25.   Private airport or airstrip: Provided all requirements of
Chapter 18.57 (AF Aviation Facilities and Environs Zones) are met.
(Ord. 2017-36 § 9, 2017; Ord. 1999-34 § 2, 1999; Ord. 1997-20 § 2, 1997; Ord.
1994-146 § 1, 1994; Ord. 1986-150 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-187 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.12.030   Conditional uses.
   A.   Procedures: In accordance with
Chapter 18.97 (Conditional Use Permits).
   B.   Uses conditionally permitted:
      1.   Agricultural processing facility, including wineries;
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Minimum setback: Three hundred feet from any property line,
         c.   Notification area: Six hundred feet;
      2.   Commercial feedlot;
         a.   Type III procedure,
         b.   Minimum setback: Five hundred feet from any property line,
         c.   Notification area: One thousand feet;
      3.   Hog ranch:
         a.   Type III procedure,
         b.   Hogs be penned a minimum of five hundred feet from any property
line,
         c.   Notification area: One thousand feet;
      4.   Livestock auction yard:
         a.   Type I procedure,
         b.   All structures, holding pens and areas, and show areas are set
back a minimum of three hundred feet from any property line,
         c.   Provisions area made to minimize the generation of dust, and
         d.   No outdoor audio amplification shall create a nuisance to
adjacent properties;
      5.   Feed store:
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Access to the store be from a paved public road with "collector"
classification or higher;
      6.   Racetrack for the racing of animals:
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Minimum setback: Two hundred feet from any property line,
         c.   Notification area: One thousand feet;
      7.   Minor resort:
         a.   Type I procedure,
         b.   In accordance with
Chapter 18.07 (General Regulations and Exceptions);
      8.   Reserved.
      9.   Fairgrounds or carnival:
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Minimum setback: Two hundred feet from any property line,
         c.   Notification area: One thousand feet;
      10.   Airport facilities: In accordance with
Chapter 18.57;
      11.   Skeet, trap, rifle or pistol range:
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Minimum front site setback: One hundred feet, which may be used
for parking or recreational facilities,
         c.   Review procedures: Type II procedure, with recommendations to the
hearing administrator by the target range committee (refer to Section
18.99.040, Review Committees),
         d.   Release from liabilities: The owners or operators of a target
range shall, by written agreement, indemnify and hold Pima County harmless from
any liability arising from the existence, use or operation of the range. The
owners or operators shall provide to the board of supervisors evidence of a
valid policy of liability insurance in an amount to be determined by the
county. The policy shall name Pima County, its agents, officers and employees
as insureds thereunder,
         e.   Notification area: One thousand feet;
      12.   Sand and gravel operation, including asphalt and cement plants:
         a.   Type III procedure,
         b.   Minimum setback: Three hundred feet from any property line,
         c.   Controls be used to minimize the generation of dust,
         d.   Notification area: One thousand feet;
      13.   Museum:
         a.   Type II procedures,
         b.   Minimum setback: One hundred feet from any property line,
         c.   Notification area: Six hundred feet;
      14.   Zoo and other animal exhibits:
         a.   Type II procedures,
         b.   Minimum setback: One hundred feet from any property line,
         c.   Notification area: Six hundred feet;
      15.   Contractor's yard:
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Minimum setback: One hundred feet from any property line,
         c.   Yard to be completely enclosed by screening a minimum of six feet
in height,
         d.   Access be onto a paved public road with "collector"
classification or higher,
         e.   The parking and driveway areas be maintained to minimize the
generation of dust;
      16.   Real estate office:
         a.   Type I procedure,
         b.   Maximum floor area: Two thousand square feet;
      17.   Telephone or telegraph distribution installation or electrical
receiving or distribution station (with or without a building):
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   In accordance with Section
18.07.040(B) (General Regulations and Exceptions);
      18.   Outside amplification for livestock or equestrian events: Type I
procedure;
      19.   Artists or artisans workshop or studio:
         a.   Type I procedure,
         b.   Maximum floor area: Two thousand square feet;
      20.   Animal Rescue and Sanctuary Facility:
         a.   Type I procedure.
         b.   Subject to Section
18.09.020(N).
      21.   Other conditional uses: All uses which are similar in type, scale
and intensity to other uses which are specifically listed as requiring either
Type 1, Type 2 or Type 3 conditional use procedures and which are, in the
opinion of the zoning inspector, not otherwise unlawful, injurious to the
general health or welfare, or specifically excluded.
(Ord. 2009-59 § 2 (part), 2009; Ord. 2007-81 § 3, 2007; Ord. 1998-36 § 3, 1998;
Ord. 1997-40 § 3, 1997; Ord. 1986-188 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1986-150 (part),
1986; Ord. 1985-187 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.12.040   Development standards—General.
   A.   Minimum site area: Thirty-six acres (one million five hundred sixty-
eight thousand one hundred sixty square feet).
   B.   Minimum site area per dwelling unit: Thirty-six acres (one million five
hundred sixty-eight thousand one hundred sixty square feet).
   C.   Minimum setback requirements:
      1.   Front: Fifty feet;
      2.   Side: Fifty feet;
      3.   Rear: Fifty feet.
   D.   Height limitations:
      1.   Maximum height: Thirty-four feet;
      2.   Maximum stories: Two.
   E.   Minimum distance between main buildings: Twenty feet.
   F.   Maintenance of stock-tight fences: A stock-tight fence and necessary
cattle guards shall be erected along the boundaries of any property in which
livestock is pastured, herded or cared for and which abuts either a public-
maintained road of abuts the boundary of any zone other than IR. This provision
shall not apply to open range as determined under Arizona Revised Statutes.
(Ord. 1987-67 § 1 (part), 1987; Ord. 1985-187 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.12.050   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
   A.   Permitted coverage: Fifteen hundred square feet, or seventy percent of
the area of the largest main building on the site, whichever is greater.
   B.   Height limitations: Twenty-four feet.
   C.   Minimum distance standards:
      1.   From front property line: Fifty feet;
      2.   From side and rear property lines:
         a.   Nonanimal uses: Ten feet,
         b.   Animal uses except corrals: Fifty feet,
         c.   Corrals: Ten feet.
(Ord. 2004-59 § 5, 2004; Ord. 1987-67 § 1 (part), 1987; Ord. 1985-187 § 1
(part), 1985)
18.12.060   Institutional reserve exceptions.
   A.   Rezoning—Release of Land to Private Sector. Upon written notification
by the appropriate public land management agency to the planning and
development services department director that certain lands have formally been
released to the private sector and a finding that the Tucson water basin is in
balance, Pima County will initiate a rezoning from institutional reserve (IR)
zone to rural homestead (RH) zone in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 18.91, excluding Section
18.91.030(E), plan submittals. The authorized representative of the public land
management agency shall also submit any appropriate supplemental documentation
and boundary maps as may be required.
   B.   Nonconforming Parcels. Parcels of less than thirty-six acres, recorded
prior to the adoption of this chapter (November 5, 1985) which conformed to
Pima County minimum lot size requirements at the date of recording, shall be
treated as if they contained an area of thirty-six acres. However, any parcel
or use created under Section
18.12.060(B) must adhere to all the requirements of
Chapter 18.13 (RH Rural Homestead Zone).
   C.   Nonconforming Uses and Buildings: In accordance with Section
18.01.030(D) (General Provisions).
(Ord. 2011-2 § 5, 2011; Ord. 1988-61 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1985-187 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.12.070   Cluster development option.
   Reserved.
Chapter 18.13
RH RURAL HOMESTEAD ZONE [1] 
18.13.010   Purpose.
18.13.020   Permitted uses.
18.13.030   Conditional uses.
18.13.040   Development standards—General.
18.13.045   Development standards—Manufactured home park.
18.13.050   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
18.13.060   Exceptions.
18.13.070   Cluster development option.
18.13.010   Purpose.
   A.   Purpose: This zone is intended to preserve the character and encourage
the orderly growth of rural areas in the county. It is intended to encourage
rural development in areas lacking facilities for urban development and to
provide for commercial and industrial development only where appropriate and
necessary to serve the needs of the rural area.
(Ord. 1985-187 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.13.020   Permitted uses.
   A.   Uses permitted:
      1.   Single detached dwelling;
      2.   Duplex dwelling;
      3.   Triplex dwelling;
      4.    Manufactured or mobile home or trailer;
      5.    Guest dwelling: In accordance with Section
18.09.020(G) (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions) [proposed];
      6.    Accessory structures;
      7.    Crop production, used only for the purpose of propagation and
cultivation and not for retail sales, including field crops, truck gardening,
berry or bush crops, tree crops, flower gardening, nurseries and aviaries;
      8.    Reserved;
      9.    The raising and grazing of livestock and ratites;
      10.    The raising of hogs: In accordance with Section
18.09.020(A)(9) (IR Institutional Reserve Zone);
      11.    Hog raising projects, which exceed the permitted number of hogs,
sponsored by the 4-H Club, Future Farmers of America or other similar nonprofit
organization: In accordance with Section
18.12.020(A)(11) (IR Institutional Reserve Zone);
      12   . The raising of poultry and other small animals;
      13.    Private stable;
      14.    Commercial stable or riding school, provided:
         a.    There is a minimum site of ten acres, and
         b.    That all buildings be set back a minimum of one hundred feet
from any property line;
      15.    Community stable, provided:
         a.   The site is a minimum of ten acres,
         b.    The stable shall be located within and not closer than two
hundred feet from the boundary of the site or subdivision to be served,
         c.   All roads and parking areas shall be surfaced with a dust-proof
material to minimize the creation of dust, and
         d.    There shall be no outside audio amplification on the site;
      16.    Farm products stand, provided:
         a.    The stand does not exceed seven hundred fifty feet, and
         b.   All other requirements of Section
18.12.020(A)(15) (IR Institutional Reserve Zone) are met;
      17.   Animal hospital, provided no structure, shelter, animal run or
fenced area be within one hundred feet of any abutting property in a rural or
residential zone, and animal runs enclosed within the buildings;
      18.   Governmental uses;
      19.   Public park;
      20.   Public school;
      21.   Child care center;
      22.   Group foster home: In accordance with Section
18.09.020(E) (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions);
      23.   Church, provided there is a minimum eighty-foot setback from any
property line;
      24.   Health clinic, provided:
         a.   There is a minimum one hundred-foot setback from any property
line, and
         b.   The clinic has access onto a paved public road with "collector"
classification or higher;
      25.   Home occupation;
      26.   Temporary real estate office: In accordance with Section
18.17.020(A)(8) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      27.   Nature reserve.
(Ord. 2025-8 § 3, 2025; Ord. 2017-36 § 10, 2017; Ord. 1999-34 § 3, 1999; Ord.
1997-20 § 3 (part), 1997; Ord. 1994-146 § 2, 1994; Ord. 1986-150 (part), 1986;
(Ord. 1986-125 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-187 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.13.030   Conditional uses.
   A.   Procedure: In accordance with
Chapter 18.97 (Conditional Use Permits).
   B.   Uses conditionally permitted:
      1.   Agricultural processing facility, including wineries:
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Minimum setback: Three hundred feet from any property line,
         c.   Notification area: Six hundred feet;
      2.   Commercial feedlot:
         a.   Type III procedure,
         b.   Minimum setback: Five hundred feet from any property line,
         c.   Notification area: One thousand feet;
      3.   Hog ranch:
         a.   Type III procedure,
         b.   Hogs be penned a minimum of five hundred feet from any property
line,
         c.   Notification area: One thousand feet;
      4.   Racetrack for the racing of animals:
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Minimum setback: Two hundred feet from any property line,
         c.   Notification area: One thousand feet;
      5.   Feed store:
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Access be onto a paved public road with collector classification
or higher;
      6.   Minor resort: In accordance with Section
18.12.030(B)(7) (IR Institutional Reserve Zone);
      7.   Grocery store or convenience store:
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Maximum floor area: Ten thousand square feet;
      8.   Neighborhood Market:
         a.   Type I procedure,
         b.   Maximum floor area: Fifteen thousand square feet;
      9.   Gasoline service station:
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Access be onto a paved public road with "collector"
classification or higher;
      10.   Automobile repair or parts store:
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Maximum floor area: Ten thousand square feet,
         c.   Paint spray operations prohibited;
      11.   Retail or repair shop:
         a.   Type II procedure;
      12.   Personal services, including hair salon, barber shop, catering
service or interior decoration:
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Maximum floor area: Five thousand square feet;
      13.   Restaurant: Type II procedure;
      14.   Tavern:
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Maximum floor area: Five thousand square feet,
         c.   Notification area: Six hundred feet;
      15.    Professional and semiprofessional services:
         a.   Type I procedure,
         b.   Maximum floor area: Ten thousand square feet;
      16.   Private recreational club:
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Minimum setback: One hundred feet from any property line,
         c.   Access to onto a paved public street with "collector"
classification or higher,
         d.   Notification area: Six hundred feet;
      17.   Fairgrounds or carnival:
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Minimum setback: Two hundred feet from any property line,
         c.   Notification area: One thousand feet;
      18.   Zoo and other animal exhibits:
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Minimum setback: One hundred feet from any property line,
         c.   Notification area: One thousand feet;
      19.   Museum:
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Minimum setback: One hundred feet from any property line,
         c.   Notification area: Six hundred feet;
      20.   Skeet, trap, rifle or pistol range: In accordance with Section
18.12.030(B)(11) (IR Institutional Reserve Zone);
      21.   Reserved;
      22.   Contractors yard: In accordance with Section
18.12.030(B)(15) (IR Institutional Reserve Zone);
      23.   Cemetery or crematorium:
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   All buildings be set back a minimum of one hundred feet from any
property line, except that a crematorium shall be set back a minimum of two
hundred feet from any property line;
      24.   Sand and gravel operation, including asphalt and cement plants: In
accordance with Section
18.12.030(B)(12) (IR Institutional Reserve Zone);
      25.   Bank, (except non-chartered financial institutions):
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Minimum setback: One hundred feet from any property line,
         c.   Access be from a paved public road with "collector"
classification or higher,
         d.   Notification area: Six hundred feet;
      26.   Airport facilities: In accordance with
Chapter 18.57;
      27.   Sanatorium or rest home: Type I procedure;
      28.   Commercial kennel:
         a.   Type I procedure,
         b.   Minimum setback: One hundred feet from any property line;
      29.   Telephone or telegraph distribution installation or electrical
receiving or distribution station (with or without a building): In accordance
with Section
18.12.030(B)(17) (IR Institutional Reserve Zone);
      30.   Outside amplification for livestock or equestrian events: Type I
procedure;
      31.   Artists or artisans workshop or studio:
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Maximum floor area: Five thousand square feet;
      32.   Nursery with restricted retail sales:
         a.   Type II procedure.
         b.   Minimum site area: One hundred forty-four thousand square feet.
         c.   Minimum setback for nursery buildings and the storage of related
materials: 100 feet.
         d.   The principal nursery use is the on-site propagation and
cultivation of plant stock which may include desert plants salvaged from off-
site locations.
         e.   A minimum of sixty percent of the nursery site must be allocated
to the principal use.
         f.   Retail sales shall be primarily of on-site cultivated or off-site
salvaged nursery stock. Sales of nursery products cultivated or produced off-
site shall be a minor portion of retail sales. Retail sales shall not exceed
twenty-five percent of the total sales for the nursery use.
         g.   Retail sales areas, including customer parking areas and display
areas may not exceed one and a half acres.
         h.   Retail sales shall not include power tools and equipment,
including farm equipment.
         i.   Access to the site shall only be from a major street as
designated on the Major Streets & Scenic Routes plan. Access from the site to
any abutting street that is not designated a major street is prohibited.
         j.   Landscaping and screening must meet the requirements of
Chapter 18.73. A bufferyard type "D" is required. If possible, the bufferyard
requirement shall be satisfied with plants in cultivation (in-ground) or
natural desert.
         k.   Any outdoor lighting shall be in accordance with the county
outdoor lighting code (Title 15).
         l.   The use of amplifiers or public address systems is prohibited.
         m.   All access lanes and parking areas within the nursery site shall
be of a paved or concrete surface.
         n.   A development plan is required pursuant to
Chapter 18.71.
      33.   Manufactured home park:
         a.   Type I procedure;
      34.   Off-road vehicle facility for personal use only:
         a.   Type I procedure.
         b.   Subject to the standards of
18.07.030(M).
      35.   Animal Rescue and Sanctuary Facility:
         a.   Type I procedure.
         b.   Subject to Section
18.09.020(N).
      36.   Medical marijuana designated caregiver cultivation location:
         a.   Type 1 procedure.
            1)   All conditions and restrictions for medical marijuana
dispensary offsite cultivation location as provided for in Section
18.45.040E5 except that the Type 1 procedure as provided for in Section
18.97.030D2 is applied and the designated caregiver cultivation location area
is limited to two hundred fifty square feet.
            2)   More than one designated caregiver may co-locate cultivation
locations as long as the total cultivation area does not exceed two hundred
fifty square feet.
      37.   Community food pantry:
         a.   Type I procedure.
         b.   All driveways and parking areas shall be maintained with a dust-
proof material which shall be approved by the department of transportation.
      38.   Trail-Oriented Development:
         a.   Type I procedure.
         b.   In accordance with Section
18.07.030(V) (Land use regulations).
      39.   Marijuana Dispensary Offsite Cultivation Location:
         a.   Type II procedure.
         b.   There is no size limit for the maximum floor area of a marijuana
dispensary off-site cultivation location.
         c.   A marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location shall be
located in a permanent, enclosed, locked facility in accordance with state
statutes and Arizona Department of Health Services rules and shall not be
located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or modular unit, mobile home,
recreational vehicle, or other motor vehicle.
         d.   A marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location shall be
setback a minimum of 2,000 feet from any other marijuana dispensaries or
marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation locations measured in a straight and
direct horizontal line between the two closest exterior or applicable interior
suite walls of marijuana dispensaries' cultivation locations.
         e.   A marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location shall be
setback a minimum of 500 feet from a K-12 public, private, or charter school,
measured in a straight and direct horizontal line from the closest exterior or
applicable interior suite wall of the marijuana offsite cultivation location to
the closest property line of a school.
         f.   A marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location shall comply
with all lawful, applicable health regulations, including those promulgated by
the Arizona Department of Health Services and any other authorized regulatory
agency.
         g.   A marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location shall provide
only wholesale products to other marijuana dispensaries, marijuana dispensary
offsite manufacturing locations, or marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation
locations.
         h.   Odor Mitigation
            (1)   Odor mitigation devices and techniques shall be incorporated
in all marijuana facilities to ensure that odors are mitigated. Odor mitigation
may be accomplished through an exhaust air filtration system with odor control
that prevents internal odors from being emitted externally or through any other
best practices adequate for odor mitigation as determined acceptable by the
Chief Zoning Inspector, in the Chief Zoning Inspector's sole discretion.
            (2)   An odor mitigation plan shall be submitted with the initial
permit application. When a modification is made to a marijuana facility, or the
facility operation, that has the potential to impact the nature or degree of
odor, or affects the control of odor, the marijuana facility owner must update
its odor mitigation plan within 30 days of facility modification.
            (3)   An odor mitigation plan shall include all of the following
information:
               (a)   Facility floor plan (showing areas of potential odor
emissions);
               (b)   List of odor emitting activities to take place on site;
               (c)   Phases (timing, length, etc.) of odor-emitting activities;
               (d)   Odor mitigation practices based on industry-specific best
control technologies and best management practices; and
               (e)   Administrative controls and engineering controls (system
design plan, operational processes, maintenance plan).
            (4)   The marijuana facility shall not begin operations until the
odor mitigation plan, or any required update to the odor mitigation plan, is
approved by the Chief Zoning Inspector.
      40.   Other conditional uses: All uses which are similar in type, scale
and intensity to other uses which are specifically listed as requiring either
Type 1, Type 2 or Type 3 conditional use procedures and which are, in the
opinion of the zoning inspector, not otherwise unlawful, injurious to the
general health or welfare or specifically excluded.
(Ord. 2022-16 § 2, 2022; Ord. 2020-24, § 2, 2020; Ord. 2019-26 § 1, 2019: Ord.
2019-5 § 3, 2019; Ord. 2018-33 § 1, 2018; Ord. 2018-29 § 2, 2018; Ord. 2011-2 §
6, 2011; 2009-59 ;2; (part), 2009; Ord. 2007-81 § 4, 2007; Ord. 2005-105 § 2,
2005; Ord. 2005-85 § 3, 2005; Ord. 1998-37 § 2 (part), 1998; Ord. 1998-36 § 3,
1998; Ord. 1997-40 § 4, 1997; Ord. 1997-20 § 3 (part), 1997; Ord. 1986-188 § 1
(part), 1986; Ord. 1986-150 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-187 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.13.040   Development standards—General.
   A.   Minimum site area: One hundred eighty thousand square feet.
   B.   Minimum site area per dwelling unit: One hundred eighty thousand square
feet.
   C.   Minimum setback requirements:
      1.   Front: Fifty feet;
      2.   Side: Twenty feet;
      3.   Rear: Fifty feet.
   D.   Height limitations:
      1.   Maximum height: Thirty-four feet;
      2.   Maximum stories: Two.
   E.   Minimum distance between buildings: Twenty feet.
   F.   Maintenance of stock-tight fences: A stock-tight fence and necessary
cattle guards shall be erected along the boundaries of any property on which
livestock is pastured, herded or cared for and which either abuts a public-
maintained road or abuts the boundary of any zone other than IR. This provision
shall not apply to open range as determined under Arizona Revised Statutes.
(Ord. 1987-67 § 1 (part), 1987; Ord. 1985-187 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.13.045   Development standards—Manufactured home park.
   All manufactured home parks shall comply with the following development
requirements:
   A.   Minimum site area: Seven hundred-twenty thousand square feet.
   B.   Minimum area per dwelling unit: One hundred-eighty thousand square
feet.
   C.   Minimum site width: Sixty feet.
   D.   Minimum site setbacks:
      1.   Front: Thirty feet.
      2.   Side: Fifteen feet.
      3.   Rear: Fifty feet.
   E.   Minimum distance between units: Fourteen feet.
   F.   Off-street parking: Per Section 18.75 (Off-street Parking and Loading
Standards.)
   G.   Bufferyard "C" shall be placed around the perimeter of the manufactured
home park unless more intensive bufferyards are required per
Chapter 18.73 (Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening Standards).
   H.   Detached accessory buildings:
      1.   Maximum site coverage: Twenty-five percent of the rear yard setback
area for the site.
      2.   Maximum height: Twenty-four feet.
      3.   Minimum distances required:
         a.   To dwelling units or other buildings: Seven feet.
         b.   To front site setback: Thirty feet for an entryway building used
to control access and for all other buildings.
         c.   To side site setback: Ten feet.
         d.   To rear site setback: Fifteen feet.
   I.   Storage area:
   A manufactured home park may include a detached, accessory open storage area
for the storage of a travel trailer, boat, automobile recreational vehicle,
noncommercial truck, motorcycle, or similar vehicle owned by residents of the
park.
      1.   Only residents of the park may use or have access to the open
storage area.
      2.   All vehicles must be operable. Storage of junk or inoperable
vehicles is not permitted.
      3.   A minimum five-foot wide buffer shall be provided around and
abutting the entire storage area, except at the point of access. The buffer
shall at a minimum include all of the following:
         a.   A minimum six-foot high opaque screen wall or fence.
         b.   A fifteen-gallon canopy tree for each twenty linear feet of
buffer length.
         c.   A five-gallon desert shrub for each twenty linear feet of buffer
length.
         d.   Two one-gallon accents, flowers or vines for each twenty linear
feet of buffer length.
         e.   Decomposed granite or other acceptable groundcover over the
entire buffer surface.
         f.   Plant materials within the buffer shall be selected from the
official regulatory plant list, Section
18.73.030(A) (Landscape Design Manual).
   J.   Paving: All driveways and parking areas shall be surfaced with a
durable asphalt, concrete, stone, tile or brick surface consistent with
pavement design standards and principles and engineered according to soil
conditions and anticipated wheel loads.
   K.   Exception: The requirements of this section do not apply to a
manufactured home park which was permitted prior to May 26, 1998. Such a
manufactured home park must comply with the zoning standards in place at the
time the manufactured home park was permitted.
(Ord. 1998-37 § 2 (part), 1998)
18.13.050   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
   A.   Permitted coverage: Fifteen hundred square feet, or seventy percent of
the area of the largest main building on the site, whichever is greater.
   B.   Height limitation: Twenty-four feet.
   C.   Minimum distance standards:
      1.   From front property line: Fifty feet;
      2.   From side and rear property lines:
         a.   Nonanimal uses: Ten feet,
         b.   Animal uses, except corrals: Fifty feet,
         c.   Corrals: Fifty feet, or ten feet if written consents provided by
the owner of the abutting property.
(Ord. 2004-59 § 6, 2004; Ord. 1987-67 § 1 (part), 1987; Ord. 1985-187 § 1
(part), 1985)
18.13.060   Exceptions.
   A.   Nonconforming parcels:
      1.   Parcels of less than one hundred eighty thousand square feet,
recorded prior to the adoption of this chapter (November 5, 1985) which
conformed to Pima County minimum lot size requirements at the date of
recording, shall be treated as if they contained an area of one hundred eighty
thousand square feet.
      2.   A parcel of less than one hundred eighty thousand square feet,
recorded prior to December 1, 1985, which would have conformed to Pima County
minimum lot size requirements but for the adoption of Ordinance 1985-187, shall
be treated as if it contained an area of one hundred eighty thousand square
feet provided that the transaction creating the parcel was in escrow prior to
November 5, 1985, or is evidenced by a binding contract entered into prior to
November 5, 1985.
   B.   Nonconforming uses and buildings: In accordance with Section
18.01.030D (General Provisions).
(Ord. 1985-187 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.13.070   Cluster development option.
   A.   This option shall be permitted only for subdivided residential lots as
allowed in this chapter, and their associated space, in accordance with Section
18.09.040 (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions).
(Ord. 1985-187 § 1 (part), 1985)
   FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
   Prior ordinance history: Ords. 1985-82 and 1985-153. (Back)
Chapter 18.14
GR-1 RURAL RESIDENTIAL ZONE
18.14.010   Purpose.
18.14.020   Permitted uses.
18.14.030   Conditional uses.
18.14.040   Development standards—General.
18.14.045   Development standards—Manufactured home park.
18.14.050   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
18.14.060   Cluster development option.
18.14.010   Purpose.
   A.   Purpose. This zone is intended to encourage orderly growth in rural and
semirural areas as well as to provide opportunities for semirural residential
uses. In addition, this zone is intended to allow commercial development only
where appropriate and necessary to serve the needs of the rural area.
(Ord. 1985-187 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.14.020   Permitted uses.
   A.   Uses permitted:
      1.   Single detached dwelling;
      2.   Duplex dwelling;
      3.   Triplex dwelling;
      4.   Manufactured or mobile home or trailer;
      5.   Guest dwelling: In accordance with Section
18.09.020(G) (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions) [proposed];
      6.   Accessory structures;
      7.   Plant nursery used only for the purpose of propagation and
cultivation and not for retail sales;
      8.   Reserved;
      9.   The raising and grazing of livestock and ratites, provided there is
no more than one animal per ten thousand square feet;
      10.   The raising of hogs, provided:
         a.   There is no more than one hog over six months of age per acre,
and
         b.   All other requirements of Section
18.12.020(A)(9) (IR Institutional Reserve Zone) are met;
      11.   Hog or livestock raising projects, which exceed the permitted
number of animals, sponsored by the 4-H Club, Future Farmers of America or
other similar nonprofit organizations: In accordance with Section
18.12.020(A)(11) (IR Institutional Reserve Zone);
      12.   The raising of poultry or other small animals, provided there are
no more than forty animals per acre;
      13.   Private stable;
      14.   Commercial stable: In accordance with Section
18.13.020(A)(12) (RH Rural Homestead Zone);
      15.   Community stable: In accordance with Section
18.13.020(A)(13) (RH Rural Homestead Zone);
      16.   Farm products stand, provided:
         a.   The stand does not exceed three hundred square feet, and
         b.   All other requirements of Section
18.12.020(A)(15) (IR Institutional Reserve Zone) are met;
      17.   Animal hospital: In accordance with Section
18.13.020(A)(15) (RH Rural Homestead Zone);
      18.   Governmental uses;
      19.   Public park;
      20.   Public school;
      21.   Church, provided there is a minimum forty-foot setback from any
property line;
      22.   Child care center;
      23.   Group foster home: In accordance with Section
18.09.020(E) (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions);
      24.   Health clinic, provided:
         a.   There is a minimum site area of two acres,
         b.   There is a minimum fifty-foot setback from any property line, and
         c.   Access is from a paved public road with "collector"
classification or higher;
      25.   Home occupation;
      26.   Temporary real estate office: In accordance with Section
18.17.020(A)(8) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone).
(Ord. 2025-8 § 4, 2025; Ord. 2017-36 § 11, 2017; Ord. 1999-34 § 4, 1999; Ord.
1997-20 § 4 (part), 1997; Ord. 1994-146 § 3, 1994; Ord. 1986-150 (part), 1986;
Ord. 1986-125 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-187 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.14.030   Conditional uses.
   A.   Procedures: In accordance with
Chapter 18.97 (Conditional Use Permits).
   B.   Uses conditionally permitted:
      1.   Feed store;
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Access be onto a paved public road with "collector"
classification or higher,
         c.   Notification area: Six hundred feet;
      2.   Grocery store or convenience store:
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Maximum floor area: Ten thousand square feet;
      3.   Neighborhood market:
         a.   Type I procedure,
         b.   Maximum floor area: Fifteen thousand square feet;
      4.   Gasoline service station:
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Access be onto a paved public road with "collector"
classification or higher;
      5.   Automobile repair or parts store: In accordance with Section
18.13.030(B)(9) (RH Rural Homestead Zone);
      6.   Retail or repair shop:
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Maximum floor area: Ten thousand square feet;
      7.   Personal services, including hair salon, barber shop, catering
service or interior decorating:
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Maximum floor area: Five thousand square feet;
      8.   Professional and semiprofessional services:
         a.   Type I procedure,
         b.   Maximum floor area: Ten thousand square feet;
      9.   Restaurant:
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Maximum floor area: Ten thousand square feet;
      10.   Tavern: In accordance with Section
18.13.030(B)(13) (RH Rural Homestead Zone);
      11.   Sanatorium or rest home: Type I procedure;
      12.   Cemetery or crematorium: In accordance with Section
18.13.030(B)(22) (RH Rural Homestead Zone);
      13.   Contractor's yard: In accordance with Section
18.13.030(B)(21) (RH Rural Homestead Zone);
      14.   Bank, (except non-chartered financial institutions): In accordance
with Section
18.13.030(B)(24) (RH Rural Homestead Zone);
      15.   Commercial kennel:
         a.   Minimum site area: Five acres,
         b.   All other requirements of Section
18.13.030(B)(28) (RH Rural Homestead Zone);
      16.   Telephone or telegraph distribution installation or electrical
receiving or distribution station (with or without a building): In accordance
with Section
18.12.030(B)(19) (IR Institutional Reserve Zone);
      17.   Outside amplification for livestock or equestrian events: Type I
procedure;
      18.   Artists or artisans workshop or studio:
         a.   Type II procedure,
         b.   Maximum floor area: Five thousand square feet;
      19.   Nursery with restricted retail sales:
         a.   Type II procedure.
         b.   Minimum site area: One hundred forty-four thousand square feet.
         c.   Minimum setback for nursery buildings and the storage of related
materials: 100 feet.
         d.   The principal nursery use is the on-site propagation and
cultivation of plant stock which may include desert plants salvaged from off-
site locations.
         e.   A minimum of sixty percent of the nursery site must be allocated
to the principal use.
         f.   Retail sales shall be primarily of on-site cultivated or off-site
salvaged nursery stock. Sales of nursery products cultivated or produced off-
site shall be a minor portion of retail sales. Retail sales shall not exceed
twenty-five percent of the total sales for the nursery use.
         g.   Retail sales areas, including customer parking areas and display
areas may not exceed one and a half acres.
         h.   Retail sales shall not include power tools and equipment,
including farm equipment.
         i.   Access to the site shall only be from a major street as
designated on the major streets and scenic routes plan. Access from the site to
any abutting street that is not designated a major street is prohibited.
         j.   Landscaping and screening must meet the requirements of
Chapter 18.73. A bufferyard type "D" is required. If possible, the bufferyard
requirement shall be satisfied with plants in cultivation (in-ground) or
natural desert.
         k.   Any outdoor lighting shall be in accordance with the county
outdoor lighting code (Title 15).
         l.   The use of amplifiers or public address systems is prohibited.
         m.   All access lanes and parking areas within the nursery site shall
be of a paved or concrete surface.
         n.   A development plan is required pursuant to
Chapter 18.71.
      20.   Manufactured home park:
         a.   Type I procedure;
      21.   Off-road vehicle facility for personal use only:
         a.   Type I procedure.
         b.   Subject to the standards of
18.07.030(M).
      22.   Animal Rescue and Sanctuary Facility:
         a.   Type I procedure.
         b.   Subject to Section
18.09.020(N).
      23.   Medical marijuana designated caregiver cultivation location:
         a.   Type 1 procedure.
            1)   All conditions and restrictions for medical marijuana
dispensary offsite cultivation location as provided for in Section
18.45.040E5 except that the Type 1 procedure as provided for in Section
18.97.030D2 is applied and the designated caregiver cultivation location area
is limited to two hundred fifty square feet.
            2)   More than one designated caregiver may co-locate cultivation
locations as long as the total cultivation area does not exceed two hundred
fifty square feet.
      24.   Community food pantry:
         a.   Type I procedure.
         b.   All driveways and parking areas shall be maintained with a dust-
proof material which shall be approved by the department of transportation.
      25.   Trail-Oriented Development:
         a.   Type I procedure.
         b.   In accordance with Section 18.07.030(V) (Land use regulations).
      26.   Other conditional uses: All uses which are similar in type, scale,
and intensity to other uses which are specifically listed as requiring either
Type 1, Type 2 or Type 3 conditional use procedures and which are, in the
opinion of the zoning inspector, not otherwise unlawful, injurious to the
general health or welfare or specifically excluded. (Ord. 2020-24, § 3, 2020;
Ord. 2019-26 § 2, 2019: Ord. 2019-5 § 4, 2019; Ord. 2018-33 § 2, 2018; Ord.
2018-29 § 3, 2018; Ord. 2011-2 § 7, 2011; Ord. 2009-59 § 2 (part), 2009; Ord.
2007-81 § 5, 2007; Ord. 2005-105 § 3, 2005; Ord. 2005-85 § 4, 2005; Ord. 1998-
37 § 3 (part), 1998; Ord. 1998-36 § 5, 1998; Ord. 1997-20 § 4 (part), 1997;
Ord. 1986-188 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1986-150 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-187 § 1
(part), 1985)
18.14.040   Development standards—General.
   a.   Minimum site area: Thirty-six thousand square feet.
   b.   Minimum site area per dwelling unit: Thirty-six thousand square feet.
   C.   Minimum setback requirements:
      1.   Front: Thirty feet;
      2.   Side: Ten feet;
      3.   Rear: Forty feet.
   D.   Height limitations:
      1.   Maximum height: Thirty-four feet;
      2.   Maximum stories: Two.
   E.   Minimum distance between main buildings: Twenty feet.
   F.   Maintenance of stock-tight fences: A stock-tight fence and necessary
cattle guards shall be erected along the boundaries of any property on which
livestock is pastured, herded or cared for and which either abuts a public-
maintained road or abuts the boundary of any zone other than IR. This provision
shall not apply to open range as determined under Arizona Revised Statutes.
(Ord. 1987-67 § 1 (part), 1987; Ord. 1985-187 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.14.045   Development standards—Manufactured home park.
   All manufactured home parks shall comply with the following development
requirements:
   A.   Minimum site area: One hundred forty-four thousand square feet.
   B.   Minimum area per dwelling unit: Thirty-six thousand square feet.
   C.   Minimum site width: Sixty feet.
   D.   Minimum site setbacks:
      1.   Front: Thirty feet.
      2.   Side: Fifteen feet.
      3.   Rear: Forty feet.
   E.   Minimum distance between units: Fourteen feet.
   F.   Off-street parking: Per Section 18.75 (Off-street Parking and Loading
Standards.)
   G.   Bufferyard "C" shall be placed around the perimeter of the manufactured
home park unless more intensive bufferyards are required per
Chapter 18.73 (Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening Standards).
   H.   Detached accessory buildings:
      1.   Maximum site coverage: Twenty-five percent of the rear yard setback
area for the site.
      2.   Maximum height: Twenty-four feet.
      3.   Minimum distances required:
         a.   To dwelling units or other buildings: Seven feet.
         b.   To front site setback: Thirty feet for an entryway building used
to control access, and for all other buildings.
         c.   To side site setback line: Ten feet.
         d.   To rear site setback line: Fifteen feet.
   I.   Storage area:
   A manufactured home park may include a detached, accessory open storage area
for the storage of a travel trailer, boat, automobile recreational vehicle,
noncommercial truck, motorcycle, or similar vehicle owned by residents of the
park.
      1.   Only residents of the park may use or have access to the open
storage area.
      2.   All vehicles must be operable. Storage of junk or inoperable
vehicles is not permitted.
      3.   A minimum five-foot wide buffer shall be provided around and
abutting the entire storage area, except at the point of access. The buffer
shall at a minimum include all of the following:
         a.   A minimum six-foot high opaque screen wall or fence.
         b.   A fifteen-gallon canopy tree for each twenty linear feet of
buffer length.
         c.   A five-gallon desert shrub for each twenty linear feet of buffer
length.
         d.   Two one-gallon accents, flowers or vines for each twenty linear
feet of buffer length.
         e.   Decomposed granite or other acceptable groundcover over the
entire buffer surface.
         f.   Plant materials within the buffer shall be selected from the
official regulatory plant list, Section
18.73.030(A) (Landscape Design Manual).
   J.   Paving: All driveways and parking areas shall be surfaced with a
durable asphalt, concrete, stone, tile or brick surface consistent with
pavement design standards and principles and engineered according to soil
conditions and anticipated wheel loads.
   K.   Exception: The requirements of this section do not apply to a
manufactured home park which was permitted prior to May 26, 1998. Such a
manufactured home park must comply with the zoning standards in place at the
time the manufactured home park was permitted.
(Ord. 1998-37 § 3 (part), 1998)
18.14.050   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
   A.   Permitted coverage: Fifteen hundred square feet, or seventy percent of
the area of the largest main building on the site, whichever is greater.
   B.   Height limitations: Twenty-four feet.
   C.   Minimum distance standards:
      1.   From front property line: Thirty feet;
      2.   From side and rear property line:
         a.   Nonanimal uses: Ten feet,
         b.   Animal uses, except corals: Fifty feet,
         c.   Corrals: Fifty feet, or ten feet if written consent is provided
by the owner of the abutting property.
(Ord. 2004-59 § 7, 2004; Ord. 1987-67 § 1 (part), 1987; Ord. 1985-187 § 1
(part), 1985)
18.14.060   Cluster development option.
   A.   This option shall be permitted only for subdivided residential lots as
allowed in this chapter, and their associated open space, in accordance with
Section
18.09.040 (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions).
(Ord. 1985-187 § 1 (part), 1985)
Chapter 18.15
ML MOUNT LEMMON ZONE
18.15.010   Scope.
18.15.020   Permitted uses.
18.15.030   Conditional uses.
18.15.040   Development standards—General.
18.15.050   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
18.15.060   Cluster development option.
18.15.070   Exceptions.
18.15.010   Scope.
   A.   This zone applies to the communities located in the Santa Catalina
Mountains in or surrounded by the Coronado National Forest.
(Ord. 2003-72 § 2 (part), 2003; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.15.020   Permitted uses.
   A.   Uses permitted:
      1.   All uses as permitted in Section
18.09.020(A) (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions).
      2.   Temporary mobile home: For one year during construction of a
residence on the same property.
         a.   For purposes of this section, mobile home refers to a mobile
home, manufactured home and recreational vehicle.
         b.   Upon application this period may be extended for an additional
one hundred eighty days, after the property owner provides the zoning inspector
with a valid building permit for the construction of a residence on the same
property. The zoning inspector shall notify adjoining property owners within
one hundred feet of the subject property. If a written protest to the issuance
of the one hundred eighty-day extension is received within fifteen days of the
date of mailing of notice, the board of adjustment shall hear the case in
accordance with Section
18.93.040. If no written protest is received at the end of fifteen days, the
zoning inspector shall issue the one hundred eighty-day extension.
(Ord. 2003-72 2 (part), 2003; Ord. 1998-36 § 6, 1998; Ord. 1985-82 (part),
1985)
18.15.030   Conditional uses.
   A.   Bed and breakfast establishments in accordance with 18.09.020L.
(Ord 2003-72 § 2 (part), 2003)
18.15.040   Development standards—General.
   A.   Minimum lot area:
      1.   Thirty-six thousand square feet.
      2.   Minimum lot area requirements in Section
18.15.040A1 shall not apply to:
         a.   Lots of record as evidenced by legal description recorded prior
to June 19, 2003; or
         b.   A U.S. Forest Service special use permit or lease in effect prior
to June 19, 2003.
      3.   In the event that Section
18.15.040A2 applies, the minimum lot area shall not be less than the area of
the recorded parcel or area subject to lease or special use permit as of June
19, 2003. Minor adjustments to the recorded lot lines may be permitted by the
zoning inspector provided that there is no reduction in the lot area.
   B.   Minimum area per dwelling unit: The minimum lot area set forth in
Section
18.15.040A.
   C.   Minimum lot width: None.
   D.   Minimum setback requirements:
      1.   Front: Five feet;
      2.   Side: Five feet each;
      3.   Rear: Five feet.
      4.   Setbacks less than five feet may be allowed if a recorded agreement
authorizing the reduced setback is submitted to the zoning inspector. The
agreement shall be signed by the record owner(s) of the property adjacent to
the setback for which the reduction is sought. Reductions from the minimum
setback requirements are subject to the limitations set forth in the applicable
Pima County building codes (Title 15).
   E.   Maximum lot coverage: Fifty percent of the lot or leased area including
all buildings and patio areas.
   F.   Building height limitations:
      1.   Maximum height: Thirty-four feet;
      2.   Maximum stories: Three.
(Ord. 2003-72 § 2 (part), 2003; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.15.050   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
   A.   Permitted coverage: In accordance with Section
18.15.040E.
   B.   Maximum height: Nineteen feet.
   C.   Front, side and rear setback requirements as specified in Title 15 of
the Pima County Code.
(Ord. 2004-59 § 8; Ord. 2003-72 § 2 (part), 2003; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.15.060   Cluster development option.
   A.   This option shall be permitted only for subdivided residential lots as
allowed in this chapter, and their associated open space, in accordance with
Section
18.09.040 (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions).
(Ord. 1985-111 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.15.070   Exceptions.
   A.   The following provisions of
Chapter 18.61 (Hillside Development Overlay Zone) do not apply:
      1.   Sections
18.61.030B (Prohibited development).
      2.   Section
18.61.040 (Protected peaks).
      3.   Section
18.61.051 (Average cross slope calculations).
      4.   Section
18.61.052 (Slope density requirements).
      5.   Section
18.61.053 (Natural areas).
      6.   Section
18.61.054C, E, and H (Grading table, stockpiling fill, mass graded
subdivisions).
      7.   Sections
18.61.054G1, 2, 3a through d, and 5 (Grading table reference, terraced plant
bench standard).
      8.   Section
18.61.055D.1 - 4 (Vegetation retention and revegetation).
      9.   Section
18.61.080B and C (Special use permits for protected peaks and slope density
requirements).
   B.   
Chapter 18.67, Buffer Overlay Zone,
Chapter 18.72, Native Plant Preservation Standards,
Chapter 18.73, Landscaping, Buffering and Screening Standards, and
Chapter 18.75, Off Street Parking Standards do not apply in the ML zone. Plans
for parking and loading, including joint use public and private parking areas,
are required and are subject to approval by the county engineer. The county
engineer shall review such plans for parking and loading to ensure adequate
parking is available either on site or off site so as to protect the public
safety, minimize traffic congestion, permit safe passage of pedestrians to and
from parked vehicles and to expedite the safe passage of moving traffic.
(Ord. 2003-72 § 2 (part), 2003)
Chapter 18.17
SR SUBURBAN RANCH ZONE*
18.17.010   Purpose.
18.17.020   Permitted uses.
18.17.030   Conditional uses.
18.17.040   Development standards—General.
18.17.050   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
18.17.060   Cluster development option.
18.17.010   Purpose.
   A.   Suburban ranch is intended as a low density zone principally for
single-family residences and associated conditional uses on large lots. A wide
range of agricultural and ranch uses are permitted. The large minimum lot size
requirement of this zone insures a considerable reservation of open space.
(Ord. 1986-66 § 1 (part), 1986)
18.17.020   Permitted uses.
   A.   Permitted Uses:
      1.   All uses as permitted in Section
18.09.020A (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions);
      2.   Temporary mobile home: For one year during construction of a
residence on the same property.
         a.   Upon application this period may be extended for an additional
one hundred eighty days, after the property owner provides the zoning inspector
with a valid building permit for the construction of a residence on the same
property. The zoning inspector shall notify adjoining property owners within
one hundred feet of the subject property. If a written protest to the issuance
of the one hundred eighty day extension is received within fifteen days of the
date of mailing of notice, the board of adjustment shall hear the case in
accordance with Section
18.93.040. If no written protests are received at the end of fifteen days, the
zoning inspector shall issue the one hundred eighty day extension.
         b.   The board of adjustment shall hear any requests for additional
time extensions in accordance with Section
18.93.040;
      3.   Commercial agricultural uses such as field crops, truck gardening,
berry or bush crops, tree crops, flower gardening, nurseries, orchards and
aviaries; in accordance with Section
18.21.010A3a (CR-1 Single Residence Zone);
      4.   Farm products stand, provided:
         a.   The stand does not exceed two hundred square feet in area,
         b.   The sale of farm products shall be grown or produced on the
premises,
         c.   There be a minimum of twenty feet to any street line,
         d.   There be a minimum of thirty feet to any other lot line,
         e.   A designated parking area to be provided that is set back a
minimum of twenty feet from any property line,
         f.   A designated driveway, no wider than thirty feet be provided, and
         g.   All driveways and parking areas shall be properly maintained and
approved by the department of transportation and flood control district;
      5.   The raising and marketing of poultry, rabbits and small animals, but
no slaughtering of other than those raised on the premises: In accordance with
Section
18.21.010(A)(3)(a) (CR-1 Single Residence Zone);
      6.   The grazing and raising of livestock and ratites, provided there is
no more than one head of cattle, horse, sheep, goat, or other animal more than
six months of age per ten thousand square feet of lot area;
      7.   The raising of hogs, in accordance with Section
18.14.020(A)(8) (GR-1 Rural Residential);
      8.   Temporary real estate office on any subdivision of record, provided:
         a.   Any real estate broker licensed in the state of Arizona may apply
for a temporary and revocable permit for a real estate office from the zoning
inspector,
         b.   Such use shall be terminated at the end of one year from the date
of the issuance of the permit for said office,
         c.   The zoning inspector may allow additional twelve-month extensions
as long as sales activity is continued and ten percent or more of the lots
remain unsold,
         d.   It is located on a full size lot and meets all zoning
requirements applicable to the lot,
         e.   Sale of lots be only for the subdivision not separated by more
than one street or alley,
         f.   A manufactured or mobile home shall not be permitted for this
use,
         g.   The zoning inspector may require appropriate deed restrictions to
insure that these conditions are complied with,
         h.   On or before the date of expiration of the permit period or any
extension the real estate office shall be removed from the premises,
         i.   This structure may continue to be used for the following
purposes:
            1)   A water company office servicing that subdivision, provided
there is no outside storage of material or equipment,
            2)   An office for a functioning nonprofit homeowners' association,
or
            3)   Community activities center under the homeowners' association.
(Ord. 2017-36 § 12, 2017; Ord. 1994-146 § 4, 1994; Ord. 1991-34 § 1, 1991; Ord.
1986-125 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1986-66 § 1 (part), 1986)
18.17.030   Conditional uses.
   A.   Procedures. In accordance with
Chapter 18.97 (Conditional Use Procedures).
   B.   Uses Conditionally Permitted (Type I Procedure).
      1.   Library:
         a.   Minimum site area: Ten acres,
         b.   Maximum site coverage: Thirty percent,
         c.   All driveways and parking areas shall be properly maintained and
approved by the department of transportation and flood control district,
         d.   Screening: In accordance with
Chapter 18.73 (Landscape, Buffering and Screening Standards), and
         e.   All outdoor lighting shall be in accordance with the county
outdoor lighting code (Title 15);
      2.   Playground or athletic field:
         a.   Minimum setback to any property line: One hundred feet,
         b.   In accordance with Section
18.17.030(B)(1);
      3.   Veterinary hospital:
         a.   Minimum site: Five acres,
         b.   Minimum setback from adjacent rural or residential zone for any
structure: One hundred feet,
         c.   In accordance with Section
18.17.030(B)(1) (subsections b, c, d and e only).
      4.   Off-road vehicle facility for personal use only:
         a.   Subject to the standards of
18.07.030(M).
      5.   Swimming school:
         a.   Minimum setback to any property line from the edge of the
swimming pool: fifty feet,
         b.   No more than twelve students shall be in attendance at any one
time at the swimming school.
      6.   Animal Rescue and Sanctuary Facilities in accordance with Section
18.09.020(N).
      7.    Trail-Oriented Development: In accordance with Section
18.07.030(V) (Land use regulations).
   C.   Uses Conditionally Permitted (Type II Procedure).
      1.   Commercial riding stable or school:
         a.   Minimum site area: Twenty acres,
         b.   Minimum setback for stables, barns, animal sheds or shelters: One
hundred feet,
         c.   All outdoor lighting shall be in accordance with the county
outdoor lighting code (Title 15),
         d.   Minimum setback from adjacent residential zones: Six hundred
feet,
         e.   No more than one horse be kept for each ten thousand square feet
of land area, and
         f.   All driveways and parking areas shall be maintained with a dust-
proof material which will minimize the generation of dust and shall be approved
by the department of transportation and flood control district;
      2.   Club or lodge (private, athletic, sport or recreation):
         a.   Minimum site area: Ten acres,
         b.   Minimum building setback: One hundred feet,
         c.   All outdoor lighting shall be in accordance with the county
outdoor lighting code (Title 15),
         d.   No amplifiers or loud speakers of any kind shall be installed
outside any buildings erected on the site
      3.   Commercial kennel:
         a.   Minimum site area: Ten acres,
         b.   Minimum setback from adjacent rural or residential zone for
commercial kennel facilities: One hundred feet, and
         c.   Dog runs shall be within enclosed buildings;
      4.   Community stable:
         a.   Minimum site area: Ten acres,
         b.   Minimum setback from subdivision boundaries: Five hundred feet,
         c.   No more than one horse be kept for each ten thousand square feet
of land area,
         d.   Minimum setbacks for community stable facilities and fencing: One
hundred feet,
         e.   All driveways and parking areas shall be maintained with a dust-
proof material which will minimize the generation of dust and shall be approved
by the department of transportation and flood control district,
         f.   No amplifiers or loudspeakers of any kind shall be installed
outside any buildings erected on the site,
         g.   All outdoor lighting shall be in accordance with the county
outdoor lighting code (Title 15),
         h.   Such permit may be revoked when the nonprofit community
organization ceases to function or when the community stable is not properly
maintained, and
         i.   Minimum setback from adjacent residential zones: Six hundred
feet;
      5.   Minor resort: In accordance with Section
18.07.030(F) (General Regulations and Exceptions);
      6.   College or governmental structure:
         a.   Minimum site area: Ten acres,
         b.   Maximum site coverage: Thirty percent,
         c.   Minimum setback for playground or athletic field: One hundred
feet,
         d.   All driveways and parking areas shall be maintained with a dust-
proof material which will minimize the generation of dust and shall be approved
by the department of transportation.
         e.   Screening: In accordance with
Chapter 18.73 (Landscape, Buffering and Screening Standards), and
         f.   All outdoor lighting shall be in accordance with the county
outdoor lighting code (Title 15);
      7.   Community service agency:
         a.   Minimum site area: Ten acres,
         b.   Maximum site coverage: Thirty percent,
         c.   Minimum setback for playground or athletic field: One hundred
feet,
         d.   All driveways and parking areas shall be maintained with a dust-
proof material which will minimize the generation of dust and shall be approved
by the department of transportation,
         e.   Screening: In accordance with
Chapter 18.73 (Landscape, Buffering and Screening Standards), and
         f.   All outdoor lighting shall be in accordance with the county
outdoor lighting code (Title 15);
      8.   General aviation airstrip: In accordance with
Chapter 18.57;
      9.   Ultralight airstrip: In accordance with
Chapter 18.57.
      10.   Nursery with restricted retail sales:
         a.   Minimum site area: One hundred forty-four thousand square feet,
         b.   Minimum setback for nursery buildings and the storage of related
materials: 100 feet,
         c.   The principal nursery use is the on-site propagation and
cultivation of plant stock which may include desert plants salvaged from off-
site locations,
         d.   A minimum of sixty percent of the nursery site must be allocated
to the principal use,
         e.   Retail sales shall be primarily of on-site cultivated or off-site
salvaged nursery stock. Sales of nursery products cultivated or produced off-
site shall be a minor portion of retail sales. Retail sales shall not exceed
twenty-five percent of the total sales for the nursery use,
         f.   Retail sales areas, including customer parking areas and display
areas may not exceed one and a half acres,
         g.   Retail sales shall not include power tools and equipment,
including farm equipment,
         h.   Access to the site shall only be from a major street as
designated on the Major Streets & Scenic Routes plan. Access from the site to
any abutting street that is not designated a major street is prohibited,
         i.   Landscaping and screening must meet the requirements of
Chapter 18.73. A bufferyard type "D" is required. If possible, the bufferyard
requirement shall be satisfied with plants in cultivation (in-ground) or
natural desert,
         j.   All outdoor lighting shall be in accordance with the county
outdoor lighting code (Title 15),
         k.   The use of amplifiers or public address systems is prohibited,
         l.   All access lanes and parking areas within the nursery site shall
be of a paved or concrete surface,
         m.   A development plan is required pursuant to
Chapter 18.71.
   D.   Uses Conditionally Permitted (Type III Procedure).
      1.   Museum:
         a.   Minimum site area: Ten acres,
         b.   Maximum site coverage: Thirty percent,
         c.   All driveways and parking areas shall be maintained with a dust-
proof material which will minimize the generation of dust and shall be approved
by the department of transportation,
         d.   Screening: In accordance with
Chapter 18.73 (Landscape, Buffering and Screening Standards),
         e.   All outdoor lighting shall be in accordance with the county
outdoor lighting code (Title 15),
         f.   Minimum natural or revegetated buffer setback: One hundred feet
from any property line, and
         g.   Notification area: Six hundred feet;
      2.   Residential substance abuse diagnostic and treatment facility:
         a.   Minimum site: Ten acres,
         b.   Minimum setback: One hundred feet from any property line,
         c.   Height: One story or eighteen feet,
         d.   Maximum lot coverage by structures: Fifteen percent,
         e.   Maximum number of patient rooms: Seventy-five.
(Ord. 2020-24, § 4, 2020; Ord. 2011-2 § 8, 2011; Ord. 2007-81 § 6, 2007; Ord.
2005-85 § 5, 2005; Ord. 1998-36 § 7, 1998; Ord. 1997-20 § 5, 1997; Ord. 1992-23
(part), 1992; Ord. 1986-215 (part), 1986; Ord. 1986-188 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord.
1986-125 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1986-66 § 1 (part), 1986)
18.17.040   Development standards—General.
   a.   Minimum site area: One hundred forty-four thousand square feet.
   B.   Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: One hundred forty-four thousand
square feet.
   C.   Minimum setback requirements:
      1.   Front: Fifty feet;
      2.   Side: Ten feet each;
      3.   Side, when adjacent to street: Twenty feet;
      4.   Rear: Fifty feet.
   D.   Maximum building height: Thirty-four feet.
   E.   Maximum lot coverage by structures: Thirty percent.
   F.   Minimum distance between main buildings: Twenty feet.
(Ord. 1986-66 § 1 (part), 1986)
18.17.050   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
   A.   Permitted coverage: Fifteen hundred square feet, or seventy percent of
the area of the largest main building on the site, whichever is greater.
   B.   Maximum height: Twenty-four feet.
   C.   Minimum distance standards:
      1.   To front lot line: One hundred feet;
      2.   To side and rear lot lines if building is not used for poultry or
animals:
         a.   Not adjacent to street: Ten feet;
         b.   When adjacent to street: Fifty feet.
      3.   To side and rear lot lines if building is used for poultry or
animals: One hundred feet.
         a.   All horses, cattle, sheep, goats, or other similar animals must
be confined within a stock-tight fence (no material shall be permitted not
ordinarily used for a stock-tight fence) in an area of no less than four
hundred square feet per animal. Such fenced-in area shall be set back ten feet
from the rear where it abuts an IR, RH, GR-1, SR, SR-2, SH, CR-1, CR-2, or MU
zone and forty feet from the rear where it abuts a zone other than IR, RH, GR-
1, SR, SR-2, SH, CR-1, CR-2, or MU, and forty feet from a side property line. A
setback of ten feet shall be permitted on the side yard upon the submittal of a
written recorded agreement to this effect with the adjacent property owner,
but, in no event, shall a corral be closer than fifty feet to any residence or
living quarters in an abutting property.
(Ord. 2004-59 § 9, 2004; Ord. 1993-79 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1986-66 § 1 (part), 1986)
18.17.060   Cluster development option.
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this option is to provide a wider latitude of
design, additional usable open space, and more economical use of the land.
   B.   Refer to Section
18.09.040 (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions) for the general
provisions of the cluster development option.
   C.   Permitted Uses. All uses as permitted in Section
18.09.020(A)(1) (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions).
   D.   Conditional Uses: Community stable, in accordance with Section
18.17.030(C)(4).
(Ord. 1986-66 § 1 (part), 1986)
Chapter 18.18
SR-2 SUBURBAN RANCH ESTATE ZONE
18.18.010   Purpose.
18.18.020   Permitted uses.
18.18.030   Conditional uses.
18.18.040   Development standards—General.
18.18.050   Development standards—Open space requirements.
18.18.060   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
18.18.070   Cluster development option.
18.18.010   Purpose.
   The Suburban Ranch Estate zone is a low density single-family residential
zone in which undisturbed natural areas are preserved. This zone provides a
transition between SR zoned properties and more densely zoned neighborhoods. A
limited range of agricultural and ranch uses is permitted.
(Ord. 1994-147 § 4 (part), 1994)
18.18.020   Permitted uses.
   A.   The following uses are permitted in the SR-2 zone:
      1.   All uses as permitted in Section
18.09.020(A) (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions);
      2.   A temporary trailer, mobile or manufactured home, located on a lot
for no more than one year during the construction of a permanent residence on
the same lot. Applications for extensions of the one-year time period are
considered in accordance with the procedures established in Section
18.17.020(A)(2)(SR Suburban Ranch Zone).
   B.   The following are permitted as accessory uses in addition to those uses
that would customarily be permitted as uses under Section
18.09.020(A)(1):
      1.   Agricultural and horticultural uses, not for retail sale:
         a.   Agricultural uses such as field crops, truck gardening, berry or
bush crops, tree crops, flower gardening, nurseries, orchards or aviaries;
         b.   The raising of poultry, rabbits, and similar small animals, and
the raising and grazing of ratites and livestock, including horses, cattle,
sheep, and goats, but excluding swine, subject to the following requirements:
            (1)   A minimum of ten thousand square feet of lot area is required
for each livestock animal or ratite that is more than six months of age,
            (2)   A minimum of four hundred square feet of fenced area must be
provided for each animal,
            (3)   All animals must be confined in corral or pen areas
surrounded by stock-tight fences in accordance with Section
18.07.030(B);
(Ord. 2017-36 § 13, 2017; Ord. 1996-59 § 2 (part), 1996; Ord. 1994-147 § 4
(part), 1994)
18.18.030   Conditional uses.
   A.   The following are permitted as conditional uses subject to the
procedures set forth in
Chapter 18.97 (Conditional Use Procedures).
   B.   Permitted uses subject to the Type I conditional use procedure:
      1.   Animal Rescue and Sanctuary Facility subject to Section
18.09.020(N).
   C.   Permitted uses subject to the Type II conditional use procedure:
      1.   Club or lodge (private, athletic, sport, or recreational) subject to
all the following requirements:
         a.   Minimum lot area: Ten acres;
         b.   Minimum building setback from all lot lines: One hundred feet;
         c.   All outdoor lighting shall be arranged to eliminate glare towards
streets and adjoining properties, in compliance with the Light Pollution Code,
Title 15 of the county code;
         d.   No amplifiers or loudspeakers of any kind may be installed
outside any structures on the lot;
      2.   Community stable as defined in Section
18.03.020(S)(7), subject to all the following requirements:
         a.   Minimum area for a community stable site: Ten acres;
         b.   Minimum community stable area for each horse that is more than
six months of age: Ten thousand square feet;
         c.   Minimum setback from boundaries of the subdivision in which the
community stable is located: Five hundred feet;
         d.   Minimum setback from any residence on an abutting property: Fifty
feet;
         e.   All driveways and parking areas shall be:
            (1)   Maintained with a dust-proof material which will minimize the
generation of dust, and
            (2)   Approved by the department of transportation and the flood
control district;
         f.   No amplifiers or loudspeakers of any kind may be installed
outside any buildings constructed on the site;
         g.   All outdoor lighting shall be arranged to eliminate glare towards
streets and adjoining properties, in compliance with the Light Pollution Code,
Title 15 of the county code;
         h.   A conditional use permit for a community stable may be revoked
when the stable:
            (1)   Is no longer owned by a nonprofit community organization, or
            (2)   Is maintained in a manner which violates public health
regulations, or which constitutes a public nuisance.
(Ord. 2007-81 § 7, 2007; Ord. 1994-147 § 4 (part), 1994)
18.18.040   Development standards—General.
   A.   Minimum lot area: Seventy-two thousand square feet.
   B.   Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: Seventy-two thousand square feet.
   C.   Minimum lot width: One hundred twenty feet.
   D.   Minimum yard setback requirements:
      1.   Front: Thirty feet;
      2.   Side: Ten feet each;
      3.   Rear: Forty feet;
      4.   Minimum setback requirements or distance between structures may be
modified by the zoning inspector, pursuant to the procedures and standards set
forth in Section
18.07.070.
   E.   Minimum distance between main buildings: Seven feet.
   F.   Building height limitations:
      1.   Maximum building height: Thirty-four feet;
      2.   Maximum stories: Two.
(Ord. 1994-147 § 4 (part), 1994)
18.18.050   Development standards—Open space requirements.
   A.   For unsubdivided lots, individual lots that are not part of a
residential subdivision platted under SR-2 zoning:
      1.   A minimum of thirty percent of the area of a lot, excluding the area
occupied by driveways, utility trenches, or perimeter fencing or walls, shall
be left as natural area, as that term is defined in Section
18.61.030(A)(10).
      2.   The location of the designated natural area on a lot shall be shown
on a site plan submitted at the time of building permit application.
   B.   For residential subdivisions:
      1.   An area which equals a minimum of thirty percent of the combined
area of all residential lots in the subdivision shall be left as natural area,
as that term is defined in Section
18.61.030(A)(10).
      2.   The location of the required amount of natural area, which may be
part of the common areas of the subdivision or part of individual lots, shall
be shown on the final plat and referenced in a plat note.
   C.   Except as permitted by this chapter, no development shall occur in a
designated natural area.
   D.   Exceptions. The zoning inspector may approve a smaller percentage of
natural area than required under this section where the property owner presents
evidence that prior to the establishment of SR-2 zoning on the parcel, an area
greater than the open space area required under this section was already graded
or improved.
(Ord. 1994-147 § 4 (part), 1994)
18.18.060   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
   A.   Permitted coverage: Fifteen hundred square feet, or seventy percent of
the area of the largest main building on the lot, whichever is greater.
   B.   Maximum height: Twenty-four feet.
   C.   Minimum distance standards:
      1.   To front lot line: Sixty feet;
      2.   To side and rear lot lines if building is not used for animals:
         a.   Not adjacent to street: Ten feet;
         b.   Adjacent to street: Forty feet;
      3.   To side and rear lot lines if building is used for poultry and
animals:
         a.   Abutting a rural, residential or specific plan zone: Fifty feet,
and
         b.   Abutting a business or industrial zone: Forty feet;
         c.   All horses, cattle, sheep, goats, or other similar animals must
be confined within a stock-tight fence (no material shall be permitted not
ordinarily used for a stock-tight fence) in an area of no less than four
hundred square feet per animal. Such fenced-in area shall be set back ten feet
from the rear where it abuts an IR, RH, GR-1, SR, SR-2, SH, CR-1, CR-2, or MU
zone and forty feet from the rear where it abuts a zone other than IR, RH, GR-
1, SR, SR-2, SH, CR-1, CR-2, or MU, and forty feet from a side property line. A
setback of ten feet shall be permitted on the side yard upon the submittal of a
written recorded agreement to this effect with the adjacent property owner,
but, in no event, shall a corral be closer than fifty feet to any residence or
living quarters in an abutting property.
      4.   From any residence on an abutting property: Fifty feet.
(Ord. 2004-59 § 9, 2004; Ord. 1996-59 § 2 (part), 1996; Ord. 1994-147 § 4
(part), 1994)
18.18.070   Cluster development option.
   A.   This option is permitted for subdivided residential lots and the
associated natural open space in accordance with Section
18.09.040.
(Ord. 1994-147 § 4 (part), 1994)
Chapter 18.19
SH SUBURBAN HOMESTEAD ZONE
18.19.010   Permitted uses.
18.19.020   Conditional uses.
18.19.030   Development standards—General.
18.19.040   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
18.19.045   Development standards—Manufactured home park.
18.19.050   Cluster development option.
18.19.010   Permitted uses.
   A.   Uses permitted:
      1.   Any use as permitted in Section
18.17.020 (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      2.   Duplex dwelling;
      3.   Trailers or manufactured or mobile homes; provided no more than two
trailers or manufactured or mobile homes be placed on any one lot;
      4.   The employment of persons not residing on the premises.
(Ord. 2017-36 § 14, 2017; Ord. 1994-146 § 5, 1994; Ord. 1986-125 § 1 (part),
1986; Ord. 1986-82 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.19.020   Conditional uses.
   A.   Uses conditionally permitted:
      1.   Any use as conditionally permitted in Section
18.17.030 (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      2.   Cemetery or crematory, provided:
         a.   A site of not less than one acre be provided for a pet cemetery
and not less than five acres for a human cemetery,
         b.   No crematory be erected closer than five hundred feet from any
boundary of the site which adjoins property in a rural or residential zone, and
         c.   A type 2 conditional use permit is obtained in accordance with
Chapter 18.97;
      3.   Manufactured home park:
         a.   Type I procedure;
      4.   Motion picture studio provided:
         a.   The site is not less than forty acres in area,
         b.   No building or structure is within one hundred feet of the
boundary of the site,
         c.   Permanent buildings and structures occupy in total not more than
fifty percent of the area of the required minimum site,
         d.   All outdoor lighting is controlled so as not to reflect on any
adjoining property in residential use, and
         e.   A Type 2 conditional use permit with a hearing notification area
of one thousand feet is obtained in accordance with
Chapter 18.97.
      5.   Animal Rescue and Sanctuary Facility:
         a.   Type I procedure.
         b.   Subject to Section
18.09.020(N).
      6.   Community food pantry:
         a.   Type I procedure.
         b.   All driveways and parking areas shall be maintained with a dust-
proof material which shall be approved by the department of transportation.
(Ord. 2019-5 § 5, 2019; Ord. 2007-81 § 8, 2007; Ord. 1998-37 § 4 (part), 1998;
Ord. 1997-40 § 5, 1997; Ord. 1994-114 § 3, 1994; Ord. 1986-125 § 1 (part),
1986; Ord. 1985-187 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.19.030   Development standards—General.
   A.   Minimum lot area: Thirty-six thousand square feet.
   B.   Minimum area per dwelling unit: Eighteen thousand square feet.
   C.   Minimum lot width: One hundred feet.
   D.   Minimum yard requirements:
      1.   Front: Thirty feet;
      2.   Side: Ten feet each;
      3.   Rear: Forty feet.
   E.   Building height limitations:
      1.   Maximum height: Thirty-four feet;
      2.   Maximum stories: Two.
   F.   Minimum distance between main buildings: Twenty feet.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.19.040   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
   A.   Permitted coverage: Fifteen hundred square feet, or seventy percent of
the area of the largest main building on the lot, whichever is greater.
   B.   Maximum height: Twenty-four feet.
   C.   Minimum distance standards:
      1.   To front lot line: Sixty feet;
      2.   To side and rear lot lines:
         a.   Four feet if building is not used for poultry or animals,
         b.   Fifty feet if building is used for poultry or animals,
         c.   All horses, cattle, sheep, goats, or other similar animals must
be confined within a stock-tight fence (no material shall be permitted not
ordinarily used for a stock-tight fence) in an area of no less than four
hundred square feet per animal. Such fenced-in area shall be set back ten feet
from the rear where it abuts a GR-1, RH, IR, SR, SR-2, SH, CR-1, CR-2, or MU
zone and forty feet from the rear where it abuts a zone other than GR-1, RH,
IR, SR, SR-2, SH, CR-1, CR-2, or MU, and forty feet from a side property line.
A setback of ten feet shall be permitted on the side yard where the adjacent
property owners have a written recorded agreement to this effect, but, in no
event, shall a corral be closer than fifty feet to any residence or living
quarters in an abutting property.
(Ord. 2004-59 § 10, 2004; Ord. 1998-37 § 4 (part), 1998; Ord. 1994-147 § 5,
1994; Ord. 1985-187 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.19.045   Development standards—Manufactured home park.
   All manufactured home parks shall comply with the following development
requirements:
   A.   Minimum site area: Seventy-two thousand square feet.
   B.   Minimum area per dwelling unit: Eighteen thousand square feet.
   C.   Minimum site width: Sixty feet.
   D.   Minimum site setbacks:
      1.   Front: Thirty feet.
      2.   Side: Fifteen feet.
      3.   Rear: Forty feet.
   E.   Minimum distance between units: Fourteen feet.
   F.   Off-street parking: Per Section 18.75 (Off-street Parking and Loading
Standards.)
   G.   Bufferyard "C" shall be placed around the perimeter of the manufactured
home park unless more intensive bufferyards are required per
Chapter 18.73 (Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening Standards).
   H.   Detached accessory buildings:
      1.   Maximum site coverage: Twenty-five percent of the rear yard setback
area for the site.
      2.   Maximum height: Twenty-four feet.
      3.   Minimum distances required:
         a.   To dwelling units or other buildings: Seven feet.
         b.   To front site setback: Thirty feet for an entryway building used
to control access and for all other buildings.
         c.   To side site setback: Ten feet.
         d.   To rear site setback: Fifteen feet.
   I.   Storage area:
   A manufactured home park may include a detached, accessory open storage area
for the storage of a travel trailer, boat, automobile recreational vehicle,
noncommercial truck, motorcycle, or similar vehicle owned by residents of the
park.
      1.   Only residents of the park may use or have access to the open
storage area.
      2.   All vehicles must be operable. Storage of junk or inoperable
vehicles is not permitted.
      3.   A minimum five-foot wide buffer shall be provided around and
abutting the entire storage area, except at the point of access. The buffer
shall at a minimum include all of the following:
         a.   A minimum six-foot high opaque screen wall or fence.
         b.   A fifteen-gallon canopy tree for each twenty linear feet of
buffer length.
         c.   A five-gallon desert shrub for each twenty linear feet of buffer
length.
         d.   Two one-gallon accents, flowers or vines for each twenty linear
feet of buffer length.
         e.   Decomposed granite or other acceptable groundcover over the
entire buffer surface.
         f.   Plant materials within the buffer shall be selected from the
official regulatory plant list, Section
18.73.030(A) (Landscape Design Manual).
   J.   Paving: All driveways and parking areas shall be surfaced with a
durable asphalt, concrete, stone, tile or brick surface consistent with
pavement design standards and principles and engineered according to soil
conditions and anticipated wheel loads.
   K.   Exception: The requirements of this section do not apply to a
manufactured home park which was permitted prior to May 26, 1998. Such a
manufactured home park must comply with the zoning standards in place at the
time the manufactured home park was permitted.
(Ord. 1998-37 § 4 (part), 1998)
18.19.050   Cluster development option.
   A.   This option shall be permitted only for subdivided residential lots as
allowed in this chapter, and their associated open space, in accordance with
Section
18.09.040 (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions).
(Ord. 1985-111 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
Chapter 18.21
CR-1 SINGLE RESIDENCE ZONE
18.21.010   Permitted uses.
18.21.020   Conditional uses.
18.21.030   Development standards—General.
18.21.040   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
18.21.050   Cluster development option.
18.21.060   Lot reduction option.
18.21.010   Permitted uses.
   A.   Uses permitted:
      1.   All uses as permitted in Section
18.09.020(A) (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions);
      2.   Temporary trailer or manufactured home: In accordance with Section
18.17.020(A)(2) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      3.   Agriculture or horticulture:
         a.   Used only for the purpose of propagation and culture and not for
retail sales, including any number of poultry, rabbits, and similar small
animals,
         b.   On lots of not less than thirty-six thousand square feet not more
than one head of cattle, horses, sheep, or goats, rattie, or other similar
animals more than six months of age per ten thousand square feet of lot area,
excluding swine;
      4.   College or governmental structure: In accordance with Section
18.17.030(C)(6) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      5.   Community service agency: In accordance with Section
18.17.030(C)(7) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      6.   Library: In accordance with Section
18.17.030(B)(1) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      7.   Playground or athletic field: In accordance with Section
18.17.030(B)(2) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      8.   Temporary real estate office: In accordance with Section
18.17.020(A)(8) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      9.   Museum: In accordance with Section
18.17.030(D)(2) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone).
(Ord. 2017-36 § 15 (part), 2017; Ord. 1998-36 § 8, 1998; Ord. 1986-125 § 1
(part), 1986; Ord. 1985-153 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.21.020   Conditional uses.
   A.   Uses conditionally permitted:
      1.   Club or lodge: In accordance with Section
18.17.030(C)(2) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      2.   Community stable: In accordance with Section
18.17.030(C)(4) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone).
      3.   Animal Rescue and Sanctuary Facility:
         a.   Type I procedure.
         b.   Subject to Section
18.09.020(N).
(Ord. 2017-36 § 15 (part), 2017; Ord. 2007-81 § 9, 2007; Ord. 1994-146 § 6,
1994; Ord. 1986-125 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.21.030   Development standards—General.
   A.   Minimum lot area: Thirty-six thousand square feet.
   B.   Minimum area per dwelling unit: Thirty-six thousand square feet.
   C.   Minimum lot width: One hundred feet.
   D.   Minimum yard requirements:
      1.   Front: Thirty feet;
      2.   Side: Ten feet each;
      3.   Rear: Forty feet.
   E.   Building height limitations:
      1.   Maximum height: Thirty-four feet;
      2.   Maximum stories: Two.
   F.   Minimum distance between main buildings: Twenty feet, except as
required in Section
18.09.020(D) (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions) for a rear
dwelling.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.21.040   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
   A.   Permitted coverage: Fifteen hundred square feet, or seventy percent of
the area of the largest main building on the lot, whichever is greater.
   B.   Maximum height: Twenty-four feet.
   C.   Minimum distance standards:
      1.   To front lot line: Sixty feet;
      2.   To side and rear lot lines:
         a.   Four feet if building is not used for poultry or animals,
         b.   Fifty feet if building is used for poultry or animals,
         c.   All horses, cattle, sheep, goats, or other similar animals must
be confined within a stock-tight fence (no material shall be permitted not
ordinarily used for a stock-tight fence) in an area of no less than four
hundred square feet per animal. Such fenced-in area shall be set back ten feet
from the rear where it abuts an IR, RH, GR-1, SR, SR-2, SH, CR-1, CR-2, or MU
zone and forty feet from the rear where it abuts a zone other than GR-1, RH,
IR, SR, SR-2, SH, CR-1, CR-2, or MU, and forty feet from a side property line.
A setback of ten feet shall be permitted on the side yard where the adjacent
property owners have a written recorded agreement to this effect, but, in no
event, shall a corral be closer than fifty feet to any residence or living
quarters in an abutting property.
(Ord. 2004-59 § 11, 2004; Ord. 1994-147 § 6, 1994; Ord. 1985-187 § 1 (part),
1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.21.050   Cluster development option.
   A.   This option shall be permitted only for subdivided residential lots as
allowed in this chapter, and their associated open space, in accordance with
Section
18.09.040 (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions).
(Ord. 1985-111 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.21.060   Lot reduction option.
   A.   Refer also to Section
18.09.050 (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions) for the general
provisions of the lot reduction option.
   B.   Minimum lot size requirements for lots in a CR-1 subdivision may be
approved by the board of supervisors for reduction from thirty-six thousand
square feet to twenty-four thousand square feet in accordance with Section
18.09.050; provided, that in total there are no more individual one-family lots
than one lot per gross acre of the area of the subdivision zoned CR-1.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
Chapter 18.23
CR-2 SINGLE RESIDENCE ZONE
18.23.010   Permitted uses.
18.23.020   Conditional uses.
18.23.030   Development standards—General.
18.23.040   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
18.23.050   Cluster development option.
18.23.060   Lot reduction option.
18.23.070   Lot development option.
18.23.010   Permitted uses.
   A.   Uses permitted:
      1.   Any use as permitted in Section
18.21.010 (CR-1 Single Residence Zone), but horses, cattle, sheep, goats, or
ratites shall not be kept on less than one commercial acre and not more than
one such animal for each ten thousand square feet of lot area.
(Ord. 2017-36 § 16 (part), 2017; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.23.020   Conditional uses.
   A.   Uses conditionally permitted:
      1.   Any use as conditionally permitted in Section
18.21.020 (CR-1 Single Residence Zone).
(Ord. 2017-36 § 16 (part), 2017; Ord. 1994-146 § 7, 1994: Ord. 1985-82 (part),
1985)
18.23.030   Development standards—General.
   A.   Minimum lot area: Sixteen thousand square feet.
   B.   Minimum area per dwelling unit: Sixteen thousand square feet.
   C.   Minimum lot width: Eighty feet.
   D.   Minimum yard requirements:
      1.   Front: Thirty feet;
      2.   Side: Ten feet each;
      3.   Rear: Forty feet.
   E.   Building height limitations:
      1.   Maximum height: Thirty-four feet;
      2.   Maximum stories: Two.
   F.   Minimum distance between main buildings: Twenty feet except as required
in Section
18.09.020(D) (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions) for a rear
dwelling.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.23.040   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
   A.   Permitted coverage: Five percent of the lot area.
   B.   Maximum height: Twenty-four feet.
   C.   Minimum distance standards:
      1.   To front lot line: Sixty feet;
      2.   To side and rear lot lines:
         a.   Four feet if building is not used for poultry or animals,
         b.   Fifty feet if building is used for poultry or animals,
         c.   All horses, cattle, sheep, goats, or other similar animals must
be confined within a stock-tight fence (no material shall be permitted not
ordinarily used for a stock-tight fence) in an area of no less than four
hundred square feet per animal. Such fenced-in area shall be set back ten feet
from the rear where it abuts an IR, RH, GR-1, SR, SH, CR-1, CR-2, or MU zone
and forty feet from the rear where it abuts a zone other than GR-1, RH, IR, SR,
SH, CR-1, CR-2, or MU, and forty feet from a side property line. A setback of
ten feet shall be permitted on the side yard where the adjacent property owners
have a written recorded agreement to this effect, but, in no event, shall a
corral be closer than fifty feet to any residence or living quarters in an
abutting property.
(Ord. 2004-59 § 12, 2004; Ord. 1985-187 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part),
1985)
18.23.050   Cluster development option.
   A.   This option shall be permitted only for subdivided residential lots as
allowed in this chapter, and their associated open space, in accordance with
Section
18.09.040 (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions).
(Ord. 1985-111 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.23.060   Lot reduction option.
   A.   Refer to Section
18.09.050 (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions) for the general
provisions of the lot reduction option.
   B.   Minimum lot size requirements for lots in a CR-2 subdivision for
reduction may be approved by the board of supervisors for reduction from
sixteen thousand square feet to twelve thousand square feet in accordance with
Section
18.09.050, provided that in total there are no more individual one-family lots
than two lots per gross acre of the area of the subdivision zoned CR-2.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.23.070   Lot development option.
   A.   Refer to Section
18.09.060 (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions) for the provisions
of the lot development option.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
Chapter 18.25
CR-3 SINGLE RESIDENCE ZONE
18.25.010   Permitted uses.
18.25.020   Conditional uses.
18.25.030   Development standards—General.
18.25.040   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
18.25.050   Cluster development option.
18.25.060   Lot reduction option.
18.25.070   Lot development option.
18.25.010   Permitted uses.
   A.   Uses permitted:
      1.   All uses as permitted in Section
18.09.020(A) (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions);
      2.   Temporary trailer or mobile or manufactured home: In accordance with
Section
18.17.020(A)(2)(SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      3.   Agriculture and horticulture, flower and vegetable gardening,
nursery or greenhouse used only for propagation and culture and not for retail
sales;
      4.   The keeping of small animals, such as rabbits, chickens, but not
cockerels, and not for commercial purposes, provided not more than twenty-four
such animals per eight thousand square feet of lot area are kept;
      5.   College or governmental structure: In accordance with Section
18.17.030(C)(6) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      6.   Community service agency: In accordance with Section
18.17.030(C)(7) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      7.   Library: In accordance with Section
18.17.030(B)(1) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      8.   Playground or athletic field: In accordance with Section
18.17.030(B)(2) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      9.   Community storage garage, provided:
         a.   Said garage is used for the storage of private passenger vehicles
only, and
         b.   The entrances and exits for said garage are on a public alley or
directly abut a public street;
      10.   Temporary real estate office: In accordance with Section
18.17.020(A)(8) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      11.   Transitional use where side of lot abuts a business or industrial
zone: Any residential use permitted in Section
18.27.010 (CR-4 Mixed-dwelling Type Zone), including CR-4 area and yard
requirements, provided such use extends not more than one hundred twenty feet
or two lots, whichever is the lesser, from the zone boundary;
      12.   Museum: In accordance with Section
18.17.030(D)(2)(SR Suburban Ranch Zone).
(Ord. 1998-36 § 9, 1998; Ord. 1986-125 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-153 § 1
(part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.25.020   Conditional uses.
   Reserved.
18.25.030   Development standards—General.
   A.   Minimum lot area: Eight thousand square feet.
   B.   Minimum area per dwelling unit: Eight thousand square feet.
   C.   Minimum lot width: Sixty feet.
   D.   Minimum yard requirements:
      1.   Front: Ten feet; twenty feet to front entry carport/garage.
      2.   Side: Four feet each;
      3.   Rear: Ten feet.
   E.   Building height limitations:
      1.   Maximum height: Thirty-four feet;
      2.   Maximum stories: Two.
   F.   Minimum distance between main buildings: Sixteen feet, except as
required in Section
18.09.020(D) (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions) for a rear
dwelling.
   G.   Buildable area: Not to exceed sixty percent of the lot.
(Ord. 2020-18 § 1, 2020; Ord. 2019-26 § 3, 2019: Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.25.040   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
   A.   Permitted coverage: Five percent of lot area.
   B.   Maximum height: Twelve feet.
   C.   Minimum distance standards:
      1.   To front lot line: Fifty feet;
      2.   To side lot lines: Four feet, twenty feet if used for small animals;
      3.   To rear lot line: Four feet, twenty feet if used for small animals.
(Ord. 2004-59 § 13; Ord. 1988-151 § 1 (part), 1988; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.25.050   Cluster development option.
   A.   This option shall be permitted only for subdivided residential lots as
allowed in this chapter, and their associated open space, in accordance with
Section
18.09.040 (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions).
(Ord. 1985-111 § 1 (part), 1985: Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.25.060   Lot reduction option.
   A.   Refer to Section
18.09.050 (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions) for the general
provisions of the lot reduction option.
   B.   Minimum lot size requirements for lots in a CR-3 subdivision may be
approved by the board of supervisors for reduction from eight thousand square
feet to seven thousand square feet in accordance with Section
18.09.050, provided that in total there are no more individual one-family lots
than 3.4 lots per gross acre of the area of the subdivision zoned CR-3.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.25.070   Lot development option.
   A.   Refer to Section
18.09.060 (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions) for the provisions
of the lot development option.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
Chapter 18.27
CR-4 MIXED-DWELLING TYPE ZONE
18.27.010   Permitted uses.
18.27.020   Conditional uses.
18.27.030   Development standards—General.
18.27.040   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
18.27.050   Reserved.
18.27.060   Lot development option.
18.27.010   Permitted uses.
   A.   Uses permitted:
      1.   All uses are permitted in Section
18.09.020(A) (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions);
      2.   Duplex, condominium, townhouse, apartment, or other multiple
dwelling development;
      3.   Recreational facilities;
      4.   Temporary manufactured or mobile housing: In accordance with Section
18.17.020(A)(2) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      5.   Temporary real estate office: In accordance with Section
18.17.020(A)(8) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      6.   Keeping chickens in accordance with the restrictions in Section
18.09.020(T)(1) (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions).
(Ord. 2017-36 § 3 (part), 2017; Ord. 2005-1 § 2 (part), 2005; Ord. 1998-36 §
10, 1998; Ord. 1986-125 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.27.020   Conditional uses.
   A.   Uses conditionally permitted:
      1.   Assisted living centers in accordance with the Type 1 procedure
subject to the following restrictions and requirements:
         a.   Minimum lot area: Two acres.
         b.   Maximum lot coverage: Sixty percent.
(Ord. 2000-77 § 1 (part), 2000)
18.27.030   Development standards—General.
   A.   Minimum site area: Seven thousand square feet.
   B.   Average area per dwelling unit: Three thousand five hundred square
feet.
   C.   Minimum site setbacks:
      1.   Front: Twenty feet;
      2.   Side: Ten feet each;
      3.   Rear: Ten feet.
   D.   Maximum coverage: Sixty percent of the site.
   E.   With the exception of perimeter site setbacks, zero lot-line siting of
dwelling units on individual lots is permissible, subject to Pima County
building codes (Title 15).
   F.   Building height limitations:
      1.   Maximum height: Thirty-four feet; and
      2.   In all areas restricted by the hillside development zone (
Chapter 18.61, HD Hillside Development Zone), no building shall exceed two
stories;
      3.   In areas designated as historic zones (
Chapter 18.63, Historic Zone) no buildings shall exceed two stories.
   G.   Minimum distance between main multiple dwelling buildings: Subject to
Pima County building codes (Title 15).
(Ord. 2020-18 § 2, 2020; Ord. 2017-37 § 2 (part), 2017: Ord. 2005-1 § 2 (part),
2005; Ord. 2004-7 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1995-42 § 1, 1995; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.27.040   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
   A.   Permitted coverage: Five percent of the individual lot area.
   B.   Height limitation: Twelve feet.
   C.   Minimum setback standards:
      1.   From property lines: In accordance with applicable Pima County
building codes (Title 15);
      2.   Accessory structures used to shelter chickens shall be a minimum of
twenty feet from any dwelling on adjoining properties.
(Ord. 2017-36 § 3 (part), 2017; Ord. 2004-59 § 14; Ord. 1988-151 § 1 (part),
1988; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.27.050   Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-37, § 2 (part), adopted October 17, 2017, repealed
§ 18.27.050, which pertained to small lot subdivision option and derived from
Ord. No. 1985-82, 1985.
18.27.060   Lot development option.
   A.   Refer to Section
18.09.060 (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions) for the provisions
of the lot development option.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
Chapter 18.29
CR-5 MULTIPLE RESIDENCE ZONE
18.29.010   Permitted uses.
18.29.020   Conditional uses.
18.29.030   Development Standards—General.
18.29.040   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
18.29.050   Reserved.
18.29.060   Lot development option.
18.29.010   Permitted uses.
   A.   Any use as permitted in Section
18.27.010 (CR-4 Mixed-Dwelling Type Zone).
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.29.020   Conditional uses.
   A.   Uses conditionally permitted:
      1.   Assisted living centers in accordance with the Type 1 procedure
subject to the following restrictions and requirements:
         a.   Minimum lot area: Two acres.
         b.   Maximum lot coverage: Sixty percent.
(2000-77 § 1 (part), 2000)
18.29.030   Development Standards—General.
   A.   Minimum site area: Six thousand square feet.
   B.   Average area per dwelling unit: Two thousand square feet.
   C.   Minimum site setbacks:
      1.   Front: Twenty feet;
      2.   Side: Ten feet each;
      3.   Rear: Ten feet.
   D.   Maximum coverage: Sixty percent of the site.
   E.   With the exception of perimeter site setbacks, zero lot-line siting of
dwelling units on individual lots is permissible, subject to Pima County
building codes (Title 15).
   F.   Building height limitations:
      1.   Maximum height: Thirty-four feet; and
      2.   In all areas restricted by the hillside development zone (
Chapter 18.61, HD Hillside Development Zone), no building shall exceed two
stories;
      3.   In areas designated as historic zones (
Chapter 18.63, Historic Zone) no buildings shall exceed two stories.
   G.   Minimum distance between main multiple dwelling buildings: Subject to
Pima County building codes (Title 15).
(Ord. 2020-18 § 3, 2020; Ord. 2017-36 § 3 (part), 2017: Ord. 2005-1 § 3, 2005;
Ord. 2004-7 § 2, 2004; Ord. 1995-42 § 2, 1995; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.29.040   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
   A.   Permitted coverage: Five percent of the individual lot area.
   B.   Height limitation: Twelve feet.
   C.   Minimum setback standards:
      1.   From property lines: In accordance with applicable Pima County
building codes (Title 15);
      2.   Accessory structures used to shelter chickens shall be a minimum of
twenty feet from any dwelling on adjoining properties.
(Ord. 2017-36 § 3, 2017; Ord. 2004-59 § 15, 2004; Ord. 1988-151 § 1 (part),
1988; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.29.050   Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-37, § 23 (part), adopted October 17, 2017,
repealed § 18.29.050, which pertained to small lot subdivision option and
derived from Ord. No. 1985-82, 1985.
18.29.060   Lot development option.
   A.   Refer to Section
18.09.060 (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions) for the provisions
of the lot development option.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
Chapter 18.31
TR TRANSITIONAL ZONE
18.31.010   Permitted uses.
18.31.020   Conditional uses.
18.31.030   Development standards—Residential.
18.31.040   Development standards—Nonresidential.
18.31.050   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
18.31.010   Permitted uses.
   A.   Any use as permitted in Sections
18.25.010 (CR-3 Single Residence Zone),
18.27.010 (CR-4 Mixed-Dwelling Type Zone) and
18.29.010 (CR-5 Multiple Residence Zone).
   B.   Additional uses permitted:
      1.   Assisted living centers;
      2.   College or governmental structure;
      3.   Community service agency;
      4.   Library or museum;
      5.   Playground or athletic field;
      6.   Hospital or sanatorium;
      7.   Clinic or dispensary;
      8.   Club;
      9.   Private club or lodge (nonprofit);
      10.   Community storage garage;
      11.   Child care center;
      12.   Professional or semi-professional office;
      13.   Real estate office;
      14.   Insurance adjuster's office, which may include a drive-through
facility;
      15.   Community food pantry;
      16.   Motel or hotel, together with the following accessory uses located
on the premises and having no exterior entrance closer than one hundred feet to
a public street:
         a.   Retail shops,
         b.   Personal services,
         c.   Recreational facilities,
         d.   Restaurant,
         e.   Beverage service.
      17.   Administrative, engineering, scientific research, design or
experimentation facility, and such processing and fabrication as may be
necessary thereto, provided:
         a.   All such operations be completely housed within buildings located
on a site of no less than ten thousand square feet,
         b.   All such buildings shall set back not less than twenty-five feet
from any property line abutting a residential zone,
         c.   A dust-proofed off-street parking area be provided for all such
vehicles incidental to said operation,
         d.   One additional such parking space be provided for each three
persons regularly employed on said premises,
         e.   Buffering and screening is provided in accordance with Chapter
18.73, Landscaping, Buffering and Screening Standards,
         f.   There is no manufacturing or warehousing of goods for sale at
wholesale or retail, and
         g.   Any activity conducted on said premises shall be free of dust,
noxious smoke, fumes, odors or unusual vibrations or noise;
      18.   Bank
      19.   Personal Services
      20.   Nonexpressed residential uses: All residential uses not expressly
permitted in any other residential zone and which are not otherwise unlawful,
injurious to the general health or welfare, or specifically excluded. (Ord.
2019-26 § 4, 2019: Ord. 2019-5 § 6, 2019; Ord. 2000-77 § 1 (part), 2000; Ord.
1998-36 § 11, 1998; Ord. 1985-171, § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-153, § 1 (part),
1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.31.020   Conditional uses.
   Reserved.
18.31.030   Development standards—Residential.
   A.   Minimum site area: Four thousand five hundred square feet.
   B.   Average area per dwelling unit: One thousand square feet.
   C.   Minimum site setback requirements:
      1.   Front: Twenty feet;
      2.   Side: Seven feet;
      3.   Rear: Ten feet.
   D.   Minimum site width: Forty feet.
   E.   With the exception of perimeter site setbacks, zero lot-line siting of
dwelling units on individual lots is permissible, subject to Pima County
building codes (Title 15).
   F.   Building height limitations:
      1.   Maximum height: Thirty-four feet; and
      2.   In areas restricted by the hillside development zone (
Chapter 18.61, HD Hillside Development Zone), no building shall exceed two
stories; and
      3.   In areas designated as historic zones (
Chapter 18.63, Historic Zone) no buildings shall exceed two stories; and
      4.   For all conditionally approved rezonings that do not have an
ordinance for TR, if a third story is requested within the thirty-four-foot
height limit, approval shall be requested at a noticed board of supervisors
public hearing.
   G.   Minimum distance between main multiple dwelling buildings: Subject to
Pima County building codes (Title 15).
(Ord. 2017-37 § 4, 2017: Ord. 2005-1 § 4 (part), 2005; Ord. 1995-42 § 3 (part),
1995; Ord. 1992-60 § 1, 1992; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.31.040   Development standards—Nonresidential.
   A.   Minimum site area: None.
   B.   Minimum site width: Sixty feet.
   C.   Minimum site setback requirements:
      1.   Front: Twenty feet;
      2.   Side: Seven feet each;
      3.   Rear: Twenty-five feet.
   D.   Building height limitations:
      1.   Maximum height: Thirty-four feet; and
      2.   In areas restricted by the hillside development zone (
Chapter 18.61, HD Hillside Development Zone), no building shall exceed two
stories; and
      3.   In areas designated as historic zones (
Chapter 18.63, Historic Zone) no buildings shall exceed two stories; and
      4.   For all conditionally approved rezonings that do not have an
ordinance for TR, if a third story is requested within the thirty-four-foot
height limit, approval shall be requested at a noticed board of supervisors
public hearing.
(Ord. 2005-1 § 4 (part), 2005; Ord. 1995-42 § 3 (part), 1995; Ord. 1985-82
(part), 1985)
18.31.050   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
   A.   Permitted coverage:
      1.   Residential: Five percent of the lot area.
      2.   Non-residential: Forty percent of the minimum rear yard area plus
fifty percent of any additional space in the rear of the principal building.
   B.   Maximum height: Twenty-four feet.
   C.   Minimum distance standards:
      1.   To front lot line: Sixty feet;
      2.   To side lot lines: Four feet;
      3.   To rear lot line:
         a.   Four feet if building is not used for poultry or animals,
         b.   Fifteen feet if building is used for poultry or animals.
(Ord. 2004-59 § 16, 2004; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
Chapter 18.33
CMH-1 COUNTY MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOME—1 ZONE
18.33.010   Purpose.
18.33.020   Permitted uses.
18.33.030   Conditional uses.
18.33.040   Development standards—General.
18.33.050   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
18.33.055   Development standards—Manufactured home park.
18.33.060   Cluster development option.
18.33.010   Purpose.
   A.   The purpose of this zone is to provide for needed and properly planned
mobile home developments with additional usable open space within reasonable
walking distance, by permitting a wider latitude of design, without increasing
existing densities.
(Ord. 1997-1 § 2, 1997; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.33.020   Permitted uses.
   A.   Uses permitted.
      1.   All uses as permitted in Section
18.09.020(A) (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions), except that the
minimum site area for a church is five gross acres.
      2.   Manufactured home park;
      3.   College or governmental structure: In accordance with Section
18.17.030(C)(6) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      4.   Community service agency: In accordance with Section
18.17.030(C)(7) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      5.   Library: In accordance with Section
18.17.030(B)(1) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      6.   Playground or athletic field: In accordance with Section
18.17.030(B)(2) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      7.   Temporary real estate office;
      8.   Museum: In accordance with Section
18.17.030(D)(2) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      9.   Manufactured/mobile home park;
      10.   Keeping chickens in accordance with the restrictions in Section
18.09.020(T)(1) (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions).
(Ord. 2017-36 § 5 (part), 2017; Ord. 1998-37 § 5 (part), 1998; Ord. 1998-36 §
12, 1998; Ord. 1997-1 § 2, 1997; Ord. 1986-125, § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-82
(part), 1985)
18.33.030   Conditional uses.
   A.   Uses conditionally permitted:
      1.   Club or lodge: In accordance with Section
18.17.030(C)(2) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone).
(Ord. 1986-125, § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.33.040   Development standards—General.
   A.   Minimum lot area: Eight thousand square feet.
   B.   Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: Eight thousand square feet.
   C.   Minimum lot width: Sixty feet.
   D.   Minimum yard requirements:
      1.   Front: Twenty feet;
      2.   Sides: Eight feet each;
      3.   Rear: Twenty-five feet.
   E.   Building height limitations:
      1.   Maximum height: Thirty-four feet;
      2.   Maximum stories: Two.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.33.050   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
   A.   Permitted coverage: Five percent of the lot area.
   B.   Maximum height: Twenty-four feet.
   C.   Minimum distance standards:
      1.   To front lot line: Sixty feet;
      2.   To side lot lines: Four feet;
      3.   To rear lot line: Four feet;
      4.   Accessory structures used to shelter chickens shall be a minimum of
twenty feet from any dwelling on adjoining properties.
(Ord. 2017-36 § 5 (part), 2017; Ord. 2004-59 § 17, 2004; Ord. 1985-82 (part),
1985)
18.33.055   Development standards—Manufactured home park.
   All manufactured home parks shall comply with the following development
requirements:
   A.   Minimum site area: Thirty-two thousand square feet.
   B.   Minimum area per dwelling unit: Eight thousand square feet.
   C.   Minimum site width: Sixty feet.
   D.   Minimum site setbacks:
      1.   Front: Twenty feet.
      2.   Side: Eight feet.
      3.   Rear: Twenty-five feet.
   E.   Minimum distance between units: Fourteen feet.
   F.   Off-street parking: Per
Chapter 18.75 (Off-street Parking and Loading Standards).
   G.   Landscaping: Per
Chapter 18.73 (Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening Standards), provided,
however, that the minimum bufferyard along the perimeter of a manufactured home
park is bufferyard "C".
   H.   Detached accessory buildings:
      1.   Maximum site coverage: Twenty-five percent of the rear yard setback
area for the site;
      2.   Maximum height: Twenty-four feet.
      3.   Minimum distances required:
         a.   To dwelling units or other buildings: Seven feet;
         b.   To front lot line: Twenty feet for an entryway building used to
control access, and thirty feet for all other buildings;
         c.   To side lot line: Ten feet;
         d.   To rear lot line: Fifteen feet.
   I.   Storage area. A manufactured home park may include a detached,
accessory open storage area for the storage of a travel trailer, boat,
automobile recreational vehicle, noncommercial truck, motorcycle, or similar
vehicle owned by residents of the park.
      1.   Only residents of the park may use or have access to the open
storage area.
      2.   All vehicles must be operable. Storage of junk or inoperable
vehicles is not permitted.
      3.   A minimum five-foot wide buffer shall be provided around and
abutting the entire storage area, except at the point of access. The buffer
shall at a minimum include all of the following:
         a.   a minimum six-foot high opaque screen wall or fence;
         b.   a fifteen-gallon canopy tree for each twenty linear feet of
buffer length;
         c.   a five-gallon desert shrub for each twenty linear feet of buffer
length, two one-gallon accents, flowers or vines for each twenty linear feet of
buffer length; and
         d.   decomposed granite of other acceptable groundcover over the
entire buffer surface.
      4.   Plant materials within the buffer shall be selected from the
official regulatory plant list, Section
18.73.030.A (Landscape Design Manual).
   J.   Common areas. For parks with more than five dwelling units, a minimum
of five percent of the gross site area, excluding streets and other rights-of-
way shall be devoted to recreational facilities or common functionally usable
open space as defined in Section
18.09.040.B.5.
   K.   Paving. All driveways and parking areas shall be surfaced with a
durable asphalt, concrete, stone, tile or brick surface consistent with
pavement design standards and principles and engineered according to soil
conditions and anticipated wheel loads.
(Ord. 1998-37 § 5 (part), 1998; Ord. 1997-1 § 2, 1997)
18.33.060   Cluster development option.
   A.   This option shall be permitted only for subdivided residential lots as
allowed in this chapter, and their associated open space, in accordance with
Section
18.09.040 (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions).
(Ord. 1985-111 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
Chapter 18.35
CMH-2 COUNTY MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOME—2 ZONE
18.35.010   Purpose.
18.35.020   Permitted uses.
18.35.030   Conditional uses.
18.35.040   Development standards—General.
18.35.050   Development standards—Detached accessory buildings and uses.
18.35.060   Mobile/manufactured home subdivision or manufactured home park
option.
18.35.010   Purpose.
   A.   The purpose of this zone is to:
      1.   Provide for properly planned manufactured home subdivisions or
mobile home parks;
      2.   Provide usable open space within reasonable walking distances; and
      3.   Permit wider latitude of design.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.35.020   Permitted uses.
   A.   Uses permitted:
      1.   All uses as permitted in Section
18.09.020(A) (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions), subject to the
following additional conditions:
         a.   Church: Five gross acres minimum area;
      2.   Manufactured or mobile home or trailer;
      3.   College or governmental structure: In accordance with Section
18.17.030(C)(6) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      4.   Community service agency: In accordance with Section
18.17.030(C)(7) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      5.   Library: In accordance with Section
18.17.030(B)(1) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      6.   Playground or athletic field: In accordance with Section
18.17.030(B)(2) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      7.   Child care center:
         a.   Minimum lot size: Seven thousand square feet, or
         b.   Upon approval of a development plan, if in conjunction with a
mobile home subdivision or park;
      8.   Temporary real estate office: In accordance with Section
18.17.020(A)(8) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      9.   Museum: In accordance with Section
18.17.030(D)(2) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone).
      10.   Manufactured home park;
      11.   Keeping chickens in accordance with the restrictions in Section
18.09.020(T)(1) (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions).
(Ord. 2017-36 § 6 (part), 2017; Ord. 1998-37 § 6 (part), 1998; Ord. 1998-36 §
13, 1998; Ord. 1986-125 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.35.030   Conditional uses.
   A.   Uses conditionally permitted:
      1.   Club or lodge: In accordance with Section
18.17.030(C)(2) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone).
(Ord. 1986-125 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.35.040   Development standards—General.
   A.   Minimum lot area: None.
   B.   Minimum area per dwelling unit: Three thousand five hundred square
feet, exclusive of adjacent rights-of-way.
   C.   Minimum lot width: None.
   D.   Minimum setback requirements:
      1.   Front:
         a.   Twenty-five feet, if access is provided,
         b.   Fifteen feet, if no access is provided.
      2.   Side: Ten feet;
      3.   Rear:
         a.   Twenty-five feet, if access is provided,
         b.   Fifteen feet, if no access is provided.
   E.   Building height limitations:
      1.   Maximum height: Thirty-four feet;
      2.   Maximum stories: Two.
   F.   Minimum distance between units: Fourteen feet.
   G.   Off-street parking: One off-street parking for visitors and guests
shall be required, and a minimum of one off-street parking space per dwelling
unit shall be provided.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.35.050   Development standards—Detached accessory buildings and uses.
   A.   Within a manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision,
storage is permitted by residents of the park or subdivision. Only residents of
the manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision shall have access
to or use of the storage area. The storage area may be used to store the
following:
      1.   Travel trailer;
      2.   Boat;
      3.   Automobile;
      4.   Recreational vehicle;
      5.   Truck;
      6.   Motorcycle.
   B.   All vehicles stored in the storage area must be operable. Storage of
junk or inoperable vehicles is not permitted.
   C.   A maximum area of ten percent of the gross area of the subdivision or
park may be used for a storage area.
   D.   A minimum five-foot-wide landscaped buffer shall be provided around and
abutting the entire storage area, except at the point of access. The buffer
shall consist of the following:
      1.   A minimum six-foot-high opaque screen, wall or fence;
      2.   Plant materials selected from the Official Regulatory Plant List,
Section
18.73.030(A) (Landscape Design Manual). The buffer shall, at a minimum, include
all of the following:
         a.   A fifteen-gallon canopy tree for each twenty linear feet of
buffer length;
         b.   A five-gallon desert shrub for each twenty linear feet of buffer
length;
         c.   Two one-gallon accents, flowers, or vines for each twenty linear
feet of buffer length;
         d.   Decomposed granite or other acceptable groundcover over the
entire buffer surface.
      3.   The buffer shall be maintained by the property owner as specified in
Section
18.73.080 of this code.
   E.   Accessory structures used to shelter chickens shall be a minimum of
twenty feet from any dwelling on adjoining properties.
(Ord. 2017-36 § 6 (part), 2017; Ord. 1998-37 § 6 (part), 1998; Ord. 1994-134 §
1, 1994)
18.35.060   Mobile/manufactured home subdivision or manufactured home park
option.
   A.   Mobile/manufactured home subdivisions only:
      1.   Single mobile home lots may be individually owned if so indicated
upon a recorded subdivision plat setting forth the area of individual
ownership.
      2.   Where common open space is provided, a mandatory homeowner's
association shall accept the responsibilities of maintenance, liability and
control of private streets and common areas.
      3.   All mobile/manufactured home units shall be secured to permanent
masonry or concrete foundations. The wheels and axles shall be removed.
   B.   Development standards:
      1.   Minimum plan site:
         a.   Eighteen thousand square feet, exclusive of adjacent rights-of-
way,
         b.   The use and/or minimum acreage requirements of Sections
18.35.020 and
18.35.030 (except clubs or lodges) greater than seven thousand square feet
shall be in addition to the required minimum site of eighteen thousand square
feet and shall not be included in calculating the number of dwelling units
permitted;
      2.   Maximum density: One dwelling unit per three thousand five hundred
square feet;
      3.   Minimum individual lot area: None;
      4.   Minimum individual lot width: None;
      5.   Minimum yard requirements: None. Zero lot-line siting of units on
individual lots is permissible, subject to applicable county building codes
(Title 15) and Section
18.09.060(D) (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions);
      6.   Maximum building height: Thirty-four feet;
      7.   Minimum distance between dwelling units: Fourteen feet;
      8.   Off-street parking: Two off-street parking spaces per unit shall be
provided;
      9.   Required buffer:
         a.   In lieu of yard setbacks, a permanent buffer of ten feet shall be
required along all subdivision or park boundaries wherein no structures
exceeding in six feet in height shall be placed,
         b.   A six-foot masonry wall, fence, opaque landscape screen or any
combination thereof shall be provided on all subdivision or park boundaries
except at vehicle or pedestrian access locations:
            1)   At vehicle access locations, such screening shall be no more
than thirty-six inches high for a distance of twenty feet on either side of the
opening,
            2)   Appropriate covenants shall be placed in effect to insure the
continued maintenance of such walls, fences and screens;
      10.   Streets:
         a.   Streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
Section
18.69.040 (Subdivision Standards),
         b.   Curbs shall be installed on both sides of all streets, and
sidewalks shall be placed on at least one side of all streets;
      11.   The lots so created shall be subject to all other subdivision
regulations of this code, as applicable,
   C.   Accessory buildings:
      1.   Accessory buildings shall conform to the requirements of Section
18.37.050 (MU Multiple Use Zone);
      2.   Carports and patio covers, open on two sides, shall be considered
accessory buildings, except that:
         a.   They may be attached to the dwelling unit,
         b.   The front yard setback shall be four feet, and
         c.   The side and rear yard setbacks shall be three feet;
      3.   Any side of a carport or patio cover located within fourteen feet of
the main dwelling unit on the adjacent lot shall not be enclosed.
   D.   Landscaping:
      1.   A landscape plan shall be developed for the subdivision or park to
insure unity of design;
      2.   Covenants shall be recorded, providing for the continuation and
maintenance of the landscaping;
      3.   Approval of the landscape plan by the county subdivision review
staff shall be a prerequisite for approval of a development plan or final plat;
      4.   Each mobile/manufactured home lot shall have at least one
functionally placed shade tree, indigenous to, or in harmony with the area, of
fifteen gallons or larger size at the time of planting;
      5.   Tree species shall be selected on the basis of desert hardiness, low
pollen production and low water requirement.
   E.   Common areas and private areas:
      1.   A minimum of five percent of the gross subdivision or park area
shall be devoted to recreational facilities or common, functionally usable,
open space;
      2.   The open space shall constitute no less than an equivalent
proportional amount to the area being developed;
      3.   Interior streets shall not be calculated as part of the open space;
      4.   The maximum permitted coverage by buildings in the required open
space shall not exceed five percent;
      5.   Private outdoor living and service space shall be provided for each
mobile/manufactured home:
         a.   It shall be of a size, walled, or fenced, or planted as necessary
to assure reasonably privacy and shall be partially paved or hard surfaced for
garden furniture,
         b.   It shall be located for privacy, convenience and optimum use;
         c.   The minimum area shall be not less than four hundred square feet;
         d.   A paved or hard surfaced area, included in the outdoor living
area, shall not be less than one hundred square feet.
   F.   Approvals: In accordance with Section
18.09.040(E)(7) (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions).
   G.   Release from liabilities: In accordance with Section
18.09.040(G) (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions).
(Ord. 1998-37 § 6 (part), 1998; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
Chapter 18.37
MU MULTIPLE USE ZONE
18.37.010   Permitted uses.
18.37.020   MU special uses.
18.37.030   Development standards—Residential.
18.37.040   Development standards—Nonresidential.
18.37.050   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
18.37.060   Mobile home subdivision option.
18.37.065   Development standards—Manufactured home park.
18.37.070   Lot development option.
18.37.010   Permitted uses.
   A.   Uses permitted:
      1.   All uses as permitted in Section
18.09.020(A) (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions);
      2.   Duplex dwelling;
      3.   Multiple dwelling;
      4.   Dwelling group;
      5.   Manufactured or mobile home;
      6.   Manufactured home park in accordance with Section
18.37.065;
      7.   Trailer or trailer court;
      8.   Boarding/rooming house;
      9.   Private stable: In accordance with Section
18.21.010(A)(3) (CR-1 Single Residence Zone);
      10.   Motel;
      11.   Private and parochial school in accordance with Section
18.09.020(A)(1)(g);
      12.   College or governmental structure;
      13.   Community service agency;
      14.   Library or museum;
      15.   Playground or athletic field;
      16.   Public or private utility and facilities;
      17.   Hospital or sanatorium, provided:
         a.   The building site of any hospital is not less than four
commercial acres, and
         b.   The buildings of any hospital or sanatorium occupy not more than
thirty percent of the building site and are located at least fifty feet from
any lot line;
      18.   Clinic;
      19.   Club;
      20.   Club (private, athletic, sport or recreation);
      21.   Keeping chickens in accordance with the restrictions in Section
18.09.020(T)(1) (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions);
      22.   Trail-Oriented Development: In accordance with Section
18.07.030(V) (Land use regulations).
(Ord. 2020-24, § 5, 2020; Ord. 2017-36 § 7 (part), 2017; Ord. 2011-2 § 9, 2011;
Ord. 1998-37 § 7 (part), 1998; Ord. 1998-36 § 14, 1998; Ord. 1985-153 § 1
(part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.37.020   MU special uses.
   A.   Any of the uses of Section
18.37.020(B); provided, that:
      1.   The applicant for an MU special use permit submits plans to the
zoning inspector for the proposed use; and
      2.   When the zoning inspector finds that the use will create no
foreseeable flood, traffic or health hazards or nuisances as defined by the
standards adopted by the board of supervisors, the inspector shall then give
notice by mail to all property owners of record within three hundred feet of
the proposed site of the intention to grant an MU special use permit for the
use, and giving any interested person thirty days in which to appeal to the
board of adjustment from the inspector's interpretation of the application of
the standards in connection with the proposed use; and
      3.   If no appeal is received within thirty days from the date the
notices are mailed, the permit shall be issued and become final;
      4.   All uses are subject to Pima County Code Section 18.71 Development
Plan Standards; and
      5.   All uses must comply with Section
18.53.020(A) (CI-2 General Industrial Zone).
   B.   Uses conditionally permitted:
      1.   Cemetery or crematory;
      2.   Storage building or warehouse (except if operated in conjunction
with a permitted manufacturing or home occupation use, in which case no
separate permit shall be required);
      3.   Building material, contractor's or well driller's equipment yard;
      4.   Lumber or commercial feed yard;
      5.   Business: Any use permitted in Section
18.43.030(B) (CB-1 Local Business Zone) and in Section
18.45.030(B) and (C) (CB-2 General Business Zone), except massage
establishment, reducing salon or gymnasium, which is expressly prohibited under
this chapter;
      6.   Manufacture, processing, assembly or repairing which the board of
adjustment determines not objectionable due to odors, smoke, noise, vibration
or similar cause. Permitted are the following:
         a.   The manufacture, assembly and repair of advertising displays,
         b.   The processing, assembly and repair of light sheet-metal
products, miscellaneous small parts, novelties, toys and merchandise from
previously prepared materials such as cellophane, nylon, canvas, cloth, felt,
leather, paper, plastics and similar materials;
      7.   The primary assembly of electrical appliances, radios, phonographs,
and similar assembly businesses;
      8.   The processing of food products except: meat, fish, sauerkraut,
vinegar, yeast, pickles, and the refining of fats and oils, and canneries;
      9.   Beverage bottling plant;
      10.   Laundry, cleaning or dyeing works;
      11.   Auto body or fender repair: If operated in conjunction with a
general garage or gasoline service station business;
      12.   Experimental laboratory;
      13.   Radio or television tower or station;
      14.   Veterinary hospital;
      15.   Kennels;
      16.   Commercial stable: In accordance with Section
18.17.030(C)(1) (SR Suburban Ranch Zone);
      17.   Animal Rescue and Sanctuary Facility for cats, dogs, and small
household pets, provided that no such building or structure is within one
hundred feet of the boundary of an adjacent rural or residentially-zoned
property, unless such building or structure is used as a caretaker's residence.
         a.   Owners and operators of such facilities must meet the eligibility
requirements of Sections
18.09.020(N)(3) and
18.09.020(N)(5).
      18.   Fair, carnival, circus or tent show: For not more than fifteen
days;
      19.   Community food pantry.
(Ord. 2019-5 § 7, 2019; Ord. 2009-59 § 3, 2009; Ord. 2007-81 § 10, 2007; Ord.
1986-125 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.37.030   Development standards—Residential.
   A.   Minimum lot area: Seven thousand square feet.
   B.   Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: Three thousand five hundred square
feet.
   C.   Minimum lot width: Sixty feet.
   D.   Minimum yard requirements:
      1.   Front: Twenty feet, which may be used to meet off-street parking
requirements, or as part of an off-street parking lot;
      2.   Side: Seven feet each;
      3.   Rear: Twenty-five feet.
   E.   Building height limitations:
      1.   Maximum height:
         a.   Thirty-four feet, or,
         b.   Eighty feet for all buildings located outside of the following
Approach-Departure Corridors defined in
Chapter 18.57:
            i.   ADC-1
            ii.   ADC-2 and greater than 2,500 feet from the ADC-2 boundary,
            iii.   ADC-3.
            Provided that the building is setback a minimum distance equal to
double the total building height from any abutting existing permitted single
family detached residence. The distance shall be measured from the closest
point of the existing residence to the proposed building.
   F.   Minimum distance between main buildings: Fourteen feet.
(Ord. 2019-10 (part), 2019; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.37.040   Development standards—Nonresidential.
   A.   Minimum lot area: None.
   B.   Minimum lot width: None.
   C.   Minimum yard requirements:
      1.   Front: Twenty feet, which may be used to meet off-street parking
requirements, or as part of an off-street parking lot;
      2.   Side: Seven feet each;
      3.   Rear: Twenty-five feet.
   D.   Building height limitations:
      1.   Maximum height:
         a.   Thirty-four feet; or,
         b.   Eighty feet for all buildings located outside of the following
Approach-Departure Corridors defined in
Chapter 18.57:
            i.   ADC-1,
            ii.   ADC-2 and greater than 2,500 feet from the ADC-2 boundary,
            iii.   ADC-3.
            Provided that the building is setback a minimum distance equal to
double the total building height from any abutting existing permitted single
family detached residence. The distance shall be measured from the closest
point of the existing residence to the proposed building.
   E.   Minimum distance between main buildings: None.
(Ord. 2019-10 (part), 2019; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.37.050   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
   A.   Permitted coverage:
      1.   Residential: Ten percent of the lot area.
      2.   Non-residential: Forty percent of the required rear yard and any
additional space within the buildable area.
   B.   Maximum building height:
      1.   Within the required rear yard: Twenty-four feet;
      2.   Within the buildable area: Two stories or Thirty-four feet.
   C.   Minimum distance standards:
      1.   To front lot line: Twenty feet;
      2.   To side lot lines: Four feet;
      3.   To rear lot line: Four feet;
      4.   Accessory structures used to shelter chickens shall be a minimum of
twenty feet from any dwelling on adjoining properties.
(Ord. 2017-36 § 7 (part), 2017; Ord. 2004-59 § 18, 2004; Ord. 1985-82 (part),
1985)
18.37.060   Mobile home subdivision option.
   A.   Scope:
      1.   Single residential lots may be individually owned if so indicated
upon a recorded subdivision plat setting forth the area of individual
ownership;
      2.   Dwelling units permitted in a mobile home subdivision may be of one,
or a combination of any one of the three generally defined types:
         a.   Mobile,
         b.   Manufactured, or
         c.   Site-built;
      3.   Where common areas, private roads, or common open spaces are
provided, a mandatory homeowners' association shall accept the responsibilities
of maintenance, liability and control of private streets and common areas.
   B.   Development standards:
      1.   Minimum area: Eighteen thousand square feet, exclusive of adjacent
rights-of-way;
      2.   Maximum density: One dwelling unit per three thousand five hundred
square feet;
      3.   Minimum individual lot area: None;
      4.   Minimum individual lot width: None;
      5.   Minimum yard requirements: None. Zero lot-line siting of units on
individual lots is permissible, subject to applicable county building codes
(Title 15) and Section
18.09.060(D) (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions);
      6.   Maximum building height: Thirty-four feet;
      7.   Minimum distance between detached dwelling units: Fourteen feet;
      8.   Off-street parking: Two off-street parking spaces per unit shall be
provided;
      9.   Required buffers:
         a.   In lieu of yard setbacks, a permanent buffer of ten feet shall be
required along all subdivision boundaries wherein no structures exceeding six
feet in height shall be placed,
         b.   A six-foot masonry wall, fence, opaque landscape screen or any
combination thereof shall be provided on all subdivision boundaries except at
vehicle or pedestrian access locations;
            1)   At vehicle access locations, such screening shall be no more
than thirty-six inches high for a distance of twenty feet on either side of the
opening,
            2)   Appropriate covenants shall be placed in effect to insure the
continued maintenance of such walls, fences and screens;
      10.   Streets and utilities:
         a.   Streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
Section
18.69.040 (Subdivision Standards),
         b.   Curbs shall be installed on both sides of all streets and
sidewalks shall be placed on at least one side of all streets,
         c.   Underground utilities shall be provided;
      11.   Siting:
         a.   All mobile home units shall be secured to permanent masonry or
concrete foundations,
         b.   The wheels and axles shall be removed;
      12.   The lots so created shall be subject to all other subdivision
regulations of this code.
   C.   Accessory buildings:
      1.   Accessory buildings shall conform to the requirements of Section
18.37.050;
      2.   Carports and patio covers, open on two sides, shall be considered
accessory buildings, except that:
         a.   They may be attached to the dwelling unit,
         b.   The front yard setback shall be four feet, and
         c.   The side and rear yard setbacks shall be three feet;
      3.   Any side of a carport or patio cover located within fourteen feet of
the main dwelling unit on the adjacent lot shall not be enclosed.
   D.   Landscaping:
      1.   A landscape plan shall be developed for the subdivision to insure
unity of design;
      2.   Covenants shall be recorded, providing for the continuation and
maintenance of the landscaping;
      3.   Approval of the landscape plan by the county subdivision review
staff shall be a prerequisite for approval of a development plan or final plat;
      4.   Each subdivision lot shall have at least one functionally placed
shade tree, indigenous to, or in harmony with the area, of fifteen gallons or
larger size at the time of planning;
      5.   Tree species shall be desert hardy, low pollen producing and low in
water requirement.
   E.   Common areas and private areas:
      1.   A minimum of five percent of the gross subdivision area shall be
devoted to recreational facilities or common, functionally usable, open space;
      2.   Private outdoor living and service space shall be provided as
necessary to assure reasonable privacy and shall be partially paved or hard
surfaced for garden furniture;
         a.   It shall be located for privacy, convenience and optimum use,
         b.   The minimum area shall be not less than four hundred square feet,
         c.   The paved or hard surfaced area, included in the outdoor living
area, shall not be less than one hundred square feet.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.37.065   Development standards—Manufactured home park.
   All manufactured home parks shall comply with the following development
requirements:
   A.   Minimum site area: Fourteen thousand square feet.
   B.   Minimum area per dwelling unit: Three thousand five hundred square
feet.
   C.   Minimum site width: Sixty feet.
   D.   Minimum site setbacks:
      1.   Front: Twenty feet.
      2.   Side: Seven feet.
      3.   Rear: Ten feet.
   E.   Minimum distance between units: Fourteen feet.
   F.   Off-street parking: Per Section 18.75 (Off-street Parking and Loading
Standards.)
   G.   Minimum bufferyard: "C."
      1.   For sites less than eighteen thousand square feet in area, the five-
foot bufferyard "C" option may be used on all sides of the site and a chain
link fence perimeter structure may be used.
      2.   All other landscaping requirements per
Chapter 18.73 (Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening Standards).
   H.   Detached accessory buildings:
      1.   Maximum site coverage: Twenty-five percent of the rear yard setback
area for the site.
      2.   Maximum height: Twenty-four feet.
      3.   Minimum distances required:
         a.   To dwelling units or other buildings: Seven feet.
         b.   To front site setback: Thirty feet for an entryway building used
to control access, and for all other buildings.
         c.   To side site setback: Seven feet.
         d.   To rear site setback: Ten feet.
   I.   Storage area:
   A manufactured home park may include a detached, accessory open storage area
for the storage of a travel trailer, boat, automobile recreational vehicle,
noncommercial truck, motorcycle, or similar vehicle owned by residents of the
park.
      1.   Only residents of the park may use or have access to the open
storage area.
      2.   All vehicles must be operable. Storage of junk or inoperable
vehicles is not permitted.
      3.   A minimum five-foot wide buffer shall be provided around and
abutting the entire storage area, except at the point of access. The buffer
shall at a minimum include all of the following:
         a.   A minimum six-foot high opaque screen wall or fence.
         b.   A fifteen-gallon canopy tree for each twenty linear feet of
buffer length.
         c.   A five-gallon desert shrub for each twenty linear feet of buffer
length.
         d.   Two one-gallon accents, flowers or vines for each twenty linear
feet of buffer length.
         e.   Decomposed granite or other acceptable groundcover over the
entire buffer surface.
         f.   Plant materials within the buffer shall be selected from the
official regulatory plant list, Section
18.73.030A (Landscape Design Manual).
   J.   Paving: All driveways and parking areas shall be surfaced with a
durable asphalt, concrete, stone, tile or brick surface consistent with
pavement design standards and principles and engineered according to soil
conditions and anticipated wheel loads.
   K.   Exception: The requirements of this section do not apply to a
manufactured home park which was permitted prior to May 26, 1998. Such a
manufactured home park must comply with the zoning standards in place at the
time the manufactured home park was permitted.
(Ord. 1998-37 § 7 (part), 1998)
18.37.070   Lot development option.
   A.   Refer to Section
18.09.060 (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions) for the provisions
of the lot development option.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
Chapter 18.39
GENERAL COMMERCIAL STANDARDS
18.39.010   Purpose.
18.39.020   General Requirements.
18.39.030   Large Scale Retail Establishment.
18.39.040   Regional Shopping Center.
18.39.050   Neighborhood Shopping Center.
18.39.060   Small Shopping Center.
18.39.070   Expansion of Existing Development.
18.39.080   Exceptions.
18.39.010   Purpose.
   A.   Establish a scale of commercial intensity.
   B.   Provide standards to reduce potential adverse effects on adjacent
residential uses.
   C.   Provide a reasonable connection to the adjoining transportation
network.
   D.   Encourage innovative site planning for the region.
   E.   Encourage architecture that is compatible with the surrounding
neighborhood.
   F.   Encourage locating large scale retail establishments in areas planned
as Regional Activity Centers, Community Activity Centers, Multi-functional
Corridors or Urban Industrial.
(Ord. 2001-165 § 1 (part), 2001)
18.39.020   General Requirements.
   A.   General Requirements.
      1.   The development standards of this chapter apply to development
within the TR zone where:
         a.   A development plan for of any of the uses listed in Section
18.39.030 through and including Section
18.39.060 is submitted for land adjacent to a TR zone; and
         b.   The development plan includes proposed development on the TR
zoned land.
(Ord. 2003-32 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 2001-165 § 1 (part), 2001)
18.39.030   Large Scale Retail Establishment.
   A.   Permitted Zones. CB-2, CI-1, and CI-2.
      1.   Exception: CB-1 pursuant to
18.39.080A3.
   B.   Development Scale. A single building that includes retail and related
uses under one roof and in one ownership occupying more than 80,000 square
feet.
   C.   Development Standards.
      1.   Circulation:
         a.   Access shall be provided onto a roadway with not less than four
lanes or through a commercial or industrial subdivision with access to at least
one four-lane roadway or onto a roadway with less than four lanes if Pima
County has plans to construct improvements to provide for four or more lanes
within five years of the date on which the large retail establishment opens for
business.
         b.   A traffic impact analysis must be submitted to development
services. This analysis must be prepared using the Institute of transportation
engineers' trip generation guidelines and must be prepared by a traffic
engineer or similar transportation professional;
         c.   Sidewalk standards:
            1)   Sidewalks along sides of the large scale retail establishment
abutting a public street shall be at least four feet in width.
            2)   Sidewalks along the building facade with the primary customer
entrance shall be at least eight feet in width.
            3)   From the public sidewalk or right-of-way to the principal
customer entrance, an internal walkway shall be at least four feet in width.
      2.   Setbacks:
         a.   For any building with a loading area directly facing the
residential use, 200-foot setback from the property line on the same side as
the loading area contiguous to an existing residential use;
         b.   For any building without an exposed loading area, 100 foot
setback from the property line contiguous to an existing residential use;
         c.   For temporary outdoor sales displays, 250-foot setback from the
property lines contiguous to existing residential use;
         d.   For trash collection or compaction, 100-foot setback from
property line contiguous to an existing residential use;
         e.   For permanent outdoor sales, 100-foot setback from property line
contiguous to an existing residential use;
         f.   For commercial or industrial, zero setback; and
         g.   For illustration of a and b, see the commercial design manual.
      3.   Landscaping and screening:
         a.   When the large scale retail establishment is contiguous to a
residential use, a minimum 60-foot landscape bufferyard, with a minimum of 15
canopy trees per 100 linear feet shall be required. A six-foot decorative
masonry wall, which may be placed at the property line, is required unless
height and location are otherwise agreed upon by a signed agreement with the
contiguous property owners;
         b.   Landscaping within the parking lot shall conform to the
requirements of Section
18.75.040B3;
         c.   The landscaping plan shall include stormwater harvesting features
to be used in the development;
         d.   Permanent outdoor sales displays, trash collection containers and
trash compaction shall be screened from adjacent residential view with opaque
materials;
         e.   The internal walkway from the public sidewalk or right-of-way to
the principal customer entrance shall be parallel to a six-foot minimum total
width landscaped area using the landscaping standards of the parking lot; see
the commercial design manual;
         f.   Outdoor storage shall be screened from view with opaque materials
and be adjacent to the building; and
         g.   Loading area wall: When required under this
Chapter 18.39, a loading area screening wall shall be a fourteen-foot high wall
measured on the dock side and shall include an extended cap detail that is a
minimum of two-brick courses of eight inches each. See the commercial design
manual for illustration.
      4.   Noise: When the large scale retail establishment is adjacent to an
existing residential use, the following noise restrictions shall apply:
         a.   Deliveries, loading, idling, or similar operations shall not
occur between ten p.m. and six a.m. unless the activity occurs within a loading
bay or on the street side of the building; and
         b.   Trash removal or compaction, or similar operations, shall not be
allowed between seven p.m. and seven a.m.
      5.   Noise plan option: To the extent that the proposed development does
not meet the applicable development standards contained in Section
18.39.030(C)(2)(a) (exposed loading area), (C)(3)(g) (loading area wall
height), (C)(4)(a) (hours of deliveries) and (C)(4)(b) (hours of trash removal
and compaction), then a noise plan shall be prepared to evaluate the potential
noise impacts in context with the surrounding ambient noise characteristics and
shall specify how the proposed development will mitigate noise generation. The
required setback for a loading or delivery bay and trash removal or compaction
enclosure is a minimum of one hundred feet.
         a.   Noise level restrictions of the noise plan shall not exceed the
following decibel (dB) limits as measured at any adjoining residential property
line of the property receiving the sound based on the reference sound pressure
and measured with a sound level meter:
            1)   Large scale retail and shopping center adjacent to residential
use: daytime (six a.m. to ten p.m.) sixty-five dB, nighttime (ten p.m. to six
a.m.) forty-five dB.
            2)   Office/commercial use adjacent to residential use: daytime
(six a.m. to ten p.m.) sixty-five dB, nighttime (ten p.m. to six a.m.) forty-
five dB.
            3)   Large scale retail and shopping center adjacent to office/
commercial use: daytime (six. a.m. to ten p.m.) seventy-five dB, nighttime (not
applicable).
         b.   A noise plan must be prepared and implemented to address all
noise including but not limited to the noise resulting from loading and
unloading of trucks, dynamic vehicle braking devices, truck waiting/idling,
motor vehicle sound amplification equipment, warning devices (i.e. backup
alarms), store paging, music systems, mechanical equipment, air-conditioning
units, loading and unloading areas, garbage/dumpster/trash compactor and
forklift operations. The noise plan shall be prepared in compliance with the
commercial design manual.
      6.   Odor: When the large scale retail establishment is adjacent to an
existing residential use, an odor plan shall be required to evaluate the
potential odor emissions from food preparation or chemicals that may be
offensive or that may create a nuisance beyond the property line. The odor plan
shall be prepared in compliance with the commercial design manual.
      7.   Light: All outdoor lighting shall be in accordance with the county
outdoor lighting code (Title 15).
      8.   Commercial Design Manual: The commercial design manual, adopted by
resolution of the board of supervisors, shall provide guidelines and procedures
for implementation of the standards of
Chapter 18.39.
      9.   Submittal requirements for building design: Submittals shall be made
through the subdivision coordination office and shall include the following:
         a.   Illustrations depicting two traverse sections of the entire site
(generally north-south and east-west) that include the height and relationships
of structures and that are drawn at the same scale as the development plan; and
         b.   Identification and description of all design features on the
traverse sections, including those listed in the commercial design manual.
   D.   Additional Standards.
      1.   An economic impact statement shall be submitted with the site plan
which assesses the impact the cost of emergency services, and the ratio of
existing and potential commercial development available to the target
population.
      2.   Food and beverage sales areas shall not in total exceed ten percent
of the general merchandise and retail sales areas of the establishment.
(Ord. 2015-7 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 2011-2 § 10, 2011; Ord. 2003-32 § 1 (part),
2003; Ord. 2001-165 § 1 (part), 2001)
18.39.040   Regional Shopping Center.
   A.   Permitted Zones. CB-2, CI-1, and CI-2.
      1.   Exception: CB-1 if no single building occupies more than eighty
thousand square feet.
   B.   Development Scale. A large scale retail establishment or regional
shopping center in which the aggregate square footage of the buildings on the
site may be greater than one hundred fifty thousand square feet.
   C.   Development Standards. Shall be in accordance with
18.39.030(C).
(Ord. 2001-165 § 1 (part), 2001)
18.39.050   Neighborhood Shopping Center.
   A.   Permitted Zones. RVC, CB-1, CB-2, CI-1, and CI-2.
   B.   Development Scale. No single building occupant within this use shall
exceed eighty thousand square feet. The aggregate square footage of the
buildings on the site shall not exceed one hundred fifty thousand square feet.
   C.   Development Standards.
      1.   The commercial design manual shall be used as a guideline for the
site plan.
      2.   Setbacks: The minimum setback for any building shall be sixty feet
from a property line contiguous to an existing residential use as measured from
the building.
      3.   Loading: If a loading area is perpendicular to, and opens towards,
the property line of a contiguous residential use, the development standard in
18.39.030(C)(5) shall apply.
      4.   Landscaping and screening:
         a.   A minimum thirty-foot landscape bufferyard is required at a
property line contiguous to an existing residential use with a minimum of ten
canopy trees per one hundred linear feet. A six-foot decorative masonry wall,
which may be placed at the property line, is required unless height and
location are otherwise agreed upon by a signed agreement with the contiguous
property owners;
         b.   The development shall provide for stormwater harvesting with the
features shown on the landscape plan submittal; and
         c.   Landscaping within the parking lot shall conform to the
requirements of Section
18.75.040(B)(3).
      5.   Noise, odor and light trespass plans shall be in accordance with
Section
18.39.030(C)(4), (5), (6) and (7).
(Ord. 2015-7 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 2003-32 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 2001-165 § 1
(part), 2001)
18.39.060   Small Shopping Center.
   A.   Permitted Zones. RVC, CB-1, CB-2, CI-1, and CI-2 zones.
   B.   Development Scale. No single building occupant within this use shall
exceed thiry-five thousadn square feet. The aggregate square footage of the
buildings on the site shall not exceed one hundred thousand square feet.
   C.   Development Standards.
      1.   The commercial design manual shall be used as a guideline in the
site planning of this use.
      2.   Setbacks: The minimum setback for any building shall be forty feet
from any residential property line. When single or multiple attached buildings
or occupants total thirty-five thousand square feet, any additional attached
building or building occupant shall be setback an additional twenty feet from
the residential property line. See the commercial design manual.
      3.   Landscaping and screening:
         a.   A minimum fifteen-foot landscape bufferyard is required at a
property line adjacent to an existing or conditionally approved residential or
rural zoning district, with a minimum of six canopy trees per 100 linear feet,
with a maximum six foot decorative masonry wall, which may be placed at the
property line, unless another location is agreed upon by signed agreement with
the contiguous residential property owners;
         b.   The development shall include stormwater harvesting features to
be used in the development;
         c.   Landscaping within the parking lot shall conform to the
requirements of Section
18.75.040B3.; and
      4.   Noise, odor, and light trespass plans shall be in accordance with
Sections
18.39.030C4, 5, 6 and 7.
   D.   Exceptions.
      1.   Uses permitted in commercial zoning districts less than 45,000
square feet of aggregate buildings are exempt from development standards in
18.39.060C2 and 3a. but shall comply with the development standards of the
applicable zoning district and all other applicable development standards. A
commercial use without specific development standards and in a commercial
district not defined as a shopping center that is greater than 45,000 square
feet aggregate building area shall meet the small shopping center development
standards.
(Ord. 2015-7 § 4 (part), 2015; Ord. 2003-32 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 2001-165 § 1
(part), 2001)
18.39.070   Expansion of Existing Development.
   A.   Expansion of Existing Development.
      1.   If a proposed expansion of an existing development will exceed 25
percent of the gross floor or lot area, the property shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter except that:
         a.   The setback requirements contained in this chapter shall not
apply;
         b.   The bufferyard requirements contained in this chapter shall be
complied with whenever space on the property allows and exempted only when it
is demonstrated that it is not possible to meet these standards;
         c.   If the individual proposing the expansion does not control the
area of the approved plans and development, the provisions of this chapter
shall not apply to the approved plans and development if the individual
proposing the expansion provides the following:
            1)   A written statement that the individual proposing the
expansion has requested in writing that any owner or owners of the area of the
approved plans or development comply with the provisions of this chapter and
that such owners have rejected the request;
            2)   A copy of the written request to any owner of the area of the
approved plans and development and a copy of the written response, if any.
      2.   Lack of control over the area of the approved plans and development
may be demonstrated by nonownership, existence of a lease, rental agreement or
other agreement that prevents or significantly inhibits alteration of the
property in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-165 § 1 (part), 2001)
18.39.080   Exceptions.
   A.   Exceptions.
      1.   Design Review Committee (DRC). The DRC may grant exceptions to some
of the large scale retail establishment, regional, neighborhood, and small
shopping center development standards sections of this chapter if the DRC finds
that the alternative plan provides the same or greater mitigation upon the
development's impact upon surrounding properties, traffic and the community as
the current standards. Examples of physical site constraints that may warrant
an exception include the protection of riparian habitat, undisturbed natural
area, prominent stand of vegetation, topographic features or the existence of a
residence that is setback greater than the current setback standard.
         a.   The DRC decision accepting alternative mitigation may be appealed
to the board of supervisors within 20 days of the of the committee's decision
by the applicant or by property owners within 300 feet.
      2.   Self-storage. When a large scale retail establishment or a regional,
neighborhood, or small retail center is combined with a self-storage use, the
self-storage use shall not be calculated as part of the large scale retail
establishment or regional, neighborhood, or small retail center's development
scale standard.
      3.   Board of Supervisors.
         a.   The board of supervisors may allow a large scale retail
establishment or regional retail center in the CB-1 zone after a noticed public
hearing as defined in section
18.91.060B, Public Notice. Consideration should include:
            1)   Whether the subject property meets the development standards
contained in
18.39.030C.
            2)   Whether the development generates traffic which causes
adjacent roadways and intersections to exceed level of service "D."
      4.   Specific Plans. To the extent the development standards contained in
the specific plan conflict with the standards in
Chapter 18.39, the specific plan's development standards shall control.
      5.   Existing Development: The following shall be exempt from the
development standards and provisions in
Chapter 18.39:
         a.   Development for which a building permit has been issued and
substantial construction commenced prior to the effective date of this chapter;
         b.   Development completed in compliance with a building permit; and
         c.   Development plans approved by Pima County or under review on or
before the effective date of this
Chapter 18.39.
(Ord. 2001-165 § 1 (part), 2001)
Chapter 18.40
MR MAJOR RESORT ZONE
18.40.010   Purpose and intent.
18.40.020   Permitted uses.
18.40.030   Development standards.
18.40.040   Development review.
18.40.010   Purpose and intent.
   A.   Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to provide for the development and
operation of major resorts and their associated commercial guest facilities
while protecting adjacent land uses from adverse impacts.
   B.   Intent. This zone is intended to meet the lodging, convention and
recreational needs of short-term visitors to Pima County and is not intended
for the development of residential units for permanent or long-term residential
use.
(Ord. 1985-153 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.40.020   Permitted uses.
   A.   Primary Use. Major resort.
   B.   Accessory Uses.
      1.   Permitted uses:
         a.   Convention facilities, such as conference and banquet rooms;
         b.   Restaurants and drinking establishments;
         c.   Retail and service establishments;
         d.   Swimming pools and spas;
         e.   Game courts such as tennis and racquetball;
         f.   Fitness and exercise centers;
         g.   Equestrian facilities, provided:
            1)   There is not more than one horse for each ten thousand square
feet of resort zone area; and
            2)   No stable or corral is within one hundred feet of any property
line or within three hundred feet of any existing structure on an adjacent
property.
      2.   Other provisions:
         a.   Accessory uses shall be operated primarily for guests of the
major resort;
         b.   No sign identifying an accessory use shall be visible from a
public street; and
         c.   No entrance to an accessory use shall face a public street.
(Ord. 1985-153 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.40.030   Development standards.
   A.   Minimum Site Area. Twenty acres.
   B.   Maximum Density. One guest room per four thousand three hundred fifty-
six square feet of site area.
   C.   Maximum Height. Thirty-four feet.
   D.   Maximum Site Coverage. Thirty-three percent of the site.
   E.   Minimum Site Setbacks. Fifty feet.
   F.   Landscaping, Buffering and Screening. Refer to
Chapter 18.73 (Landscaping Standards).
   G.   Off-Street Parking. Refer to
Chapter 18.75 (Off-Street Parking and Loading Standards).
   H.   Exterior Lighting. In accordance with the Outdoor Lighting Code (Title
15).
   I.   Signs. Refer to Section
18.79.050 O (Signs).
(Ord. 2020-41, § 2, 2020; Ord. 1985-153 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.40.040   Development review.
   A.   Design Review. In accordance with Section
18.99.030 (Design Review Committee). Following the procedures of Section
18.71.060 (RVC Zoning).
   B.   Development Plan. In accordance with
Chapter 18.71 (Development Plan).
(Ord. 1985-153 § 1 (part), 1985)
Chapter 18.41
RVC RURAL VILLAGE CENTER ZONE
18.41.010   Purpose.
18.41.020   Performance standards.
18.41.030   Permitted uses.
18.41.040   Conditional uses.
18.41.050   Development standards—General.
18.41.060   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
18.41.070   Exceptions:
18.41.010   Purpose.
   A.   The purpose of this zone is to provide a mixed-use village center
including commercial and residential uses planned and designed for the
convenience and necessity of a suburban or rural area. To ensure compatibility
and mitigate potential impacts of uses, all uses are conditional uses with the
exception of a single family dwelling.
   B.   The regulations are designed to maintain the suburban character of duly
designated commercial areas located along scenic routes as designated, and to
provide safe ingress and egress to and from the village center.
(Ord 2003-72 3 (part), 2003; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.41.020   Performance standards.
   A.   All Section
18.41.040A uses shall be conducted within a building and adjacent patio areas,
and all products produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the
premises.
   B.   Architectural Review. Each development, building, addition and
alteration within this zone shall be subject to review by the design review
committee with regard to the architectural design in accordance with Section
18.71.060 (Development Plan Standards). Detached dwelling units shall be exempt
from architectural review.
(Ord. 2003-118 § 1, 2003; Ord 2003-72 3 (part), 2003; Ord. 1985-82 (part),
1985)
18.41.030   Permitted uses.
   A.   The following uses, as restricted in Section
18.41.020A:
      1.   A single family dwelling.
      2.   A nonconforming use in existence prior to June 19, 2003, may be
issued a building permit subject to applicable standards. Nonconforming
commercial uses are subject to the review and approval of a development plan in
accordance with Section
18.71.060.
      3.   Temporary mobile home: For one year during construction of a
residence on the same property.
         a.   For purposes of this section, mobile home refers to a mobile
home, manufactured home and recreational vehicle.
         b.   Upon application, this period may be extended for an additional
one hundred eighty days, after the property owner provides the zoning inspector
with a valid building permit for the construction of a residence on the same
property. The zoning inspector shall notify adjoining property owners within
one hundred feet of the subject property. If a written protest to the issuance
of the one hundred eighty-day extension is received within fifteen days of the
date of mailing of notice, the board of adjustment shall hear the case in
accordance with Section
18.93.040. If no written protest is received at the end of fifteen days, the
zoning inspector shall issue the one hundred eighty-day extension.
(Ord 2003-72 3 (part), 2003; Ord. 2001-165 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 1985-82
(part), 1985)
18.41.040   Conditional uses.
   A.   The following uses, as restricted in Section
18.41.020A, are permitted as conditional Type II uses, except as otherwise
specified, subject to the procedures as set forth in
Chapter 18.97 (Conditional Use Procedures):
      1.   Antique store;
      2.   Apparel store;
      3.   Apartments: density not to exceed one dwelling unit per 2,000 square
feet;
      4.   Art needlework or hand-weaving establishment;
      5.   Art store or gallery: The "patio" architectural design concept is
allowed;
      6.   Automobile accessories, parts and supplies: Provided that there is
no installation, repair, rebuilding, modification, or outside storage of parts
on the premises;
      7.   Bakery;
      8.   Bank, (except non-chartered financial institutions);
      9.   Barber;
      10.   Beauty shop;
      11.   Bed and breakfast establishment, subject to the provisions of
Section
18.09.020L, including applicable Type I or Type II conditional use procedures;
      12.   Bicycle shop: No sales or servicing of motor scooters or
motorcycles;
      13.   Book store;
      14.   Cafe or lunchroom:
         a.   Provided no dancing is allowed and no alcoholic beverages sold
except beer and wine,
         b.   The "patio" architectural design concept is allowed;
      15.   Catering service;
      16.   Child care center, including outdoor playground;
      17.   Church;
      18.   Cigar store;
      19.   Cleaning, dyeing, laundry collection agency;
      20.   Clinic;
      21.   Confectionery store;
      22.   Custom dressmaking, millinery, hemstitching or pleating;
      23.   Custom weaving or mending;
      24.   Dealers in coins, stamps or similar collector's items;
      25.   Delicatessen store: The "patio" architectural design concept is
allowed;
      26.   Dental laboratory;
      27.   Department store;
      28.   Drug store;
      29.   Dry goods or notions store;
      30.   Electrical appliance store;
      31.   Florist shop;
      32.   Furniture store;
      33.   Gift, curio or novelty shop;
      34.   Grocery market;
      35.   Hardware store;
      36.   Hotel;
      37.   House furnishing store;
      38.   Ice cream store: The "patio" architectural design concept is
allowed;
      39.   Ice station: For packaged sales only;
      40.   Interior decorator;
      41.   Jewelry and watch repair;
      42.   Jewelry store;
      43.   Leather goods store;
      44.   Library: Rental or public;
      45.   Liquor store: For package sales only, including wine tasting;
      46.   Meat, fish or poultry market;
      47.   Medical laboratory;
      48.   Museum;
      49.   Music, phonograph, radio or television store;
      50.   Nursery: For the sale of flowers, plants, trees or shrubs, within a
building or enclosure;
      51.   Office: Business, professional or semi-professional;
      52.   Photograph studio;
      53.   Photographic supply store;
      54.   Picture frame shop: The "patio" architectural design concept is
allowed;
      55.   Postal station;
      56.   Restaurant or tea room; including a cocktail lounge or bar in
connection therewith:
         a.   Subject to the provisions of Section
18.43.030F (CB-1 Local Business Zone); and
         b.   But not to include drive-in restaurants.
      57.   Safe depository;
      58.   Self-service carwash; provided, that neither steam cleaning nor
engine repair shall be allowed on the premises;
      59.   Self-service laundry or coin-operated dry cleaning establishment,
provided:
         a.   An attendant be on the premises during all open hours,
         b.   For not more than twenty-four dry cleaning units, and
         c.   Occupying not more than three thousand square feet of floor area
for such use;
      60.   Shoe repair shop;
      61.   Shoe store;
      62.   Shopping center, neighborhood: In accordance with
Chapter 18.39;
      63.   Shopping center, small: In accordance with
Chapter 18.39;
      64.   Sporting goods, hunting and fishing equipment store;
      65.   Tailor shop;
      66.   Toy or hobby shop;
      67.   Trust company;
      68.   Variety store.
   B.   A conditional use permit is not required for a property that is
approved for a rezoning to the RVC zone with a list of use limitations.
(Ord. 2005-105 § 4, 2005; Ord. 2003-72 § 3 (part) 2003)
18.41.050   Development standards—General.
   A.   Area:
      1.   The maximum area of each RVC zone shall not exceed twenty acres
excluding public rights of way.
      2.   This area shall be apportioned as evenly as consideration of
streets, topography and other unique factors affecting individual sites will
permit.
   B.   Site coverage: All buildings within a site as shown on the development
plan shall not cover more than seventy-five percent of the area of such site.
   C.   Minimum setback requirements:
      1.   No building shall be erected within twenty feet of a front property
line or twenty feet of the pavement edge of a scenic route as designated on the
Major Streets and Scenic Routes Plan when the property is adjacent to the ML
zone;
      2.   Nonresidential buildings shall not be constructed within:
         a.   Twenty-five feet of any district zoned TR, nor
         b.   Twenty-five feet of any residential district.
         c.   The rear and side setbacks may be reduced to ten feet in
accordance with the standards of
18.07.070D when the building adjoins a residential property and if the design
review committee approves the reduction as not creating adverse impacts on
surrounding residential properties. Notice shall be given to the design review
committee hearing to all property owners within one hundred feet.
      3.   Residential buildings at a minimum shall be set back ten feet from
the side and rear property lines.
      4.   There are no other setback requirements except as may be required in
Title 15 of the Pima County Code.
   D.   Building height limitations:
      1.   Maximum height: Thirty-four feet;
      2.   A building adjacent to both a scenic route and a property in the ML
zone is not required to perform a viewshed analysis as noted in
Chapter 18.77 (Roadway Frontage Standards).
   E.   Screening: Bufferyards, landscaping, and screening are required except
on property adjacent to the ML zone. Refer to Section 18.73.100 (Landscaping
Standards). Bufferyards, landscaping and screening for development adjacent to
the ML zone may be required as part of any conditional use permit.
   F.   Parking and loading requirements: Plans for parking and loading,
including joint use public and private parking areas, are required and are
subject to approval by the county engineer. The county engineer shall review
such plans for parking and loading to ensure adequate parking is available
either on site or off site so as to protect the public safety, minimize traffic
congestion, permit safe passage of pedestrians to and from parked vehicles and
to expedite the safe passage of moving traffic.
   G.   Signs: Refer to
Chapter 18.79 (Sign Standards).
   H.   Design Manual. In addition to the provision of this section, all
development adjacent to the ML zone shall conform to the Mount Lemmon Design
Standards Manual.
(Ord. 2004-9 § 1, 2004; Ord. 2003-72 § 3 (part) 2003; Ord. 1996-58 § 4 (part),
1996; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.41.060   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
   Reserved.
18.41.070   Exceptions:
   A.   The following provisions of
Chapter 18.61 (Hillside Development Overlay Zone) do not apply to RVC zoned
sites adjacent to the ML zone:
      1.   Sections
18.61.030B (Prohibited development).
      2.   Section
18.61.040 (Protected peaks).
      3.   Section
18.61.051 (Average cross slope calculations).
      4.   Section
18.61.052 (Slope density requirements).
      5.   Section
18.61.053 (Natural areas).
      6.   Section
18.61.054C, E, and H (Grading table, stockpiling fill, mass graded
subdivisions).
      7.   Section
18.61.055D.1 - 4 (Vegetation retention and revegetation).
      8.   Section
18.61.056 (Color requirements).
      9.   Section
18.61.080B and C (Special use permits for protected peaks and slope density
requirements).
   B.   
Chapter 18.67, Buffer Overlay Zone,
Chapter 18.72, Native Plant Preservation Standards,
Chapter 18.73, Landscaping, Buffering and Screening Standards, and
Chapter 18.75, Off Street Parking Standards do not apply to RVC zoned sites
adjacent to the ML zone.
(Ord. 2003-72 § 3 (part) 2003)
Chapter 18.43
CB-1 LOCAL BUSINESS ZONE
18.43.010   Purpose.
18.43.020   Performance standards.
18.43.030   Permitted uses.
18.43.040   Conditional uses.
18.43.050   Development standards—Nonresidential.
18.43.060   Development standards—Residential.
18.43.070   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
18.43.080   Lot development option.
18.43.010   Purpose.
   Reserved.
18.43.020   Performance standards.
   A.   All Section
18.43.030B uses shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building
unless otherwise specified and any use operating as a store, shop, or business
shall be a retail establishment. All products produced on the premises shall be
sold at retail on the premises.
   B.   Performance standards:
      1.   The following performance standards shall apply to the uses of
Section
18.43.030I:
         a.   Noise or vibration: No noise or vibration shall be permitted
which is discernible beyond the lot line to the human sense of feeling for
three minutes or more duration in any one hour of the day between the hours of
seven a.m. and seven p.m., or of thirty seconds or more duration in any one
hour during the hours of seven p.m. to seven a.m.;
         b.   Smoke: No emission of smoke from any source shall be permitted;
         c.   Odors: No emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter shall
be permitted in such quantities as to be offensive in such a manner as to
create a nuisance or hazard beyond the property lines;
         d.   Fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, gases and other forms of air
pollution: No emission shall be permitted which can cause any damage to health,
to animals or vegetation, or other forms of property, which can cause any
excessive soiling; and
         e.   Liquids and solid waste: No wastes shall be discharged in the
streets, drainageways or any property which is dangerous to the public health
and safety, and no waste shall be discharged in the public sewage system which
endangers the normal operation of the public sewage system.
      2.   Certifications: The zoning inspector shall not issue a permit for
any use until the applicant has provided the required number of plans showing
the certificates of the department of transportation and flood control
district, traffic engineer, and health department director certifying that said
use complies with all laws and regulations under their jurisdiction, and the
zoning inspector has determined that the use complies with this chapter.
(Ord. 1989-96 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.43.030   Permitted uses.
   A.   Any use as permitted in Section
18.31.010 (TR Transitional Zone).
   B.   The following uses, as restricted in Section
18.43.020(A):
      1.   Air conditioning, heating, and ventilating fixtures or supplies:
Retail, all within enclosed building;
      2.   Antique store;
      3.   Apparel store;
      4.   Art needlework or hand-weaving establishment;
      5.   Art gallery or store: The "patio" architectural design concept is
allowed;
      6.   Art or drawing supply store;
      7.   Auto mechanical repair: In conjunction with service stations on
state or federal highways only, provided there is no outside storage of autos
or parts, and no body or fender work, painting or upholstering;
      8.   Auto parking lot (within or without a building): Subject to the
provisions of Section
18.75.030(B) (Off-Street Parking and Loading Standards);
      9.   Automobile accessories, parts and supplies; provided, that there is
no installation, repair, rebuilding, modification, or outside storage of parts
on the premises;
      10.   Automobile lubrication and oil change operation;
      11.   Automobile tires, batteries and accessories installation in
conjunction with a department store;
      12.   Bakery;
      13.   Bank, (except non-chartered financial institutions);
      14.   Barbershop;
      15.   Beauty shop;
      16.   Bicycle shop: No sales or servicing of motor scooters or
motorcycles;
      17.   Billiard or poolhall;
      18.   Book, newspapers, or magazine store;
      19.   Burglar alarm service;
      20.   Cafe or lunchroom:
         a.   Provided no dancing is allowed and no alcoholic beverages sold
except beer and wine,
         b.   The "patio" architectural design concept is allowed;
      21.   Catering service;
      22.   Church;
      23.   Cigar store;
      24.   Cleaning, dyeing, laundry collection agency;
      25.   Confectionery store;
      26.   Custom dressmaking, millinery, hemstitching or pleating;
      27.   Custom weaving or mending;
      28.   Dealer in coins, stamps or similar collector's items;
      29.   Delicatessen;
      30.   Dental laboratory;
      31.   Department store;
      32.   Drugstore;
      33.   Dry goods or notions store;
      34.   Electrical appliance store;
      35.   Feed store: No sales or storage of hay;
      36.   Fix-it shop, small appliances;
      37.   Florist shop;
      38.   Frozen food locker;
      39.   Fruit or vegetable store;
      40.   Furniture store;
      41.   Garage: For public storage only;
      42.   Gasoline service station (incidental repairing only); subject to:
         a.   The provisions of Section
18.07.030(A) (General Regulations and Exceptions),
         b.   No gasoline or other flammables be stored above ground level,
except in legally accepted containers of fifty-five gallons or less and no more
than three such containers, and
         c.   The dispensing of gasoline or any flammables into a fuel tank or
into a legally accepted container, using manually controlled nozzles only,
shall be under the supervision of a competent attendant at all times;
      43.   Gift, curio, or novelty shop;
      44.   Grocery store;
      45.   Hardware store;
      46.   Hotel;
      47.   House furnishing store;
      48.   Ice cream store: The "patio" architectural design concept is
allowed;
      49.   Ice station: For packaged sales only;
      50.   Interior decorator;
      51.   Jewelry and watch repair;
      52.   Jewelry store;
      53.   Large scale retail establishment: In accordance with Section
18.39.080(A)(3);
      54.   Laundromat, laundry and dry cleaning units, provided the same
occupy no more than three thousand square feet of gross floor area;
      55.   Leather goods store;
      56.   Library: Rental or public;
      57.   Liquor store: For packaged sales only, including wine tasting;
      58.   Locksmith;
      59.   Marijuana Dispensary - Subject to Type III Conditional Use;
         a.   The total maximum floor area of a marijuana dispensary shall not
exceed 10,000 square feet.
         b.   A marijuana dispensary shall be located in a permanent building
and shall not be located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or modular unit,
mobile home, recreational vehicle, or other motor vehicle.
         c.   The permitted hours of operation of a marijuana dispensary are
from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
         d.   A marijuana dispensary shall have an interior customer waiting
area equal to a minimum of 25% of the sales floor area. For purposes of this
section, sales floor area is defined as any area open to customers for the sale
of products. This does not include waiting areas, areas for production and
storing of products, or offices.
         e.   A marijuana dispensary shall not have outdoor seating areas.
         f.   A marijuana dispensary may deliver medical marijuana to the
extent permitted by Arizona law. A marijuana dispensary may deliver
recreational marijuana once rules permitting and regulating delivery are
approved by the Arizona Department of Health Services and become effective, and
shall comply with Arizona law and all lawful, applicable health regulations,
including those promulgated by the Arizona Department of Health Services and
any other authorized regulatory agency.
         g.   A marijuana dispensary shall be setback a minimum of 2,000 feet
from any other marijuana dispensaries, measured in a straight and direct
horizontal line between the two closest exterior or applicable interior suite
walls of marijuana dispensaries.
         h.   A marijuana dispensary shall be setback a minimum of 500 feet
from a K-12 public, private, or charter school or a licensed childcare center,
measured in a straight and direct horizontal line from the closest exterior or
applicable interior suite wall of the marijuana dispensary to the closest
property line of a school or childcare center. Exception: For the purposes of
this section, the following uses are not considered schools and are exempt from
the setback requirement: 1) school administrative offices not located on or
contiguous with a school site; or, 2) athletic fields or playgrounds used for
school functions that are not contiguous with a school site.
         i.   A marijuana dispensary shall be setback a minimum of 500 feet
from a public park or library and a minimum of 500 feet from a licensed
residential substance abuse diagnostic and treatment facility or other licensed
residential drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility, measured in a straight and
direct horizontal line from the closest exterior or applicable interior suite
wall of the marijuana dispensary to the closest property line of a library,
public park, licensed residential substance abuse diagnostic and treatment
facility, or other licensed drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility.
         j.   The expansion of an existing marijuana dispensary shall be
setback a minimum of 500 feet from a K-12 public, private, or charter school,
measured in a straight and direct horizontal line from the closest exterior or
applicable interior suite wall of the marijuana dispensary to the closest
property line of a school.
         k.   A marijuana dispensary shall comply with all lawful, applicable
health regulations, including those promulgated by the Arizona Department of
Health Services and any other authorized regulatory agency.
         l.   Odor Mitigation
            (1)   Odor mitigation devices and techniques shall be incorporated
in all marijuana facilities to ensure that odors are mitigated. Odor mitigation
may be accomplished through an exhaust air filtration system with odor control
that prevents internal odors from being emitted externally or through any other
best practices adequate for odor mitigation as determined acceptable by the
Chief Zoning Inspector, in the Chief Zoning Inspector's sole discretion.
            (2)   An odor mitigation plan shall be submitted with the initial
permit application. When a modification is made to a marijuana facility, or the
facility operation, that has the potential to impact the nature or degree of
odor, or affects the control of odor.
            (3)   An odor mitigation plan shall include all of the following
information:
               (a)   Facility floor plan (showing areas of potential odor
emissions);
               (b)   List of odor emitting activities to take place on site;
               (c)   Phases (timing, length, etc.) of odor-emitting activities;
               (d)   Odor mitigation practices based on industry-specific best
control technologies and best management practices; and
               (e)   Administrative controls, engineering controls (system
design plan, operational processes, maintenance plan).
            (4)   The marijuana facility shall not begin operations until the
odor mitigation plan, or any required update to the odor mitigation plan is
approved by Chief Zoning Inspector.
      60.   Marijuana Dispensary Offsite Cultivation Location - Subject to Type
III Conditional Use;
         a.   The total maximum floor area of a marijuana dispensary offsite
cultivation location shall not exceed 10,000 square feet.
         b.   A marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location shall be
located in a permanent building and shall not be located in a trailer, cargo
container, mobile or modular unit, mobile home, recreational vehicle, or other
motor vehicle.
         c.   A marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location shall be
setback a minimum of 2,000 feet from any other marijuana dispensaries or
marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation locations measured in a straight and
direct horizontal line between the two closest exterior or applicable interior
suite walls of marijuana dispensaries' cultivation locations.
         d.   A marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location shall be
setback a minimum of 1,000 feet from a K-12 public, private or charter school,
or a licensed childcare center measured in a straight and direct horizontal
line from the closest exterior or applicable interior suite wall of the
marijuana offsite cultivation location to the nearest property line of a school
or childcare center. Exception: For the purposes of this section, the following
uses are not considered schools and are exempt from the setback requirement:
school administrative offices not located on or contiguous with a school site,
or athletic fields or playgrounds used for school functions that are not
contiguous with a school site.
         e.   A marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location shall be
setback a minimum of 1,000 feet from a public park or library and a minimum of
1,000 feet from a licensed residential substance abuse diagnostic and treatment
facility or other licensed residential drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility
measured in a straight and direct horizontal line from the closest exterior or
applicable interior suite wall of the marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation
location to the closest property line of a library, public park, licensed
residential substance abuse diagnostic and treatment facility, or other
licensed drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility.
         f.   A marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location shall comply
with all lawful, applicable health regulations, including those promulgated by
the Arizona Department of Health Services and any other authorized regulatory
agency.
         g.   A marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location shall provide
only wholesale products to other marijuana dispensaries, marijuana dispensary
offsite manufacturing locations, or marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation
locations.
         h.   Odor Mitigation
            (1)   Odor mitigation devices and techniques shall be incorporated
in all marijuana facilities to ensure that odors are mitigated. Odor mitigation
may be accomplished through an exhaust air filtration system with odor control
that prevents internal odors from being emitted externally or through any other
best practices adequate for odor mitigation as determined acceptable by the
Chief Zoning Inspector, in the Chief Zoning Inspector's sole discretion.
            (2)   An odor mitigation plan shall be submitted demonstrating
compliance with odor control requirements. When a modification is made to a
marijuana facility, or the facility operation, that has the potential to impact
the nature or degree of odor, or affects the control of odor, the marijuana
facility owner must update its odor mitigation plan within 30 days of facility
modification.
            (3)   An odor mitigation plan shall include all of the following
information:
               (a)   Facility floor plan (showing areas of potential odor
emissions);
               (b)   List of odor emitting activities to take place on site;
               (c)   Phases (timing, length, etc.) of odor-emitting activities;
               (d)   Odor mitigation practices based on industry-specific best
control technologies and best management practices; and
               (e)   Administrative controls, engineering controls (system
design plan, operational processes, maintenance plan).
            (4)   The marijuana facility shall not begin operations until the
odor mitigation plan, or any required update to the odor mitigation plan, is
approved by Chief Zoning Inspector.
      61.   Marijuana Product Manufacturing Location - Subject to Type III
Conditional Use;
         a.   A marijuana product manufacturing location shall comply with all
lawful, applicable health regulations, including those promulgated by the
Arizona Department of Health Services and any other authorized regulatory
agency.
         b.   A marijuana product manufacturing location shall provide only
wholesale products to other marijuana dispensaries, marijuana product
manufacturing locations, or marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation locations.
         c.   Odor Mitigation
            (1)   Odor mitigation devices and techniques shall be incorporated
in all marijuana facilities to ensure that odors are mitigated. Odor mitigation
may be accomplished through an exhaust air filtration system with odor control
that prevents internal odors from being emitted externally or through any other
best practices adequate for odor mitigation as determined acceptable by the
Chief Zoning Inspector, in the Chief Zoning Inspector's sole discretion.
            (2)   An odor mitigation plan shall be submitted with the initial
permit application. When a modification is made to a marijuana facility, or the
facility operation, that has the potential to impact the nature or degree of
odor, or affects the control of odor, the marijuana facility owner must update
its odor mitigation plan within 30 days of facility modification.
            (3)   An odor mitigation plan shall include all of the following
information:
               (a)   Facility floor plan (showing areas of potential odor
emissions);
               (b)   List of odor emitting activities to take place on site;
               (c)   Phases (timing, length, etc.) of odor-emitting activities;
               (d)   Odor mitigation practices based on industry-specific best
control technologies and best management practices; and
               (e)   Administrative controls, engineering controls (system
design plan, operational processes, maintenance plan).
               (4)   The marijuana facility shall not begin operations until
the odor mitigation plan, or any required update to the odor mitigation plan,
is approved by Chief Zoning Inspector.
      62.   Meat, fish or dressed poultry market, provided no live poultry are
kept on premises;
      63.   Mechanical and electronic games arcade: In districts containing a
minimum of four commercial acres and at least seven thousand eight hundred
square feet of net leasable area;
      64.   Medical laboratory;
      65.    Messenger office;
      66.   Music, phonograph or radio store;
      67.   Office: Business, professional or semi- professional;
      68.   Orthopedic appliances (trusses, wheelchairs, etc.);
      69.    Pet grooming;
      70.    Pet shop;
      71.    Photograph studio;
      72.    Photographic supply store;
      73.   Plant nursery: All landscape contractor's supplies, fertilizers and
chemicals shall be stored indoors;
      74.    Plumbing fixtures and supplies: Retail, all within enclosed
building;
      75.   Postal station;
      76.   Pressing establishment;
      77.    Reducing salon: Not to include massage establishments;
      78.    Refreshment stand;
      79.   Religious rescue mission or temporary revival;
      80.    Safe depository;
      81.    School: Barber or beauty culture;
      82.   School: Business;
      83.   School: Dancing;
      84.   School: Dramatic;
      85.   School: Handicraft, painting or sculpture;
      86.   School: Music;
      87.   School, private, parochial and charter.
      88.   Self-service car wash; provided, that neither steam cleaning nor
engine repair shall be allowed on the premises;
      89.   Shoe repair shop;
      90.   Shoe store;
      91.   Shopping center, neighborhood: In accordance with
Chapter 18.39;
      92.   Shopping center, small: In accordance with
Chapter 18.39;
      93.   Shopping center, regional: In accordance with Sections
18.39.080(A)(1) and
18.39.080A3;
      94.   Sidewalk sales associated with existing retail business, lasting no
longer than three days, in any thirty-day period;
      95.   Sporting goods, hunting and fishing equipment store;
      96.   Station: Bus or stage;
      97.   Stationery store;
      98.   Tailor shop;
      99.   Taxicab stand;
      100.   Taxidermist;
      101.   Theater: Except drive-in or outdoor theater;
      102.   Tire store: Including incidental repair of shocks and brakes with
no outdoor storage or display;
      103.   Tool or cutlery sharpening;
      104.   Toy or hobby shop;
      105.   Trailer rental: In conjunction with service stations on state or
federal highways only, provided there is no outside storage of autos or parts,
and no body or fender work, painting or upholstering;
      106.   Trust company;
      107.   Upholstery shop and supplies;
      108.   Variety store;
      109.   Veterinary outpatient clinic for small animals:
         a.   No boarding allowed;
         b.   Overnight confinement for clinic treatment permitted for a
maximum of five animals;
      110.   Wallpaper sales, paper hanging;
      111.   Water, telephone or telegraph distribution installation or
electrical receiving or distribution station (within or without a building):
Subject to the provisions of Section
18.07.040(B) (General Regulations and Exceptions);
      112.   Wholesale of oil: In conjunction with service stations on state or
federal highways only, provided there is no outside storage of autos or parts,
and no body or fender work, painting or upholstering;
      113.   Other similar enterprise or business of the same class, which in
the opinion of the board of supervisors, as evidenced by resolution of record,
is not more obnoxious or detrimental to the welfare of the particular community
than the enterprises or businesses above enumerated.
   C.   Retail sale, rental or display of:
      1.   Clothing or accessories;
      2.   Household appliances;
      3.   Office equipment and business machines: Repair work permitted, but
limited to no more than twenty-five percent of gross floor area of the
business;
      4.   Oxygen equipment for medical outpatient uses;
      5.   Painting equipment or supplies, including varnish;
      6.   Secondhand goods: Personal, furniture, books, magazines; no
secondhand auto parts;
      7.   Venetian blinds;
      8.   Window shades.
   D.   Accessory building or use (not involving open storage): When located on
the same building site.
   E.   Trailer or manufactured or mobile home for caretaker: In conjunction
with a permitted use in a rural area, as determined by the zoning inspector.
   F.   Administrative, engineering, scientific research and development,
design or experimentation facility, and such treatment, processing, and
fabrication as may be necessary thereto; provided, that:
      1.   All such operations be completely housed within buildings located on
a site of not less than ten thousand square feet;
      2.   All such buildings shall be set back not less than twenty-five feet
from any property line abutting a residential zone;
      3.   A dust-proofed, off-street parking area be provided for all vehicles
incidental to said operation;
      4.   One additional parking space be provided for each three persons
regularly employed on said premises;
      5.   Buffering and screening provided in accordance with
Chapter 18.73, Landscaping, Buffering and Screening Standards;
      6.   Any activity conducted on said premises shall be free of dust,
noxious smoke, fumes, odors or unusual vibrations or noise discernible beyond
the property line;
      7.   The architecture of all structures shall be compatible with the
surrounding area; and
      8.   All open areas of an improved lot shall be maintained in a dust-free
condition by landscaping with trees, shrubs, suitable ground cover, undisturbed
natural growth, or by covering with material that will provide an all-weather
surface.
   G.   Restaurant, including a restaurant liquor license:
      1.   Upon condition that the cocktail lounge or bar has no separate
outside entrance; and
      2.   A dance floor with a maximum of two hundred square feet is permitted
for customer dancing only.
   H.   Trailer or manufactured or mobile unit for temporary office use: Only
during the construction of a permanent building not to exceed a period of
twelve months.
   I.   The following uses, as restricted in Section
18.43.020(B):
      1.   Blueprinting;
      2.   Photostating;
      3.   Engraving, photo-engraving;
      4.   Duplicating, mimeographing, multigraphing;
      5.   Addressographing;
      6.   Newspaper office;
      7.   Printing or publishing.
   J.   Self-storage facility:
      1.   All access to the facility shall be from arterial or collector
streets;
      2.   All access lanes within the facility shall be of a paved or concrete
surface;
      3.   There shall be a landscaped bufferyard with a minimum six-foot or
maximum eight-foot decorative masonry wall;
      4.   There shall be no razor or barbed wire;
      5.   The facility shall be single story with a maximum height of nineteen
feet;
      6.   The facility's exterior facade visible from adjoining residential
properties or the public street shall use earth tone colors and masonry or
stucco materials or materials with a similar appearance;
      7.   Lighting shall be in accordance with the county outdoor lighting
code (Title 15);
      8.   All walls, doors, and roofs visible from adjoining property shall
have surfaces that have less than eighty percent reflectivity;
      9.   The maximum size of an individual storage unit shall not exceed two
hundred square feet;
      10.   All storage shall be in an enclosed building.
(Ord. 2022-16 § 3, 2022; Ord. 2017-3 § 2, 2017; Ord. 2011-2 § 11, 2011; Ord.
2009-59 § 4, 2009; Ord. 2005-105 § 5, 2005; Ord. 2001-165 § 1 (part), 2001;
Ord. 1998-36 § 15, 1998; Ord. 1997-28 § 2, 1997; Ord. 1993-55 § 1, 1993; Ord.
1989-96 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 1988-150 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1985-171 § 1 (part),
1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.43.040   Conditional uses.
   A.   Procedures. In accordance with
Chapter 18.97 (Conditional Use Procedures).
   B.   Uses Conditionally Permitted (Type 1 Procedure).
      1.   Feed store: Including sales and outdoor storage of hay. The
applicable fire district shall receive written notice of the conditional use
application and of all public hearings.
(Ord. 1993-78 § 1, 1993)
18.43.050   Development standards—Nonresidential.
   A.   Minimum Site Area: None.
   B.   Minimum site width: None.
   C.   Minimum site setback requirements:
      1.   Front: Twenty feet, which may be used to meet off-street parking
requirements, or as part of an off-street parking lot;
      2.   Side: None;
      3.   Rear: Twenty-five feet, except as provided in Section
18.07.050(G) (General Regulations and Exceptions) for a corner lot, which may
be used to meet off-street parking requirements, or as a part of an off-street
parking lot.
   D.   Maximum building height: Thirty-nine feet.
   E.   Minimum distance between main buildings: None.
(Ord. 2005-1 § 5 (part), 2005; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.43.060   Development standards—Residential.
   A.   Minimum site area: Four thousand five hundred square feet.
   B.   Average area per dwelling unit: One thousand square feet.
   C.   Minimum site setback requirements:
      1.   Front: Twenty feet;
      2.   Side: Seven feet;
      3.   Rear: Ten feet.
   D.   Minimum site width: Forty feet.
   E.   With the exception of perimeter site setbacks, zero lot-line siting of
dwelling units on individual lots is permissible, subject to Pima County
building codes (Title 15).
   F.   Building height limitations:
      1.   Maximum height: Thirty-four feet; and
      2.   In areas restricted by the Hillside Development Zone (
Chapter 18.61, HD Hillside Development Zone), no building shall exceed two
stories;
      3.   In areas designated as historic zones (
Chapter 18.63, Historic Zone) no buildings shall exceed two stories; and
      4.   For all conditionally approved rezonings that do not have an
ordinance for CB-1, if a third story is requested within the thirty-four-foot
height limit for residential use, approval shall be requested at a noticed
board of supervisors public hearing.
   G.   Minimum distance between main multiple dwelling buildings: Subject to
Pima County building codes (Title 15).
(Ord. 2017-37 § 5, 2017: Ord. 2005-1 § 5 (part), 2005; Ord. 1995-42 § 4, 1995;
Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.43.070   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
   A.   Permitted coverage:
      1.   Residential: Five percent of the lot area.
      2.   Non-residential: Forty percent of the required rear yard and any
additional space within the buildable area.
   B.   Maximum building height:
      1.   Within the required rear yard: Twenty-four feet;
      2.   Within the buildable area: Two stories or thirty-four feet.
   C.   Minimum distance standards:
      1.   To front lot line: Twenty feet;
      2.   To side lot lines: None;
      3.   To rear lot line: Four feet.
(Ord. 2004-59 § 20, 2004; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.43.080   Lot development option.
   A.   Refer to Section
18.09.060 (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions) for the provisions
of the lot development option.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
Chapter 18.45
CB-2 GENERAL BUSINESS ZONE
18.45.010   Purpose.
18.45.020   Performance standards.
18.45.030   Permitted uses.
18.45.040   Conditional uses.
18.45.050   Development standards—Nonresidential.
18.45.060   Development standards—Residential.
18.45.070   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
18.45.080   Lot development option.
18.45.010   Purpose.
   Reserved.
18.45.020   Performance standards.
   Reserved.
18.45.030   Permitted uses.
   A.   Any uses as permitted in Section
18.31.010 (TR Transitional Zone) and in Section
18.43.030 (CB-1 Local Business Zone).
   B.   Additional uses:
      1.   Ambulance service;
      2.   Amusement or recreational enterprise (within a completely enclosed
structure), including:
         a.   Billiard or pool hall,
         b.   Bowling alley,
         c.   Dance hall,
         d.   Gymnasium,
         e.   Penny arcade or shooting gallery,
         f.   Skating rink,
         g.   Sports arena;
      3.   Amusement or recreational enterprise (outdoor), including:
         a.   Archery range,
         b.   Miniature golf or practice driving or putting range,
         c.   Games of skill or science,
         d.   Pony riding ring without stables,
         e.   Swimming pool or commercial beach or bathhouse,
         f.   Tennis court;
         g.   Off-road vehicle facility.
      4.   Auction: Public (no animals);
      5.   Auditorium or assembly hall;
      6.   Auto rental garage;
      7.   Auto repair: No body or fender work, painting or upholstery, except
as incidental;
      8.   Bar;
      9.   Baths: Turkish, Swedish, steam, etc.;
      10.   Battery service: No body or fender work, painting or upholstery,
except as incidental;
      11.   Billboard: In accordance with
Chapter 18.79 (Sign Standards);
      12.   Blueprinting;
      13.   Boats: Storage or rental;
      14.   Cemetery or crematory; provided, that:
         a.   Cemeteries for human remains shall be located on a site of not
less than five acres,
         b.   For animal pets not less than one acre, and
         c.   No crematory be erected closer than five hundred feet from any
boundary of said site adjoining property in a rural or residential zone;
      15.   Cleaning establishment: If:
         a.   Only two clothes cleaning units of not more than forty pounds
rated capacity, and
         b.   Using cleaning fluid which is noninflammable and nonexplosive at
temperatures below 138.5°F;
      16.   Club: Athletic, private, social, sport or recreational (operated
for profit), except sports stadium or field;
      17.   Cocktail lounge;
      18.   Drive-in theater, provided:
         a.   The face of any projection screen be not visible from any county
road or any street or route shown on the major streets and scenic routes plan
which is within five hundred feet of said screen,
         b.   The site for said theater shall consist of not less than ten
acres of land and be a single tract or parcel not intersected or divided by any
street, alley or by property belonging to any other owners,
         c.   Any lights used to illuminate the theater site shall be in
accordance with the county outdoor lighting code (Title 15),
         d.   The plans for said theater shall have been approved by the county
traffic engineer, indicating no undue traffic congestion due to the location
and arrangement of the theater, including the car rows and aisles and
minimizing the danger of fire and panic,
         e.   Acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be provided along the
public thoroughfare adjacent to the entrance and exit of the theater,
         f.   Parking space or storage lanes for patrons awaiting admission
shall be provided on the site in an amount equal to not less than thirty
percent of the vehicular capacity of the theater,
         g.   Vehicular circulation shall be so designed and constructed as to
permit only one-way traffic within the boundaries of the tract on which the
theater is located,
         h.   Emergency exists shall be provided,
         i.   Sanitary facilities and the method of food handling shall be
approved by the county health department,
         j.   Definite plans for shrubbery and landscaping shall be presented
to the zoning inspector and made a part of the permit,
         k.   The nearest point of the theater property, including driveways
and parking areas, shall be at least seven hundred fifty feet from the boundary
of a district zoned for residential use, and
         l.   All other conditions of the zone are fully observed;
      19.   Fair, carnival or tent show for not longer than fifteen days: If
sufficient parking area for patrons is provided;
      20.   Fortune telling;
      21.   Garage: Public (for commercial use);
      22.   Gymnasium;
      23.   Handyman shop;
      24.   Industrial or trade school: Teaching operations or occupation
permitted in this zone;
      25.   Jukebox or coin machine business: Limited to assembly, repair and
servicing;
      26.   Kennels, provided no such building or structure be within one
hundred feet of any boundary of said site abutting property in a rural or
residential zone;
      27.   Large scale retail establishment: In accordance with
Chapter 18.39;
      28.   Laundry: Steam or wet-wash;
      29.   Lawn mower repairing;
      30.   Lumberyard, retail, provided no machinery is used other than a
ripsaw and cut-off saw;
      31.   Massage establishment;
      32.   Mattress shop: For repairing only (no renovating);
      33.   Mechanical or steam washracks: No body or fender work, painting or
upholstery, except as incidental;
      34.   Merchandise broker's display: Wholesale;
      35.   Motorcycle or motor scooter repair or storage;
      36.   Mortuary or embalming establishment or school;
      37.   Nightclub;
      38.   Oxygen equipment: Rental or distribution;
      39.   Pawn shop;
      40.   Photostating;
      41.   Piano repairing;
      42.   Reserved;
      43.   Record recording studio or sound score production: No manufacturing
or treatment of records;
      44.   Reducing salon;
      45.   Refrigeration installation or service;
      46.   School or college: Operated as a commercial enterprise, for dancing
or musical instruction;
      47.   Sign painting shop;
      48.   Shopping center, regional: In accordance with
Chapter 18.39;
      49.   Shopping center, small: In accordance with
Chapter 18.39;
      50.   Taverns;
      51.   Trade show, industrial show or exhibition;
      52.   Truck-trailer repair: In conjunction with a truck stop, on a state
or federal highway only;
      53.   Upholstery shop;
      54.   Veterinary hospital, provided no such building or structure be
within one hundred feet of any boundary of said site abutting property in a
rural or residential zone.
      55.   Medical marijuana designated caregiver cultivation location subject
to the following conditions:
         a.   All conditions and restrictions for medical marijuana dispensary
offsite cultivation locations as provided for in Section 18.45.040E5 except
that the designated caregiver cultivation location cultivation area is limited
to two hundred fifty square feet.
         b.   More than one designated caregiver may co-locate cultivation
locations as long as the total cultivation area does not exceed two hundred
fifty square feet.
   C.   Sale, rental or display of:
      1.   Airplanes or parts;
      2.   Automobiles;
      3.   Barber's supplies or beauty shop equipment;
      4.   Butcher's supplies;
      5.   Clothing or accessories: Retail or wholesale;
      6.   Contractor's equipment or supplies;
      7.   Drugs or medical, dental or veterinary supplies: Retail or
wholesale;
      8.   Farm equipment or machinery;
      9.   Feed: No wholesale;
      10.   Garage equipment;
      11.   Hardware;
      12.   Hotel equipment or supplies;
      13.   Household appliances, sewing machines, etc.: Retail or wholesale;
      14.   Machinery: Commercial and industrial;
      15.   Manufactured or mobile homes;
      16.   Monuments or tombstones: No wholesale;
      17.   Office equipment: Sales, business machines, etc. (retail or
wholesale);
      18.   Painting equipment or supplies: Paint, varnish, etc.;
      19.   Pets: No boarding or hospital;
      20.   Plastic or plastic products: Wholesale and assembly only;
      21.   Plumbing, heating and ventilating fixtures or supplies: Retail or
wholesale;
      22.   Restaurant or soda fountain equipment or supplies;
      23.   Secondhand goods: Personal, furniture, books, magazines,
automobiles, but no secondhand supplies;
      24.   Tents or awnings;
      25.   Trunks or luggage: Retail or wholesale;
      26.   Upholsterer's supplies: Retail or wholesale;
      27.   Venetian blinds: Retail or wholesale;
      28.   Window shades: Retail or wholesale.
   D.   Light manufacturing or assembling incidental to retail sales from the
premises; provided, that not more than twenty-five percent of the floor area
occupied by such business is used for manufacturing, processing, assembling,
treatment, installation and repair of products.
   E.   Wholesaling of products permitted in Section
18.45.030C, unless specifically prohibited, with storage space not exceeding
one thousand five hundred square feet of floor area.
   F.   Self-storage facility subject to the following standards:
      1.   Single-story self-storage facilities, provided that:
         a.   All storage be in an enclosed building;
         b.   The structure be one story with a maximum height of nineteen
feet;
         c.   All access lanes be of a paved or concrete surface;
         d.   Landscaping, buffering and screening is provided in accordance
with
Chapter 18.73, Landscaping, Buffering and Screening Standards; and
         e.   No activity occurs other than the loading and unloading of
household and personal property.
      2.   Multi-story self storage facilities, provided that:
         a.   Such use is a Type 1 conditional use subject to the issuance of a
conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 18.97;
         b.   All storage be in an enclosed building;
         c.   The structure be a single building, maximum of two stories
(twenty-four feet in height);
         d.   All access lanes be of a paved or concrete surface;
         e.   Landscaping, buffering and screening is provided in accordance
with
Chapter 18.73, Landscaping, Buffering and Screening Standards; and
         f.   No activity occurs other than the loading and unloading of
household and personal property.
   G.   Any of the following if conducted wholly within a completely enclosed
building or within an area enclosed on all sides with a solid wall, compact
evergreen hedge or uniformly painted board fence, not less than six feet in
height:
      1.   Building material sales yard, including the sale of rock, sand,
gravel and the like as an incidental part of the main business;
      2.   Contractor's equipment sales yard or plant;
      3.   Rental of equipment commonly used by contractors;
      4.   Retail lumberyard, including only incidental mill work;
      5.   Feed yard;
      6.   Public utility service yard;
      7.   Storage of operable automobiles, boats, motorcycles, recreational
vehicles, and trucks and inhabitable manufactured or mobile homes, not intended
for salvage.
   H.   Body or fender work, painting or upholstery: When the site is located
adjacent to or abutting a state or federal highway but not extending more than
six hundred feet therefrom; provided, that:
      1.   All body and fender work, painting and upholstering is performed in
a completely enclosed building;
      2.   There is no open storage of parts, salvage materials, automobile
bodies;
      3.   No storage of junk automobiles for salvage purposes and only
automobiles parked on the premises may be those awaiting repairs. Said
automobiles are to be parked in a neat and orderly manner, behind a solid wall
or fence so that such automobiles will not be visible from surrounding
properties or the highway; and
      4.   The permit for such use shall be revocable within thirty days on
written notice from the zoning inspector when, in the opinion of the inspector,
any one or all of the above requirements have not been complied with.
   I.   Nonexpressed commercial uses: All commercial uses not expressly
permitted in any other commercial zone and which are not otherwise unlawful,
injurious to the general health or welfare, or specifically excluded.
(Ord. 2020-41, § 3, 2020; Ord. 2019-26 § 5, 2019: Ord. 2018-33 § 3 (part),
2018; Ord. 2017-3 § 3, 2017; Ord. 2011-2 § 12, 2011; Ord. 2009-59 § 5, 2009;
Ord. 2005-85 § 6, 2005; Ord. 2005-1 § 6 (part), 2005; Ord. 2001-165 § 1 (part),
2001; Ord. 1997-40 § 6, 1997; Ord. 1997-28 § 3, 1997; Ord. 1996-58 § 4 (part),
1996; Ord. 1994-114 § 4 (part), 1994; Ord. 1989-96 § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. 1987-
187 § 1, 1987; Ord. 1985-187 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-171 § 1 (part), 1985;
Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.45.040   Conditional uses.
   A.   Fair, carnival, circus or tent show for longer than fifteen days;
provided:
      1.   The same shall be conducted on a site of not less than ten acres;
      2.   The area occupied shall be paved or graveled to keep dust to a
minimum;
      3.   A Type 2 conditional use permit with a hearing notification area of
three hundred feet is obtained in accordance with
Chapter 18.97.
   B.   Swap meet:
      1.   The board of supervisors may issue a use permit for a swap meet
after an advertised public hearing for which all property owners of record
within one thousand feet have been notified;
      2.   Any use permit granted by the supervisors shall be subject to the
following:
         a.   That the sales or parking area be located no closer than three
hundred feet to any exiting or conditionally approved residential zoning
district and the use of this land must be outlined on the development plan,
         b.   Adequate screening to be designated by the supervisors,
         c.   That the performance standards of Section
18.49.020(A) (CPI Campus Park Industrial Zone) are met,
         d.   Adequate parking to be provided according to standards set by the
supervisors,
         e.   The use permit shall describe and provide adequate traffic access
to the swap meet by streets that are not residential,
         f.   Selling area must be a dust-proof surface,
         g.   Proof that the vendor holds a valid state sales tax permit,
         h.   Overnight lodging shall not be allowed, and
         i.   The county shall regulate the hours in which outdoor lighting may
be used; and
      3.   The supervisors may impose any further reasonable conditions
necessary to protect the health, safety or welfare of the public.
   C.   Adult activities facility: Type III conditional use in accordance with
Section
18.07.030(I).
   D.   Racetrack or sports stadium, provided:
      1.    Any racetrack conducted for profit must be licensed by the State
Racing Commission;
      2.    Any incidental uses in connection with said racetrack or sports
stadium not otherwise permitted in CB-2 shall be first approved by the board of
adjustment (refer to Chapter 18.93) as a use incidental to and commonly
associated with a racetrack;
      3.    A permit may be used for a practice racetrack, if operated by the
owner of the site thereof, and not conducted for profit or charging admission
to spectators;
      4.    No portion of any tracks, stables or grandstand authorized by this
provision shall be within two hundred feet of any boundary or its site
adjoining any property in a rural or residential zone; and
      5.    A Type 2 conditional use permit with a hearing notification area of
five hundred feet is obtained in accordance with
Chapter 18.97.
   E.    Non-Chartered Financial Institutions, provided:
      1.    A non-chartered financial institution shall be setback a minimum of
one thousand three hundred twenty feet from all other non-chartered financial
institutions, measured from development plan site boundary to development plan
site boundary;
      2.    A non-chartered financial institution shall be setback a minimum of
five hundred feet from all residential zoning, measured from development plan
site boundary to residential zoning boundary;
      3.    A non-chartered financial institution shall be a Type III
conditional use permit with a hearing notification area of three hundred feet
in accordance with Chapter
18.97.030H.
(Ord. 2022-16 § 4, 2022; Ord. 2018-33 § 3 (part), 2018; Ord. 2015-39 § 1, 2015;
Ord. 2010-59 § 2, 2010; Ord. 2005-105 § 6, 2005; Ord. 1994-114 § 4 (part),
1994; Ord. 1992-6 (part), 1992; Ord. 1985-187 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82
(part), 1985)
18.45.050   Development standards—Nonresidential.
   A.   Minimum site area: None.
   B.   Minimum site width: None.
   C.   Minimum site setback requirements:
      1.   Front: Fifteen feet;
      2.   Side: None;
      3.   Rear: Ten feet.
   D.   Maximum building height: Thirty-nine feet.
   E.   Minimum distance between main buildings: None.
(Ord. 2005-1 § 6 (part), 2005; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.45.060   Development standards—Residential.
   A.   Minimum site area: Four thousand five hundred square feet.
   B.   Average area per dwelling unit: One thousand square feet.
   C.   Minimum site setback requirements:
      1.   Front: Twenty feet;
      2.   Side: Seven feet;
      3.   Rear: Ten feet.
   D.   Minimum site width: Forty feet.
   E.   With the exception of perimeter site setbacks, zero lot-line siting of
dwelling units on individual lots is permissible, subject to Pima County
building codes (Title 15).
   F.   Maximum building height: Thirty-nine feet.
   G.   Minimum distance between main multiple dwelling buildings: Subject to
Pima County building codes (Title 15).
(Ord. 2017-37 § 6, 2017: Ord. 2005-1 § 6 (part), 2005; Ord. 1985-82 (part),
1985)
18.45.070   Development standards—Accessory buildings and accessory structures.
   A.   Permitted coverage:
      1.   Residential: Five percent of the lot area.
      2.   Non-residential: Forty percent of the required rear yard and any
additional space within the buildable area.
   B.   Maximum building height:
      1.   Within the required rear yard: Twenty-four feet;
      2.   Within the buildable area: Thirty-nine feet.
   C.   Minimum distance standards:
      1.   To front lot line: Fifteen feet;
      2.   To side lot lines: None;
      3.   To rear lot line: Four feet.
(Ord. 2004-59 § 21, 2004; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.45.080   Lot development option.
   A.   Refer to Section
18.09.060 (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions) for the provisions
of the lot development option.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
Chapter 18.47
INDUSTRIAL ZONING CLASSIFICATIONS
18.47.010   Purpose.
18.47.020   Industrial use category definitions.
18.47.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to classify industrial land uses into a
limited set of defined categories that shall be used to regulate the
conditionally permitted land uses of the CI-3 zone.
(Ord. 1992-103 § 1 (part), 1992)
18.47.020   Industrial use category definitions.
   A.   Industrial uses are hereby classified and defined as follows:
      1.   Agricultural Trade—Intensive. Uses and facilities engaged in the
commercial feeding and preparation of livestock animals for wholesale,
shipment, transfer or slaughter and not exempt form county zoning by state
statute. Examples include commercial feedlots and agricultural auction
facilities.
      2.   Animal Products Processing—Intensive. Uses and facilities engaged in
the commercial slaughtering or rendering of animals for further use in
manufacturing or as semi-finished food products. Examples include slaughter
houses, animal or marine rendering plants and tanneries.
      3.   Manufacturing—Hazardous Materials. Uses and facilities engaged in
manufacturing processes that use or produce explosive, toxic, flammable or
comparable substances and materials with a high level of community danger or
health-threatening potential. Examples include the manufacturing of asbestos
products, toxic or explosive chemicals and allied products or the processing of
caustic acids.
      4.   Manufacturing—Intensive. Uses and facilities engaged in the
mechanical or chemical fabrication, processing, assembling or treatment of raw
or semi-finished nonfood products, materials or substances into semi-finished
or finished products, which cannot meet the performance standards of Section
18.53.020 (CI-2). Examples include the manufacturing of plastics, nonexplosive
or nontoxic chemicals, assembly of motor vehicles or mobile or modular housing,
or the smelting and refining of metals from ore, pig or scrap.
      5.   Nonexpressed Industrial Uses. Industrial uses not expressly
permitted in any industrial zone and which are not otherwise unlawful,
injurious to the general health or welfare, or specifically excluded.
      6.   Storage—Hazardous Materials. The commercial provision of indoor or
outdoor space for the storage or transfer of materials or products that may
threaten the public health or safety because of combustibility, flammability,
toxicity or disease potential. Examples include gasoline or flammables bulk
stations, petroleum products tank farms, explosives or liquefied gases, trash
burners and commercial landfills.
   B.   Other uses are as may be defined in
Chapter 18.03 of this code.
(Ord. 1992-103 § 1 (part), 1992)
Chapter 18.49
CPI CAMPUS PARK INDUSTRIAL ZONE
18.49.010   Purpose and intent.
18.49.020   Performance standards.
18.49.030   Permitted uses.
18.49.040   Development standards—General.
18.49.050   Review and adoption procedures.
18.49.010   Purpose and intent.
   A.   Purpose. The purpose of the CPI zone is to:
      1.   Promote and facilitate innovative and comprehensively planned
industrial developments which are compatible with surrounding residential
communities; and
      2.   Encourage the highest standards of architecture and site planning
which will foster compact industrial developments.
   B.   Intent.
      1.   The CPI zone is intended exclusively for research and development
laboratory, large headquarter office and modern nonnuisance industrial uses;
      2.   The permitted uses, dimensional standards and landscaping
requirements are designed to insure a compatibility with adjoining
nonindustrial areas;
      3.   The zone will make available attractive locations for businesses and
factories which will provide employment close to residences and reduce travel
time between home and work;
      4.   CPI development regulations shall be utilized to create new
industrial centers and also shall be applied to properties in established
industrial zones as an alternative to existing regulations;
      5.   The zone may also be used to provide industrial sites along
interstate and major travel routes;
      6.   The granting of CPI zoning shall be based on the performance of the
industry as well as the type of industry;
      7.   Development and performance standards will provide a healthful
operating environment for industry and prevent effects detrimental to the
surrounding neighborhood;
      8.   The standards will ensure that all manufacturing, processing or
assembling of materials and products is not injurious or offensive to the
occupants of surrounding properties.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.49.020   Performance standards.
   A.   The following performance standards shall apply to all uses in this
zone:
      1.   Noise or vibration: No noise or vibration shall be permitted which
is discernible beyond the lot line to the human sense of feeling for:
         a.   Three minutes or more duration in any one hour of the day between
the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m., or
         b.   Thirty seconds or more duration in any one hour during the hours
of seven p.m. to seven a.m.;
      2.   Smoke: No emission of smoke from any source shall be permitted;
      3.   Odors: No emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter shall be
permitted;
      4.   Fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, gases and other forms of air
pollution: No emission shall be permitted which can cause any damage to health,
damage to animals or vegetation, or damage to or soiling of other forms of
property;
      5.   Liquid and solid waste: No wastes shall be discharged in the
streets, drainageways or on any property except in appropriately designed
disposal systems;
      6.   Radioactive materials:
         a.   Manufacturing activities involving the use, storage, or disposal
of radioactive materials are prohibited except for those materials:
            1)   Which do not become an integral part of the manufactured
product, or
            2)   Which are exempt from licensing requirements by the Arizona
Radiation Regulatory Agency or its legally established successor, or
            3)   Used for medical diagnosis and therapy and for educational or
industrial research and development,
         b.   For the purpose of this subsection, "research and development"
means either:
            1)   Theoretical analysis, exploration or experimentation, or
            2)   The extension of investigative findings and theories of a
scientific or technical nature into practical application of experimental and
demonstration purposes, including production and testing of models, equipment,
materials, etc.
   B.   Certifications. The zoning inspector shall not issue a permit for any
use until:
      1.   The applicant has provided the required number of plans showing the
certificates of the department of transportation and flood control district,
traffic engineer, and health department director, certifying that said use
complies with all laws and regulations under their jurisdiction; and
      2.   The zoning inspector has determined that the use complies with this
chapter.
   C.   Enforcement of Performance Standards.
      1.   It is the responsibility of the director of the health department to
make investigations of alleged violations of the specific performance standards
within the CPI zone.
      2.   If the existing use fails at any time to meet the specific
performance standards of this section, the use will be deemed in violation of
this code.
   D.   Conditions for Secondary Uses. No use permit for secondary uses (refer
to Section
18.49.030(B)) shall be granted unless the following conditions are met:
      1.   The use shall be compatible with the other uses in the CPI
development and with any neighboring residential developments and in particular
shall not unduly affect them due to:
         a.   Increased automobile traffic, and
         b.   Noise generated from within the site;
      2.   Evidence is provided of a need related to a primary use;
      3.   Such a use shall be intended primarily for the personal convenience
of employees;
      4.   The floor area for secondary uses shall not exceed ten percent of
the total enclosed floor area on the site;
      5.   No sign or window display shall be visible from any public way;
      6.   Entrance to such use shall be only from the interior of the
industrial site.
   E.   Ownership Control.
      1.   The land in a proposed CPI development shall be under such unified
control as to ensure that the entire district will be developed as a unified
whole.
      2.   All owners shall be included as joint applicants, and all approvals
shall bind all owners.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.49.030   Permitted uses.
   A.   Permitted primary uses:
      1.   Administrative and professional offices;
      2.   Apparel (clothing and other products manufactured from textiles);
      3.   Art needlework and hand weaving;
      4.   Manufacture of:
         a.   Cameras and other photographic equipment and supplies,
         b.   Dentures and drugs,
         c.   Jewelry,
         d.   Leather products: Including shoes and machine belting (excluding
tanning),
         e.   Luggage,
         f.   Musical instruments,
         g.   Orthopedic and medical supplies (such as artificial limbs,
braces, supports and stretchers),
         h.   Small paper products (such as envelopes, stationery, bags, boxes
and wallpaper printing),
         i.   Plastic products: But not including the processing of the raw
material,
         j.   Precision instruments (such as optical, medical and drafting),
         k.   Silverware, plate and sterling,
         l.   Sporting and athletic equipment,
         m.   Toys;
      5.   Manufacture and assembly of electrical and electronic products;
      6.   Manufacture and packaging of beverage products;
      7.   Manufacture and service of data systems;
      8.   Ink mixing and packaging and inked ribbons;
      9.   Laboratories: Medical, dental, research, experimental and testing;
      10.   Printing, newspaper publishing and binding: Including engraving and
photo-engraving;
      11.   Soap and detergents: Packaging only;
      12.   Warehousing;
      13.   Wholesale business and storage;
      14.   Any other manufacturing uses that are similar to those listed
above;
      15.   The board of supervisors may add other uses as necessary in
addition to the established list.
   B.   Permitted secondary uses: The following uses, as restricted in Section
18.49.020D, shall be also permitted:
      1.   Restaurant facilities, provided such use is accessory to an
industrial facility;
      2.   Child care centers;
      3.   Banking or financial facilities, (except non-chartered financial
institutions);
      4.   Recreational facilities:
         a.   Common areas and recreational facilities shall be located so as
to be readily accessible to employees of the firm;
         b.   Recreational facilities for the use of CPI tenant employees are
encouraged;
         c.   Facilities may include golf courses (refer to
Chapter 18.59, GC Golf Course Zone), tennis courts, health clubs, basketball
courts, and other similar amenities;
      5.   An individual dwelling unit for a caretaker.
      6.   Airport facilities: In accordance with
Chapter 18.57.
(Ord. 2005-105 § 7, 2005; Ord. 1986-188 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-82 (part),
1985)
18.49.040   Development standards—General.
   A.   Minimum site area: Ten acres.
   B.   Minimum yard requirements:
      1.   Front: Twenty-five feet;
      2.   Sides: Twenty feet or a common wall;
      3.   Rear: Thirty feet.
   C.   Maximum site coverage by buildings: Thirty-three percent.
   D.   Maximum building height:
      1.   On sites of less than fifty acres: Thirty-six feet;
      2.   For sites fifty acres or greater: Forty-four feet;
      3.   On slopes fifteen percent or greater: Thirty-six feet.
   E.   Minimum distance of structures from an existing or conditionally
approved residential zone: One hundred feet.
   F.   Landscaping: Landscape requirements shall meet all the requirements of
Chapter 18.73 (Landscaping Standards).
   G.   Fences: Barbed wire and chain link fences are prohibited.
   H.   Exterior storage:
      1.   Exterior storage shall be screened from view by the same basic
building materials as of the primary building;
      2.   The height of stacked material within storage areas shall not exceed
the height of the screen.
   I.   Roads:
      1.   All new CPI developments shall provide a separate, legal, all-
weather, paved access directly from the nearest county-maintained collector or
arterial road;
      2.   The design and construction of the access shall be subject to the
written approval of the county engineer;
      3.   CPI developments shall not be allowed to use for access any existing
or planned county-maintained streets located on adjacent properties zoned for
nonindustrial uses.
   J.   Exterior illumination:
      1.   Illumination of buildings and parking areas shall have a low profile
and consist of the most appropriate state-of-the-art type lights;
      2.   Lighting shall be in accordance with the county outdoor lighting
code (Title 15).
   K.   Signs: In accordance with
Chapter 18.79 (Sign Standards).
   L.   Off-street parking and loading: In accordance with
Chapter 18.75 (Off-street Parking and Loading Standards).
(Ord. 2011-2 § 13, 2011; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.49.050   Review and adoption procedures.
   A.   Initial Submittal Requirements. In addition to submitting a zoning
application and appropriate fee, the applicant shall submit to the planning and
development services department the following:
      1.   A legal description of the total site proposed for development;
      2.   The names and addresses of all owners;
         a.   If an owner is a corporation, the names and addresses of the
principal officers and members of the board of directors,
         b.   If an owner is a partnership, the names and addresses of the
general and managing partners;
      3.   A statement of planning and design objectives to be achieved by the
campus development through the particular approach proposed by the applicant;
and
      4.   A description of the relationship of the proposed development to
adjacent developments and lands. This shall include neighboring rezonings
contemplated by the applicant.
   B.   Final Submittal Requirements and Review.
      1.   Development plan and related materials: Prior to any rezoning
ordinance being adopted, the applicant shall submit to the planning and
development services department the following:
         a.   A development plan of the total site showing:
            1)   The existing topography, including floodplains and unusual
natural features,
            2)   Proposed uses that will change the existing topography or
remove natural vegetation, and the manner in which such areas will be treated,
            3)   Proposed lot lines and plot designs,
            4)   Architectural renderings, showing architectural harmony among
the buildings, structures and other improvements,
            5)   The location and floor area size of all existing and proposed
buildings, structures and other improvements, including maximum heights, types
of use, and other use information as required by the reviewing bodies,
            6)   The location, size and specific function of all areas to be
reserved as open space,
            7)   The location of all driveways and areas assigned for parking,
loading, curbs, islands, landscaping, pedestrian ways and sidewalks,
            8)   The location of all streets, showing access to and from and
circulation within the proposed development, and relation to adjacent streets,
            9)   The proposed treatment of the perimeter of the development,
including materials and techniques used, such as screens, fences and walls,
            10)   A complete list of raw materials used in the manufacturing
processes, and
            11)   The design, size, height, size of lettering, and lighting of
all signs;
         b.   A description of the proposed uses and materials used in
manufacturing processes;
         c.   Quantitative data for:
            1)   Total number of industrial units,
            2)   Parcel size,
            3)   Proposed lot coverage of buildings and structures,
            4)   Total amount of open space, and
            5)   Other studies as required by the reviewing bodies;
         d.   A schedule of phasing, if development of the site is to occur in
increments over a period of time.
      2.   Review by the design review committee:
         a.   Prior to a rezoning ordinance being adopted, the proposal shall
be reviewed by the design review committee (refer to Section
18.99.030 Design Review Committee);
         b.   The committee shall make a written report for the public record
as to the conformance of the proposal with the purpose and requirements of this
chapter:
            1)   The report shall also contain recommendations by the committee
for denial, approval, or approval with restrictions. Such restrictions may
include the prohibition of uses found unsuitable by the committee,
            2)   If the committee recommends denial, the applicant may be
requested to revise and resubmit the proposal,
            3)   The report may positively or negatively recommend the granting
of one or more variances from the development regulations of Section
18.49.040, except Section 18.48.040(I).
      3.   Board of supervisors public hearing:
         a.   The final committee report shall be submitted to the supervisors
for consideration at a public hearing prior to adoption of the final rezoning
ordinance;
         b.   The supervisors, at the public hearing, may consider the granting
of one or more variances to the development regulations only upon receipt of a
positive or negative recommendation by the committee.
      4.   Conformance with plan: The final plat, when required, must conform
with the approved development plan.
(Ord. 1985-141 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
Chapter 18.51
CI-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL/WAREHOUSING ZONE
18.51.010   Purpose.
18.51.020   Performance standards.
18.51.030   Permitted uses.
18.51.040   Conditional uses.
18.51.050   Development standards—General.
18.51.060   Development standards—Detached accessory buildings.
18.51.070   Mixed Use Option
18.51.010   Purpose.
   Reserved.
18.51.020   Performance standards.
   Reserved.
18.51.030   Permitted uses.
   A.   Any use as permitted in Section
18.43.030(B) (CB-1 Local Business Zone) and in
18.45.030(B) and (C) (CB-2 General Business Zone), (except non-chartered
financial institutions).
   B.   Any of the following if conducted wholly within a completely enclosed
building:
      1.   Manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of:
Bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, dairy products, drugs and pharmaceutical
products, perfumes, soap (cold process only), and food products, except fish or
meat products, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast and the rendering or refining of fats
and oils;
      2.   Manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles of
merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: Bone, broom corn,
cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fibre, fur, glass, hair or
bristles, horn, leather, paper, plastics or plastic products, precious or semi-
precious metals or stones, shell, textiles, tobacco, wax, (paraffin, tallow,
etc.), wood (excluding sawmill or planing mill), yarns, paint (not employing a
boiling process);
      3.   Manufacture and maintenance of: Electric and neon signs, billboards,
commercial advertising structures and displays, light sheet metal products,
including heating or cooling, and ventilating ducts and equipment, cornices,
eaves and the like;
      4.   Manufacture of: Glass, pottery or other similar ceramic products
(using only previously prepared sand or pulverized clay, and kilns fired only
by electricity or gas), concrete or cement products, musical instruments, toys,
novelties, rubber or metal stamps;
      5.   Automobile, trailer, or manufactured or mobile home assembling,
painting, upholstering, rebuilding, reconditioning, sale of used parts, truck
repair or overhauling, tire rebuilding or recapping, battery manufacture and
the like;
      6.   Blacksmith and welding shop or machine shop (excluding punch presses
over twenty tons rated capacity, and drop hammers), foundry casting lightweight
nonferrous metals not causing noxious fumes or odors;
      7.   Laundry, cleaning or dyeing works;
      8.   Carpet and rug cleaning;
      9.   Distribution plant;
      10.   Ice and cold storage plant;
      11.   Beverage bottling plant;
      12.   Wholesale business;
      13.   Storage building or warehouse;
      14.   Assembly of electrical appliances: Radios and phonographs,
including the manufacture of small parts only, such as coils, condensers,
transformers, crystal holders and the like;
      15.   Laboratory: Experimental, photo or motion picture film or testing;
      16.   Veterinary or cat or dog hospital or kennels;
      17.   Poultry or rabbit killing incidental to a retail business on the
same premises.
      18.   Marijuana Dispensary Offsite Cultivation Location - Subject to Type
III Conditional Use;
         a.   There is no size limit for the maximum floor area of a marijuana
dispensary offsite cultivation location.
         b.   A marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location shall be
located in a permanent, enclosed, locked facility in accordance with state
statutes and Arizona Department of Health Services rules and shall not be
located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or modular unit, mobile home,
recreational vehicle, or other motor vehicle.
         c.   A marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location shall be
setback a minimum of 500 feet from a K-12 public, private, or charter school,
measured in a straight and direct horizontal line from the closest exterior or
applicable interior suite wall of the marijuana offsite cultivation location to
the closest property line of a school.
         d.   A marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location shall comply
with all lawful, applicable health regulations, including those promulgated by
the Arizona Department of Health Services and any other authorized regulatory
agency.
         e.   A marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location shall provide
only wholesale products to other marijuana dispensaries, marijuana dispensary
offsite manufacturing locations, or marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation
locations.
         f.   Odor Mitigation
            (1)   Odor mitigation devices and techniques shall be incorporated
in all marijuana facilities to ensure that odors are mitigated. Odor mitigation
may be accomplished through an exhaust air filtration system with odor control
that prevents internal odors from being emitted externally or through any other
best practices adequate for odor mitigation as determined acceptable by the
Chief Zoning Inspector, in the Chief Zoning Inspector's sole discretion.
            (2)   An odor mitigation plan shall be submitted with the initial
permit application. When a modification is made to a marijuana facility, or the
facility operation, that has the potential to impact the nature or degree of
odor, or affects the control of odor, the marijuana facility owner must update
its odor mitigation plan within 30 days of facility modification.
            (3)   An odor mitigation plan shall include all of the following
information:
               (a)   Facility floor plan (showing areas of potential odor
emissions);
               (b)   List of odor emitting activities to take place on site;
               (c)   Phases (timing, length, etc.) of odor-emitting activities;
               (d)   Odor mitigation practices based on industry-specific best
control technologies and best management practices; and
               (e)   Administrative controls, engineering controls (system
design plan, operational processes, maintenance plan).
            (4)   The marijuana facility shall not begin operations until the
odor mitigation plan, or any required update to the odor mitigation plan, is
approved by Chief Zoning Inspector.
      19.   Marijuana Product Manufacturing Location - Subject to Type III
Conditional Use;
         a.   There is no size limit for the maximum floor area of a marijuana
product manufacturing location.
         b.   A marijuana product manufacturing location shall be located in a
permanent, enclosed, locked facility in accordance with state statutes and
Arizona Department of Health Services rules and shall not be located in a
trailer, cargo container, mobile or modular unit, mobile home, recreational
vehicle, or other motor vehicle.
         c.   A marijuana product manufacturing location shall be setback a
minimum of 500 feet from a K-12 public, private, or charter school, measured in
a straight and direct horizontal line from the closest exterior or applicable
interior suite wall of the marijuana offsite cultivation location to the
closest property line of a school.
         d.   A marijuana product manufacturing location shall comply with all
lawful, applicable health regulations, including those promulgated by the
Arizona Department of Health Services and any other authorized regulatory
agency.
         e.   A marijuana product manufacturing location shall provide only
wholesale products to other marijuana dispensaries, marijuana product
manufacturing locations, or marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation locations.
         f.   Odor Mitigation
            (1)   Odor mitigation devices and techniques shall be incorporated
in all marijuana facilities to ensure that odors are mitigated. Odor mitigation
may be accomplished through an exhaust air filtration system with odor control
that prevents internal odors from being emitted externally or through any other
best practices adequate for odor mitigation as determined acceptable by the
Chief Zoning Inspector, in the Chief Zoning Inspector's sole discretion.
            (2)   An odor mitigation plan shall be submitted with the initial
permit application. When a modification is made to a marijuana facility, or the
facility operation, that has the potential to impact the nature or degree of
odor, or affects the control of odor, the marijuana facility owner must update
its odor mitigation plan within 30 days of facility modification.
            (3)   An odor mitigation plan shall include all of the following
information:
               (a)   Facility floor plan (showing areas of potential odor
emissions);
               (b)   List of odor emitting activities to take place on site;
               (c)   Phases (timing, length, etc.) of odor-emitting activities;
               (d)   Odor mitigation practices based on industry-specific best
control technologies; and best management practices; and
               (e)   Administrative controls, engineering controls (system
design plan, operational processes, maintenance plan).
   C.   Any of the following if conducted wholly within a completely enclosed
building or within an area enclosed on all sides with a solid wall, compact
evergreen hedge or uniformly painted board fence, not less than six feet in
height:
      1.   Building material sales yard: Including the sale of rock, sand,
gravel and the like as an incidental part of the main business;
      2.   Contractor's equipment sales yard or plant;
      3.   Rental of equipment commonly used by contractors;
      4.   Retail lumber yard: Including only incidental mill work;
      5.   Feed yard;
      6.   Draying, freighting or truck yard or terminal;
      7.   Motion picture studio;
      8.   Automobile or automotive body and fender shop;
      9.   Public utility service yard.
      10.   Animal Rescue and Sanctuary Facility for cats, dogs and small
household pets, provided that owners and operators of such facilities meet the
eligibility requirements of Sections
18.09.020(N)(3) and
18.09.020(N)(5).
   D.   Accessory building or use: When located on the same building site.
   E.   One dwelling unit, trailer, or manufactured or mobile home: For a
watchman or caretaker and family.
   F.   Airport facilities: In accordance with
Chapter 18.57.
   G.   Gasoline or flammables bulk station; provided, that said product,
including butane, gasoline, petroleum, or propane shall:
      1.   Not be stored in tanks of more than ten thousand gallons capacity
each,
      2.   Be located not less than twenty-five feet from any building or lot
line or from similar tanks, and
      3.   Be located no closer than one hundred feet from any residential
zone.
   H.   Hotel, motel, lodge or inn (collectively referred to as hotel) and
customary accessory facilities, including, but not limited to, cocktail lounge,
restaurant, gift shop, barber shop, beauty shop and newsstands (collective
referred to as accessory uses), provided such accessory uses are a part of the
hotel, and further providing that the following criteria are met:
      1.   Location: The hotel and accessory uses are in buildings located
within two thousand six hundred forty feet of the right-of-way line of the
existing interstate highway full interchanges at Interstate 10 and Palo Verde
Boulevard and Interstate 10 and Cortaro Farms Road;
      2.   Minimum lot area: Two hundred seventeen thousand eight hundred
square feet;
      3.   Maximum height: Sixty-four feet;
      4.   Height limit exceptions:
         a.   The height limit shall not apply to parapets, elevator or
stairway penthouses, or any similar structures used solely for equipment and
machinery of the mechanical, electrical or other utility systems of the
building, and which do not occupy in total more than twenty-five percent of the
roof area,
         b.   Signs shall be permitted on the side of the penthouses erected
for the foregoing purposes, but not on the top of the penthouses;
      5.   Building setbacks:
         a.   Front: Fifty feet,
         b.   Side and rear: Ten feet for each story, but not less than thirty
feet;
      6.   Enclosures:
         a.   All permanent uses shall be conducted entirely within enclosed
buildings, including courtyards or atriums,
         b.   Outdoor storage of material is permitted if the storage area is
completely enclosed by walls, fences, buildings, landscape screening or a
combination thereof,
         c.   Walls and fences shall be not less than six feet in height, and
         d.   No material shall be stored to a height greater than the adjacent
screening wall, fence, building or landscaping;
      7.   Exterior illumination: Illumination of buildings and open areas
shall:
         a.   Be arranged to eliminate glare towards streets and adjoining
properties, and
         b.   Meet all conditions of the county Light Pollution Code, as may be
amended;
      8.   Prohibition: This use shall be prohibited on land that lies under
any of the approach zones to an airport (refer to
Chapter 18.57, AE Airport Environs and Facilities);
      9.   Fire protection: All structures shall include installation of
sprinkler systems in accordance with the city of Tucson fire code.
   I.   Trail-Oriented Development: In accordance with Section
18.07.030(V) (Land use regulations).
(Ord. 2022-16 § 5, 2022; Ord. 2020-24, § 6, 2020; Ord. 2007-81 § 11, 2007; Ord.
2005-105 § 8, 2005; Ord. 1986-188 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-152 § 1 (part),
1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.51.040   Conditional uses.
   A.   Uses Conditionally Permitted.
      1.   Public assembly facility:
         a.   Type I procedure: However, following review of the conditional
use application but prior to a public hearing, the request shall be placed on
the first available planning and zoning commission agenda. Upon review of the
application, the commission may direct that a Type III procedure be undertaken,
         b.   Minimum site area: Twenty-five acres,
         c.   Maximum height: One hundred fifty feet,
         d.   Minimum distance of structures from any property line: Three
hundred feet,
         e.   Access from a paved public road with collector classification or
higher,
         f.   Minimum notification area for public hearing under Section
18.07.030D2: Six hundred feet,
         g.   Prior to public hearing by the hearing administrator, review and
recommendation by the design review committee (refer to Section
18.99.030, Design Review Committee).
      2.   Reserved.
(Ord. 1986-67 § 1 (part), 1986)
18.51.050   Development standards—General.
   A.   Minimum lot area: None.
   B.   Minimum lot width: None.
   C.   Minimum yard requirements:
      1.   Front: Fifteen feet;
      2.   Side: None;
      3.   Rear: Ten feet.
   D.   Maximum building height:
      1.   Thirty-nine feet, or,
      2.   Ninety feet for all buildings located outside of the following
Approach-Departure Corridors defined in
Chapter 18.57:
         a.   ADC-1,
         b.   ADC-2 and greater than 2,500 feet from the ADC-2 boundary,
         c.   ADC-3.
   E.   Buffering and screening shall be in conformance with
Chapter 18.73, Landscaping, Buffering and Screening Standards.
   F.   Any large scale retail establishment, regional, neighborhood or small
shopping center shall be in accordance with
Chapter 18.39.
(Ord. 2019-10 (part), 2019; Ord. 2001-165 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 1986-67 § 1
(part), 1986; Ord. 1985-171 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.51.060   Development standards—Detached accessory buildings.
   A.   Permitted coverage: Forty percent of the required rear yard and any
additional space within the buildable area.
   B.   Maximum building height:
      1.   Within the required rear yard: Twenty-four feet;
      2.   Within the buildable area: Thirty-nine feet.
   C.   Minimum distance requirements:
      1.   To main buildings: Seven feet;
      2.   To front lot line: Fifteen feet;
      3.   To side lot lines: None;
      4.   To rear lot line: Four feet.
(Ord. 1986-67 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.51.070   Mixed Use Option
   A.   Purpose:
      1.   To promote and facilitate innovative and comprehensively planned
mixed-use developments which are compatible with surrounding uses.
      2.   To allow residential uses in the CI-1 zone where appropriately mixed
with non-residential uses.
   B.   Definition: Mixed use refers to the combining of retail/commercial and/
or service uses with residential or office use in the same building or on the
same site in one (1) or more of the following ways:
      1.   Vertical Mixed Use. A single structure with the above floors
generally used for residential or office use and with all or a portion of the
ground floor for retail/commercial or service uses.
      2.   Horizontal Mixed Use — Attached. A single structure which provides
retail/commercial or service use in the portion fronting the public or private
street with attached residential or office uses behind.
      3.   Horizontal Mixed Use — Detached. Two (2) or more structures on one
(1) site which provide retail/commercial or service uses in the structure(s)
fronting the public or private street, and residential or office uses in
separate structure(s) behind or to the side.
   C.   Applicability: This chapter applies to the following:
      1.   New development or substantial expansion of an existing development
on any land within a CI-1 (Light Industrial/Warehousing) zone.
      2.   A rezoning request on any land requesting to zone to CI-1.
   D.   Development Standards:
      1.   Landscaping:
         a.   Mixed use developments shall be exempt from Section
18.73.040 Screening and Bufferyard Requirements, and Sections
18.78.030(B)(2)(d), 18.78.030(C)(2)(a)&(d), and 18.78.030(F)(2)(c) Gateway
Development Standards.
         b.   Native plant preservation plans shall be submitted in accordance
with
Chapter 18.72.
      2.   Site Design:
         a.   Permitted coverage: a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the
total development site and a maximum of fifty percent (50%) of the total
development site shall be residential use. Residential development constructed
over or under other uses shall count toward permitted coverage.
         b.   Maximum building height: thirty-nine (39) feet.
         c.   All non-residential uses within two thousand five hundred (2,500)
feet of a residential structure shall adhere to the performance standards set
forth in section
18.43.020(B).
         d.   For residential structures, or mixed use structures containing
residential uses: A minimum distance of fourteen (14) feet shall separate
exterior walls of separate buildings containing dwelling units on the same lot.
The windows or window/doors of any one (1) dwelling unit may not face the
windows or window/doors of any other dwelling unit unless separated by a
distance of fourteen (14) or more feet except where the angle between the wall
of the separate dwelling units is ninety (90) degrees or more. Walls parallel
to each other shall be considered to be at a zero (0) degree angle.
      3.   Design Guidelines: In addition to the provisions of this section,
all developments using the mixed-use option shall conform to the Mixed Use
Option Design Guidelines.
   E.   Site Planning Review:
      1.   The design review committee shall review at a regularly scheduled
meeting all proposed development subject to this section and shall approve,
approve with conditions, deny, or continue for revision, proposed site
planning, architectural theme, pedestrian circulation, landscaping, signage,
and context to ensure compliance with the purpose, standards, and guidelines of
this section.
         a.   The committee shall not approve any development subject to review
without finding that the development complies with the Mixed Use Option
Guidelines.
         b.   Development proposals subject to committee review shall be
submitted to Pima County for review and recommendation by planning staff,
subject to the schedule and submittal requirements established by development
services to insure a timely, efficient, and complete review by the Committee.
         c.   Development proposals conditionally approved by the committee
shall be submitted to planning staff for determination of final compliance with
the committee's decision within thirty (30) days of the date of the hearing.
      2.   The decision of the design review committee may be appealed to the
board of adjustment. Appeals shall be submitted within sixty (60) days of the
date of the decision, appeals after that date shall not be considered.
      3.   Any change in design or layout of more than twenty five percent of
the development area must be approved by the design review committee, subject
to all review requirements of this section. Minor modifications may be approved
by the Planning Official.
      4.   Design review committee approval shall expire two (2) years from the
date of approval hearing. Approval may be extended for up to an additional two
(2) years at the discretion of the planning official if the circumstances and
basis for the design review committee's decision have not significantly changed
since the date of approval.
      5.   At the time of plan submittal, the developer shall define the
required on-site and off-site infrastructure to serve the development, and
shall provide an infrastructure phasing schedule when applicable.
      6.   At the time of plan submittal, the developer shall submit a traffic
impact analysis and a master drainage study, which fully addresses floodplain
and riparian habitat. If necessary, a riparian mitigation plan shall be
submitted and subject to the approval of the Pima County Flood Control
District.
   F.   Permitted Uses:
   Any use as permitted in
18.45.030 A, B, and C (CB-2 General Business Zone). Residential use shall be
subject to Section
18.31.030 (TR Development Standards — Residential).
   G.   Conditional Uses: Any of the uses of section
18.51.030 B-H and in
18.51.040; provided that:
      1.   The applicant for such a use permit submits to the zoning inspector
plans for said proposed use showing certificates by the department of
transportation and flood control district, transportation engineer, and health
department director, certifying that said use complies with all laws and
regulations under their jurisdictions; and
      2.   When the zoning inspector finds that said use will create no
foreseeable flood, traffic or health hazards or nuisances as defined by the
standards adopted by the board of supervisors and on file in the office of said
inspector, said inspector shall then give notice by mail to all property owners
of record within three hundred feet of the proposed site of said use of the
intention to grant a permit, and giving any interested person thirty days in
which to appeal to the board of adjustment from said inspector's interpretation
of the application of said standards in connection with said proposed use; and
      3.   If no appeal is taken within thirty (30) days from the date said
notices are mailed, the permit shall be issued and become final upon the
expiration of said thirty (30) day period.
(Ord. 2006-45 § 1, 2006)
Chapter 18.53
CI-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL ZONE
18.53.010   Purpose.
18.53.020   Performance standards.
18.53.030   Permitted uses.
18.53.040   Development standards—General.
18.53.050   Development standards—Detached accessory buildings.
18.53.010   Purpose.
   Reserved.
18.53.020   Performance standards.
   A.   The following performance standards shall apply to all uses in this
zone:
      1.   Noise.
         a.   At no point on the boundary of property having zoning other than
CI-2 shall the sound pressure level of any individual operation or plant,
excluding operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities,
exceed the decibel levels in the designated octave bands, as follows:
1) Octave Band (Cycles Per Second) 2) Maximum Sound Pressure Level in Decibels
                                   (0.02 Dynes Per CM 2
1) Octave Band (Cycles Per Second) 2) Maximum Sound Pressure Level in Decibels
                                   (0.02 Dynes Per CM 2
0 to 75                            72
76 to 150                          67
151 to 300                         59
301 to 600                         52
601 to 1200                        46
1201 to 2400                       40
2401 to 4800                       34
Above 4800                         32
 
         b.   Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and
associated octave band filter manufactured according to standards prescribed in
the American Standards Association. Measurements shall be made using the flat
network of the sound level meter.
         c.   Impulsive type noises shall be subject to the performance
standards prescribed, provided that such noises shall be capable of being
accurately measured with such equipment;
            1)   Noises capable of being so measured, for the purpose of this
section, shall be those noises which cause rapid fluctuations of the needle of
the sound level meter with a variation of no more than plus or minus two
decibels.
            2)   Noises incapable of being so measured, such as those of an
irregular or intermittent nature, shall be controlled so as not to become a
nuisance to adjacent uses.
      2.   Smoke.
         a.   No emission of smoke from any source shall be permitted to exceed
a greater density than that density described as No. 1 on the Ringlemann Chart;
         b.   However, smoke may be emitted, which is equal to but not darker
than No. 2 on the Ringlemann Chart, for not more than four minutes in any
thirty-minute period.
         c.   For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringlemann
Chart, as published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines, shall be the standard.
      3.   Glare or Heat. Any activity producing intense glare or heat shall be
performed in such manner as not to create a nuisance or hazard along lot lines.
      4.   Odors. No emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter shall be
permitted in such quantities as to be offensive in such a manner as to create a
nuisance or hazard beyond the property line.
      5.   Vibration. No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible
beyond the lot line to the human sense of feeling for:
         a.   Three minutes or more duration in any one hour of the day between
the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m.; or
         b.   Thirty seconds or more duration in any one hour during the hours
seven p.m. to seven a.m.
      6.   Fly Ash, Dust, Fumes, Vapors, Gases and Other Forms of Air
Pollution. No emission shall be permitted which can cause any damage to health,
to animals or vegetation, or other forms of property, or which can cause any
excessive soiling;
      7.   Liquids and Solid Waste. No wastes shall be discharged in the
streets, drainageways or any property which is dangerous to the public health
and safety, and no waste shall be discharged in the public sewage system which
endangers the normal operation of the public sewage system.
   B.   Certifications. The zoning inspector shall not issue a permit for any
use until the applicant has provided the required number of plans showing the
certificates of the department of transportation and flood control district,
traffic engineer and health department director, certifying that said use
complies with all laws and regulations under their jurisdiction, and the zoning
inspector has determined that the use complies with this chapter.
   C.   All uses of Section
18.53.030D shall be situated at least five hundred feet from any residence or
business district boundary line: however, this five-hundred-foot area may be
used for:
      1.   Off-street parking;
      2.   Landscaping; or
      3.   Recreational space for employees.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.53.030   Permitted uses.
   A.   Any use permitted in Section
18.45.030B and C (CB-2 General Business Zone), and
18.51.030B, C (1-9) and E (CI-1 Light Industrial/Warehousing Zone), within or
without a building or enclosure and not subject to any limitation in said
subsections.
   B.   Any other industrial use susceptible of meeting the performance
standards established in Section
18.53.020A, except those listed in Section
18.53.030D and
18.55.030B (CI-3 Heavy Industrial Zone).
   C.   Additional uses:
      1.   Service station;
      2.   Automobile repair;
      3.   Restaurant;
      4.   Doctor's office or clinic;
      5.   General store;
      6.   Sale of products manufactured on the site.
      7.   Animal Rescue and Sanctuary Facility for cats, dogs and small
household pets, subject to the enclosure requirements of
18.51.030(C) and the eligibility requirements of Sections
18.09.020(N)(3) and
18.09.020(N)(5).
   D.   The following uses, as restricted in Section
18.53.020C:
      1.   Boiler shop or works;
      2.   Commercial cattle sales, auction yard or cattle rest;
      3.   Dirt, soil, clay, sand, rock, stone, or gravel pit or yard;
      4.   Fat rendering, reduction of offal;
      5.   Manufacture of: Acid, ammonia, asphalt or products, asbestos, brick,
tile or terra cotta, babbitt metal, bleaching powder, carbon, lamp black or
graphite, cement, celluloid, chlorine gas, coal tar or products, illuminating
gas, gelatin, glucose, glue or size, gypsum, insulating material (such as rock
wool and similar products), lime or products, phenol, pickles, plaster of
paris, potash, rubber, strawboard or cardboard by reclamation, sauerkraut, soap
except by cold process, tar or asphalt roofing, turpentine, vinegar;
      6.   Meat packing plant or slaughter house;
      7.   Petroleum products storage above ground: Except in quantities of
less than one thousand barrels;
      8.   Racetrack or sports stadium: Except for contests between human
beings only;
      9.   Rifle range, including pistol range: If not within an enclosed
building;
      10.   Rolling mill: In enclosed building only;
      11.   Salt works;
      12.   Sandblasting plant: In enclosed building only;
      13.   Sewage disposal: Not operated under the control of the board of
supervisors, a municipality, or a sanitary district;
      14.   Wood or bone distillation;
      15.   Wool pulling or scouring plant.
   E.   Accessory building or use: When located on the same building site.
   F.   Airport facilities: In accordance with
Chapter 18.57.
   G.   Hotel, motel, lodge or inn: In accordance with Section
18.51.030H (CI-1 Light Industrial/Warehousing Zone).
   H.   Junk, salvage, auto wrecking, impoundment storage or used materials
yards: Subject to the following requirements:
      1.   Minimum area: One acre (forty-three thousand five hundred sixty
square feet);
      2.   Maximum area: Two acres, except that an additional two acres may be
permitted by the board of adjustment when it is determined by the board that
this additional area is necessary to the reasonable expansion of the operation
of the business, but not for additional storage of car hulks or scrap
materials;
      3.   Minimum setback:
         a.   From public streets: Fifty feet,
         b.   From a proposed right-of-way line on a major street: Fifty feet,
         c.   From a residential zone: Fifty feet;
      4.   Screening:
         a.   An opaque fence or wall shall be properly installed and
maintained along any major thoroughfare and along any properly maintained
street and where such a use is adjacent to a residential zone,
         b.   Maximum height of fence: Twelve feet,
         c.   A chain link or cyclone fence may be used in conjunction with a
properly maintained planting screen along the entire length of such fence,
         d.   No car bodies or salvage materials not ordinarily used for
fencing may be used for this purpose;
      5.   Stacking shall not be permitted above the height of the fence or the
wall;
      6.   No advertising shall be permitted on a fence or wall other than the
name of business on the premises. Signs shall not exceed one hundred square
feet on any one side of such fence or wall;
      7.   No exterior display or storage of material or salvage parts or
wrecked vehicles;
      8.   Storage of used tires provided the tires are stored in a roofed bin,
constructed for that purpose;
      9.   Maximum number of car hulks permitted to be stored at one time: Two
hundred per gross acre;
      10.   Existing yards:
         a.   Existing yards shall conform to Sections
18.53.030H3, 4, 6, 7 and 8 within twelve months of July 6, 1965;
         b.   The zoning inspector may, upon presentation of proof of hardship,
extend this term for an additional period of six months;
         c.   The permit may be extended for an additional six months by the
planning and zoning commission upon presentation of sufficient proof of
hardship.
(Ord. 2007-81 § 12, 2007; Ord. 1986-188 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-152 § 1
(part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.53.040   Development standards—General.
   A.   Minimum lot area: None, except for uses in Section
18.53.030H.
   B.   Minimum lot width: None.
   C.   Minimum yard requirements:
      1.   Front: Fifteen feet;
      2.   Side: None;
      3.   Rear: Ten feet.
   D.   Maximum building height:
      1.   Industrial uses:
         a.   Fifty-four feet, or,
         b.   Ninety feet for all buildings located outside of the following
Approach-Departure Corridors defined in
Chapter 18.57:
            i.   ADC-1,
            ii.   ADC-2 and greater than 2,500 feet from the ADC-2 boundary,
            iii.   ADC-3.
      2.   Nonindustrial uses:
         a.   Thirty-nine feet, or,
         b.   Ninety feet for all buildings located outside of the following
Approach-Departure Corridors defined in
Chapter 18.57:
            i.   ADC-1,
            ii.   ADC-2 and greater than 2,500 feet from the ADC-2 boundary,
            iii.   ADC-3.
   E.   Minimum off-street parking and loading: Refer to
Chapter 18.75 (Off-street Parking and Loading Standards).
   F.   Any large scale retail establishment, regional, neighborhood or small
shopping center shall be in accordance with
Chapter 18.39.
(Ord. 2019-10 (part), 2019; Ord. 2001-165 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 1985-82
(part), 1985)
18.53.050   Development standards—Detached accessory buildings.
   A.   Permitted coverage: Forty percent of the required rear yard and any
additional space within the buildable area.
   B.   Maximum building height:
      1.   Within the required rear yard: Twenty-four feet;
      2.   Within the buildable area: Thirty-nine feet.
   C.   Minimum distance requirements:
      1.   To main building: Seven feet;
      2.   To front lot line: Fifteen feet;
      3.   To side lot lines: None;
      4.   To rear lot line: Four feet.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
Chapter 18.55
CI-3 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL ZONE*
18.55.010   Purpose.
18.55.020   Compliance review.
18.55.030   Permitted uses.
18.55.040   Conditional uses.
18.55.050   Development standards—General.
18.55.060   Development standards—Detached accessory buildings.
18.55.010   Purpose.
   A.   The purpose of this zone is to fulfill the requirements of A.R.S.
Section 11-821.01 which requires that counties adopt an industrial zone for
industries which cannot meet the performance standards of more restrictive
zones, in order that such uses may be located in areas such that they could
expect reasonable protection.
(Ord. 1992-103 § 1 (part), 1992)
18.55.020   Compliance review.
   A.   Use Permit Requirement.
      1.   All use land and erection, moving, alteration or enlargement of a
building pursuant to this chapter shall require a use permit issued by the
zoning inspector.
      2.   The applicant for a use permit shall demonstrate conformance with
all federal, state or local laws applicable to the use prior to the issuance of
a use permit.
      3.   An approved development plan in accordance with
Chapter 18.71 (Development Plan) shall be required prior to the issuance of a
use permit.
      4.   A use permit shall be valid for the duration of the use, provided
the use remains in conformance with the terms of approval. If a use is
discontinued for more than twelve months, the permit shall be deemed null and
void, and reapplication for a new use permit shall be necessary.
   B.   Type 3 Conditional Permit Requirement.
      1.   Due to the greater potential for nuisance or hazard than of uses
permitted in other zones, all use of land and erection, moving, alteration or
enlargement of a building pursuant to the conditional uses of Section
18.55.040 shall require a Type 3 permit in accordance with
Chapter 18.97.
      2.   The applicant shall include with the conditional use permit
application an environmental assessment, prepared by a qualified professional,
which shall address the following issues:
         a.   The effects of the facility on air quality and water quality;
         b.   The amount of wastes to be produced at the facility and the
proposed methods of disposal;
         c.   The amount and type of hazardous materials to be used at the
facility and the type of storage and containment to be used;
         d.   A description of the hazards associated with the materials at the
facility;
         e.   A worst case scenario for a release of the hazardous materials at
the facility; and
         f.   A listing of environmental permits required by the facility and
their status.
      3.   The commission or the supervisors may require that additional
information be presented at the time of public hearing.
      4.   A minimum of thirty days prior to the hearing, the planning and
development services department shall provide notice in accordance with Type 3
permit hearing procedures. Written notice shall be provided to all owners of
property within one thousand feet of the subject property.
      5.   The supervisors may deny issuance of a permit or impose conditions
that are reasonably necessary to prevent a nuisance or hazard, based on the
information submitted or obtained during the conditional use permit process.
      6.   Time limits and time extension procedures shall be in accordance
with Type 3 permit requirements.
(Ord. 1992-103 § 1 (part), 1992)
18.55.030   Permitted uses.
   A.   Nonindustrial accessory building or use: When located on the same
building site.
   B.   Airport facilities: In accordance with
Chapter 18.57 (AE).
(Ord. 1992-103 § 1 (part), 1992)
18.55.040   Conditional uses.
   A.   The following uses, including outdoor storage, manufacturing,
assembling and disassembling considered as a part of the use, subject to
Section
18.55.020, and provided that such use is situated a minimum of one thousand
three hundred twenty feet from the boundary of any zone other than CI-2 or CI-
3:
      1.   Any use permitted in Section
18.53.030D (CI-2), not subject to any of the limitations of
Chapter 18.53, unless such limitations are required as part of the conditional
use permit;
      2.   Agricultural trade—intensive;
      3.   Animal products processing—intensive;
      4.   Manufacturing—hazardous materials;
      5.   Manufacturing—intensive;
      6.   Storage—hazardous materials.
   B.   Nonexpressed industrial uses, subject to Section
18.55.020 and provided that such use is situated a minimum of one thousand
three hundred twenty feet from the boundary of any zone other than CI-2 or CI-
3.
(Ord. 1992-103 § 1 (part), 1992)
18.55.050   Development standards—General.
   A.   Minimum lot area: Forty-three thousand five hundred sixty square feet.
   B.   Minimum lot width: None.
   C.   Minimum yard requirements:
      1.   Front: Ten percent of the lot depth, but such yard need not be more
than fifty feet nor less than twenty feet, unless a greater depth is required
by the setback provisions or street setback line provisions by law. Such area
may be used for off-street parking, landscaping or recreational space for
employees;
      2.   Side: Thirty-five feet, unless a greater distance is otherwise
required;
      3.   Rear: Thirty feet; however, where a site abuts a railroad spur,
buildings may have loading docks extending to the rear property line provided
such construction does not interfere with utility services;
      4.   These requirements may be included in the one thousand three hundred
twenty-foot setback, as may be required for a use, from the boundary of any
zone other than CI-2 or CI-3.
   D.   Maximum building height: None.
   E.   Minimum off-street parking and loading: Refer to
Chapter 18.75.
(Ord. 1992-103 § 1 (part), 1992)
18.55.060   Development standards—Detached accessory buildings.
   A.   Permitted coverage: Forty percent of the required rear yard and any
additional space within the buildable area.
   B.   Maximum building height:
      1.   Within the required rear yard: Twenty-four feet;
      2.   Within the buildable area: Thirty-nine feet.
   C.   Minimum distance requirements:
      1.   To main building: Seven feet;
      2.   To front lot lines: Fifteen feet;
      3.   To side lot lines: None;
      4.   To rear lot line: Four feet.
(Ord. 1992-103 § 1 (part), 1992)
Chapter 18.57
AIRPORT ENVIRONS AND FACILITIES*
18.57.010   Purpose and applicability.
18.57.020   Definitions.
18.57.030   Requirements for the Tucson International Airport, Ryan Field, and
Pinal Airpark Airport Environs Zones.
18.57.031   Requirements for the Davis-Monthan Air Force Base Airport Environs
Zone.
18.57.040   Requirements for private airport facilities.
18.57.050   Requirements for general aviation airstrips and ultralight
facilities.
18.57.060   Maps.
18.57.010   Purpose and applicability.
   A.   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to:
      1.   Protect persons and property within the environs of airports;
      2.   Provide for aircraft safety in the use of airports;
      3.   Regulate land use to ensure compatibility with airports and the
long-term viability of airport operations; and
      4.   To protect and accommodate the needs of present and future military
missions of Davis-Monthan Air Force Base based on local community, state, and
national interests.
   B.   Applicability.
      1.   This chapter establishes height and land use overlay zones for the
environs of Tucson International Airport, Ryan Field, Davis-Monthan Air Force
Base and Pinal Airpark.
      2.   Additionally, this chapter provides establishment standards and
procedures for private airports, general aviation airstrips and ultralight
facilities.
      3.   For a change of use of an existing structure located within Noise
Control Zones A or B (NCZ-A or NCZ-B) of the Davis-Monthan Air Force Base
airport environs on or after January 16, 2009, the noise level reduction
requirements and performance standards established by the respective Section
18.57.031(E)(4) (NCZ-A) and (E)(5) (NCZ-B) apply to the affected areas of the
existing structure up to and including the entire structure if the use of the
existing structure is changed to one or more permitted uses which require noise
level reduction.
      4.   Residential uses legally existing within Noise Control Zones A or B
of the Davis-Monthan Air Force Base airport environs on January 16, 2009 may
expand only if the habitable areas of new construction conform to requirements
for noise level reduction.
      5.   If the gross-floor area of a nonresidential structure or use legally
existing within Noise Control Zones A or B of the Davis-Monthan Air Force Base
airport environs on January 16, 2009 is expanded by less than fifty percent,
the requirements for noise level reduction, if applicable, apply only to the
area of expansion. If the gross floor area of the nonresidential structure or
use is expanded by fifty percent or more, the requirements for noise level
reduction, if applicable, apply to the entire nonresidential structure or use.
(Ord. 2008-118 § 3 (part), 2008; Ord. 1986-188 § 1 (part), 1986)
18.57.020   Definitions.
   A.   General. Certain terms used in this chapter shall be defined, for
general purposes of this chapter as follows:
      1.   Airport. A land area used for the landing and departure of aircraft.
      2.   Communications Nuisance. A use which creates interference with radio
communications and electronic navigational aids or devices, including
instrument landing systems, for aircraft using the airport.
      3.   Dangerous Activity, Hazard or Obstruction. An activity, structure,
vegetation or other use which is dangerous to persons or aircraft using the
airport or which is an obstruction or hazard to air navigation.
      4.   FAA. Federal Aviation Administration.
      5.   Illumination Nuisance. A use which creates difficulty for pilots to
distinguish between navigational lights or markers and other lights.
      6.   Noise-sensitive Land Use.
         a.   An activity on or use of property which is acutely sensitive to
aircraft noise generation. Examples include, but are not limited to: site-built
residential uses; educational, cultural and religious facilities; health
services; tourist lodging services; outdoor recreational or entertainment
facilities; theaters; offices; research laboratories; and government designated
wilderness areas or monuments; or
         b.   Such unconstructed uses as listed above, having an approved
subdivision plat, development plan or building permit.
      7.   Visibility Nuisance. A use which creates a hazard to air navigation
by reducing visibility.
   B.   Airport Environs Zone. Certain terms used in Sections
18.57.030 and
18.57.031 shall be defined, for purposes of those sections, as follows:
      1.   Airport Environs. Property within the boundary of a height or land
use overlay zone for Tucson International Airport, Ryan Field, Davis-Monthan
Air Force Base or Pinal Airpark, as mapped in Section
18.57.060.
      2.   ADC: Approach-Departure Corridor.
         a.   Approach-Departure Corridor One (ADC-1). An area extending from
three thousand to twelve thousand feet from the northwest end of the runway at
Davis-Monthan Air Force Base, as shown on Airport Land Use Overlay Map Zone 3.
         b.   Approach-Departure Corridor Two (ADC-2). An area extending from
three thousand feet to thirty thousand feet from the southeast end of the
runway at Davis-Monthan Air Force Base, as shown on Airport Land Use Overlay
Map Zone 3.
         c.   Approach-Departure Corridor Three (ADC-3). An area extending from
thirty thousand to fifty thousand two hundred feet from the southeast end of
the runway at Davis-Monthan Air Force Base, as shown on Airport Land Use
Overlay Map Zone 3.
      3.   CUZ: Compatible Use Zone.
      4.   Ldn: Day-Night Average Sound Level. Ldn values are expressed in
decibels and represent the average noise level over a twenty-four hour period
for an average day of the year. For Tucson International Airport, the Ldn
values are calculated based on an FAA integrated noise model, which averages
noise over a calendar year. For Davis-Monthan Air Force Base, Ldn values are
calculated based on the Department of Defense Noise Map model which averages
noise over the total flying days of the year.
      5.   NCZ: Noise Control Zone.
         a.   Noise Control Zone-A (NCZ-A). A modeled noise exposure area
between the sixty-five and seventy Ldn noise contours in the vicinity of Davis-
Monthan Air Force Base, as shown on Airport Land Use Overlay Map Zone 3.
         b.   Noise Control Zone-B (NCZ-B). A modeled noise exposure area
consisting of the areas between the seventy and seventy-five Ldn noise
contours, the seventy-five and eighty Ldn noise contours, and within the eighty
Ldn noise contour area in the vicinity of Davis-Monthan Air Force Base, as
shown on Airport Land Use Overlay Map Zone 3.
      6.   Net Lot Area. The total lot area minus the area dedicated for
rights-of-way.
      7.   RSZ: Runway Safety Zone.
   C.   Private Airports, General Aviation Airstrips and Ultralight Facilities.
Certain terms used in Sections
18.57.040 and
18.57.050 shall be defined, for purposes of the sections, as follows:
      1.   Airport, Private. An airport used by or available to commercial
carriers, flight training or flying schools, and private pilots.
      2.   Airstrip. An airport, used solely by the owner of the property,
accommodating general aviation aircraft and ultralight aircraft.
      3.   General Aviation Aircraft. Aircraft with a maximum twelve thousand
five hundred pounds gross weight, excluding ultralight aircraft.
      4.   Ultralight Flightpark. An airport used by the general public or an
ultralight flying club for ultralight aircraft operation.
(Ord. 2008-118 § 3 (part), 2008; Ord. 1986-188 § 1 (part), 1986)
18.57.030   Requirements for the Tucson International Airport, Ryan Field, and
Pinal Airpark Airport Environs Zones.
   A.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate height and land use
in the environs of civilian airports in order to ensure safe aircraft approach
and departure, avoid the concentration of population in potential accident
areas, and reduce the harmful effect of noise exposure on humans and animals.
   B.   Map Notation. An area overlaid by the Airport Environs Zone shall be
shown on county zoning maps by its underlying zone designation plus the suffix
"AE."
   C.   Establishment. AE zoning for Tucson International Airport, Ryan Field,
and Pinal Airpark is established as follows:
      1.   Height Overlay Zones. The following zones are established as shown
on the Airport Height Overlay Maps (Section
18.57.060):
         a.   Tucson International Airport: Airport Height Overlay Zone 1;
         b.   Ryan Airfield: Airport Height Overlay Zone 2; and
         c.   Pinal Airpark: Airport Height Overlay Zone 4.
      2.   Land Use Overlay Zones. The following zones are established as shown
on the Airport Land Use Overlay Maps (Section
18.57.060):
         a.   Tucson International Airport: Airport Land Use Overlay Zone 1,
composed of the RSZ, CUZ-1, CUZ-3 and CUZ-4;
         b.   Ryan Field: Airport Land Use Overlay Zone 2, composed of RSZ and
CUZ-2; and
         c.   Pinal Airpark: Airport Land Use Overlay Zone 4, composed of RSZ
and CUZ-2.
   D.   Use Restrictions.
      1.   Nonconforming Uses. In addition to the general provisions for
nonconforming uses and buildings (Section
18.01.030(D), General Provisions), a nonconforming use which began construction
or alteration prior to September 3, 1985, may continue its construction or
alteration, provided it is completed within one year and is not in violation of
subsections (D)(2) or (D)(3) of this section.
      2.   Prohibited Uses Within Height and Land Use Overlay Zones. A use
which, in the written opinion of the FAA, is determined to be a dangerous
activity, hazard or obstruction or producer of a communications, illumination
or visibility nuisance to aircraft using the airport.
      3.   Height Overlay Zone. Structural height shall not exceed the maximum
established in Section
18.57.060 (Maps).
      4.   Land Use Overlay Zones for Tucson International Airport, Ryan Field,
and Pinal Airpark:
         a.   RSZ. Only crop raising is permitted.
         b.   CUZ-1:
            1)   Permitted Uses.
               a)   Uses permitted in Section
18.49.030 (CPI), subsections (B), (C), (D) and (E) of Section
18.51.030 (CI-1), subsections (B), (C), (D), (E) and (H) of Section
18.53.030 (CI-2), and subsections (B), (C) and (E) of Section
18.55.030 (CI-3), except: administrative or professional offices as primary
uses and airport facilities, child care centers, and banks and financial
institutions as secondary uses; and retail lumber yards, motion picture
studios, restaurants, doctors offices or clinics, general stores, racetracks,
sports stadiums and rifle ranges;
               b)   Enclosed sales and display areas incidental to light
manufacturing or assembly, provided no more than twenty-five percent of the
floor area is occupied for such use;
               c)   Accessory uses for employees only, including cafeterias,
offices and indoor entertainment facilities;
               d)   Automotive, aircraft, marine, farm equipment, mobile home
and recreational vehicle sales; auto, truck and equipment rental; and
               e)   Drive-through only retail uses subject to subsection (D)(4)
(c)(2)(c).
            2)   Safety Requirements.
               a)   For uses permitted within the CPI Zone, the total ground
floor area is restricted to twenty-five percent of the net lot area and the
total floor area is restricted to 37.5 percent of the net lot area.
               b)   For all other uses, the total ground floor area is
restricted to thirty-five percent of the net lot area.
               c)   Any structure or use, or contiguous structure or use, shall
not accommodate, by intention or design, in whole or in part, more than fifty
employees and fifty non-employees at any time. This restriction shall be a
special condition of the issuance of the building permit and certificate of
occupancy. The premises shall thereafter continuously be posted with a form of
notice of the restriction, as required by the department of planning and
development services. The occupant(s) of the premises shall not permit the
limitation to be exceeded.
         c.   CUZ-2.
            1)   Permitted Uses.
               a)   Uses permitted in Section
18.49.030 (CPI), subsections (B), (C), (D) and (E) of Section
18.51.030 (CI-1), subsections (B), (C), (D), (E) and (H) of Section
18.53.030 (CI-2), subsections (B), (C) and (E) of Section
18.55.030 (CI-3), subsections (B), (C), (D), (E), (F), (G) and (H) of Section
18.43.030 (CB-1), and subsections (B), (C), (D), (E), (F), (G), (H) and (I) of
Section
18.45.030 (CB-2), except: amusement or recreational enterprises (indoor);
auctions, auditoriums or assembly halls; clubs; department stores; drive-in
theaters; fairs, carnivals or tent shows; grocery stores (except delicatessens
and convenience stores); gymnasiums; industrial or trade schools; hotels;
libraries; racetracks, sports arenas or stadiums; religious rescue missions or
temporary revivals; rifle ranges; schools or colleges; swimming pools;
theaters; trade shows or exhibitions; and within the first one thousand feet of
the CUZ-2 Zone (closest to the end of the runway), retail uses and
administrative and professional office uses are prohibited as primary uses;
               b)   Enclosed sales and display areas incidental to light
manufacturing or assembly, provided no more than twenty-five percent of the
floor area is occupied for such use;
               c)   Accessory uses for employees only, including cafeterias,
offices and indoor entertainment facilities; and
               d)   Ryan Field Only. Residential uses not exceeding a density
of one residence per acre.
            2)   Safety Requirements.
               a)   For uses permitted within the CPI Zone, the total ground
floor area is restricted to thirty-three percent of the net lot area and the
total floor area is restricted to fifty percent of the net lot area.
               b)   For all other uses, the total ground floor area is
restricted to forty-five percent of the net lot area.
               c)   Retail uses as listed in the CB-1 and CB-2 Zones, in any
building, shall not accommodate, by intention or design, in whole or in part,
more than fifty non-employees at any time. This restriction shall be a special
condition of the issuance of the building permit and certificate of occupancy.
The premises shall thereafter continuously be posted with a form of notice of
the restriction, as required by the department of planning and development
services. The occupant(s) of the premises shall not permit the limitation to be
exceeded.
               d)   Within the first one thousand feet of the CUZ-2 Zone
(closest to the end of the runway), the following uses, or any combination of
these uses, shall occupy no more than a total of ten thousand square feet in
any building: manufacturing and assembly of electrical and electronic
components; manufacturing and service of data systems; laboratories including
medical, dental, research experimental and testing; and printing, newspaper
publishing and binding.
         d.   CUZ-3.
            1)   The interior noise level of new noise-sensitive land uses, and
accessory offices and indoor areas where the public is received, shall not
exceed forty-five Ldn.
            2)   Residential uses are permitted only on existing residentially
zoned lots.
            3)   Prohibited Uses. Outdoor entertainment and sports events; swap
meets and auctions; playgrounds, parks, and public swimming pools; and animal
breeding.
         e.   CUZ-4.
            1)   The interior noise level of new noise-sensitive land uses, and
accessory offices and indoor areas where the public is received, shall not
exceed forty-five Ldn.
   E.   Administrative Procedures. The following applies to the Davis-Monthan
Air Force Base Airport Environs Zone, in addition to the Tucson International
Airport, Ryan Field, and Pinal Airpark Airport Environs Zones:
      1.   Zone Amendments. To expand or contract the boundaries, change the
location, eliminate or create a new RSZ, CUZ, ADC, or NCZ, the planning and
zoning commission shall initiate a rezoning in accordance with
Chapter 18.91 (Rezoning Procedures) and amend the applicable map(s).
      2.   Zone Boundaries. If a lot is:
         a.   Divided by an airport environs zone boundary, the development
shall conform to the land use and design criteria of the respective zones in
which the lot is located;
         b.   Partially covered by an airport environs zone boundary, only the
portion of the lot within the boundary is restricted by the zone.
      3.   Special-Use Waiver.
         a.   Scope. A waiver from a provision of this chapter may be granted
by the board of supervisors when the strict application of the provision would
cause an unnecessary hardship which substantially limits the preservation and
enjoyment of property rights.
         b.   Standards. A waiver may not be granted unless:
            1)   The hardship is not generally caused to other properties
subject to the provision;
            2)   The waiver is the minimum necessary to afford relief;
            3)   The waive will not be materially detrimental to the rights of
owners and residents of other affected properties;
            4)   The waiver is consistent with the intent and purpose of this
chapter and the provision of the section from which the waiver is requested. If
a waiver is requested from any provision of Section
18.57.010(B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(5), or
18.57.031, the request shall be analyzed for: (1) land use compatibility with
Davis-Monthan Air Force Base operations, (2) proximity to the end of the
runway, (3) location in relationship to major flight paths, (4) compliance with
the intent of applicable Pima County Comprehensive Plan Davis-Monthan Air Force
Base Special Area Policies, and (5) compliance with Arizona Revised Statutes;
and
            5)   If the waiver is requested from any provision of Section
18.57.010(B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(5), or
18.57.031, the waiver may not be granted without a specific finding that the
purpose of military airport compatibility is preserved.
         c.   Conditions. Conditions may be imposed on a waiver that will:
            1)   Secure the intent and purposes of this chapter and the
provision of the section from which the waiver is granted; and
            2)   Adequately provide for the protection of surrounding property
owners and residents.
         d.   Hearing. The supervisors shall hold a public hearing on the
waiver, at which all interested persons may be heard.
         e.   Public Notice. Notice will be mailed by the county to all owners
of property within three hundred feet of the subject property no less than
fifteen days prior to the public hearing. In addition, Davis-Monthan Air Force
Base will be notified of waiver requests within the boundaries of Airport
Height Overlay Zone 3 or Airport Land Use Overlay Zone 3; Tucson Airport
Authority will be notified of waiver requests within the boundaries of Airport
Height Overlay Zone 1 or 2 or Airport Land Use Overlay Zone 1 or 2; and Pinal
Airpark will be notified of waiver requests within the boundaries of Airport
Height Overlay Zone 4 or Airport Land Use Overlay Zone 4. Failure to give
notice may not invalidate an action of the board of supervisors.
      4.   Interpretation Review.
         a.   The hearing administrator may review an interpretation of a
provision of this chapter by a county official. A request for review may be
made by an affected person who believes there has been a misinterpretation.
         b.   The request for review shall cite the:
            1)   Disputed interpretation made by the county official; and
            2)   Words alleged to have been misinterpreted.
      5.   Application. A request for waiver or review of interpretation shall
be made on a form provided by the development services department. Hearing fees
are required.
      6.   Appeal to the Board of Supervisors.
         a.   An appeal from a decision or interpretation of the hearing
administrator may be made to the board of supervisors by the owner or affected
persons.
         b.   Application. An appeal shall be made within fifteen working days
of the date of the appealed action, on a form provided by the department.
Hearing fees shall be paid at the time the appeal is filed.
         c.   Hearing. The supervisors shall hold a public hearing on the
appeal, at which all interested persons may be heard.
         d.   Public Notice. For review of a decision or interpretation of the
hearing administrator, the county will mail notice to all owners of property
within three hundred feet of the subject property no less than fifteen days
prior to the public hearing. In addition, Davis-Monthan Air Force Base shall be
notified of appeals within the boundaries of Airport Height Overlay Zone 3 or
Airport Land Use Overlay Zone 3; Tucson Airport Authority will be notified of
appeals within the boundaries of Airport Height Overlay Zone 1 or 2 or Airport
Land Use Overlay Zone 1 or 2; and Pinal Airpark will be notified of appeals
within the boundaries of Airport Height Overlay Zone 4 or Airport Land Use
Overlay Zone 4. Failure to give notice may not invalidate an action of the
board of supervisors.
      7.   Appeal to Superior Court. Appeal from a decision of the board of
supervisors may be made to the superior court by the owner or affected persons.
      8.   Appeal to the Board of Adjustment.
         a.   Requests for variances and interpretation reviews may also be
made to the applicable board of adjustment in accordance with
Chapter 18.93 (Board of Adjustment Variances, Temporary Use Permits and
Interpretations);
         b.   In addition to the public notice required for variance
applications, Davis-Monthan Air Force Base will be notified of variance
applications within the boundaries of Airport Height Overlay Zone 3 or Airport
Land Use Overlay Zone 3; Tucson Airport Authority will be notified of variance
applications within the boundaries of Airport Height Overlay Zone 1 or 2 or
Airport Land Use Overlay Zone 1 or 2; and Pinal Airpark will be notified of
variance applications within the boundaries of Airport Height Overlay Zone 4 or
Airport Land Use Overlay Zone 4;
         c.   In addition to the standard guidelines that the board of
adjustment considers when approving or denying a variance, if a variance is
requested from any provision of Section
18.57.010(B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(5), or
18.57.031, the application will be analyzed for: (1) land use compatibility
with Davis-Monthan Air Force Base operations, (2) proximity to the end of the
runway, (3) location in relationship to major flight paths, (4) compliance with
the intent of applicable Pima County Comprehensive Plan Davis-Monthan Air Force
Base Special Area Policies, and (5) compliance with Arizona Revised Statutes;
         d.   A variance from the requirements of the Davis-Monthan Air Force
Base Airport Land Use Overlay Zone 3, contained in Section
18.57.010(B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(5), or 18.57.031, may not be granted unless the
board of adjustment makes a specific finding that the purpose of military
airport compatibility is preserved.
(Ord. 2008-118 § 3 (part), 2008; Ord. 1992-102 § 1, 1992; Ord. 1986-188 § 1
(part), 1986)
18.57.031   Requirements for the Davis-Monthan Air Force Base Airport Environs
Zone.
   A.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate height and land use
in the environs of the Davis-Monthan Air Force Base military airport in order
to ensure safe aircraft approach and departure, avoid the concentration of
population in potential accident areas, and reduce the potential for harmful
effects of high noise level exposure on humans.
   B.   Map Notation. An area overlaid by the Airport Environs Zone shall be
shown on county zoning maps by its underlying zone designation plus the suffix:
"AE."
   C.   Establishment. AE zoning for Davis-Monthan Air Force Base is
established as follows:
      1.   Height Overlay Zone. The following zone is established as shown on
the Airport Height Overlay Maps (Section
18.57.060):
         Davis-Monthan Air Force Base: Airport Height Overlay Zone 3.
      2.   Land Use Overlay Zone. The following zone is established as shown on
the Airport Land Use Overlay Maps (Section
18.57.060):
         Davis-Monthan Air Force Base: Airport Land Use Overlay Zone 3,
composed of ADC-1, ADC-2, ADC-3, NCZ-A, and NCZ-B.
   D.   Use Restrictions.
      1.   Nonconforming Uses. In addition to the general provisions for
nonconforming uses and buildings (Section
18.01.030(D), General provisions), a nonconforming building, building use, or
land use for which a permit was issued and has not expired prior to January 16,
2009 may continue to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or used
provided it is not in violation of Section
18.57.030(D)(2) or (D)(3) of this chapter.
      2.   Height Overlay Zone. Structural height shall not exceed the maximum
established in Section
18.57.060 (Maps).
   E.   Land Use Overlay Zones for Davis-Monthan Air Force Base:
      1.   ADC-1.
         a.   Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted within ADC-1 if
the use is a permitted or conditional use within the underlying zone and within
any applicable noise control zone:
            1)   Agriculture, including the raising and grazing of livestock
and other animal husbandry, excluding direct accessory retail sales;
            2)   Agricultural processing facilities and services, excluding
chemical, petroleum, and rubber products or other hazardous or highly flammable
materials;
            3)   Cemeteries;
            4)   Communications facilities and utilities;
            5)   Governmental uses, excluding landfills, facilities that
provide services directly to the public, places of public assembly, and
facilities that provide services that are critical for public health and safety
(such as fire protection, police communications, sewage or water treatment, and
water storage);
            6)   Manufacturing and industrial processing, compounding,
packaging, treatment, assembling, and maintenance, excluding chemical,
petroleum, rubber, and other processes involving the use of hazardous or highly
flammable materials;
            7)   Outdoor recreation, excluding places for people to gather
(such as picnic areas, swimming pools, and playgrounds). Examples of permitted
uses include golf courses without clubhouses and parks and nature trails
without museums or exhibits;
            8)   Rail lines and roadways;
            9)   Vehicle parking, including storage of operable vehicles,
boats, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, and trucks, and inhabitable
manufactured or mobile homes not intended for salvage, and public garages for
commercial use;
            10)   Wholesale trade, warehousing, and distribution, excluding
chemical, petroleum, and rubber products or other hazardous or highly flammable
materials; and
            11)   Other similar nonresidential uses of the same class as one or
more uses enumerated above, which, under general or specific written agreement
between the zoning inspector or the zoning inspector's designee and the
official designee of Davis-Monthan Air Force Base, are compatible and
consistent with the high noise or accident potential of military airport
operations and are not otherwise unlawful, injurious to the public health,
safety, and welfare, or specifically prohibited. The uses will be analyzed for
compliance with the intent of the February 2004 Davis-Monthan Air Force Base/
Tucson/Pima County Joint Land Use Study to prohibit uses within areas of
highest potential accident impact, including ADC-1, which are associated with
concentration or attraction of people, such as high density employment,
cultural, recreation/entertainment, and retail/service uses, or which have
special safety considerations, such as uses involving significant quantities of
hazardous or explosive materials and uses critical to public health and safety.
         b.   Prohibited Uses.
            1)   Business, personal, professional and semi-professional
services, including general offices, clinics, and repair and rental services;
            2)   Child care centers;
            3)   Cultural activities, including libraries, museums, theaters,
concert halls, and religious facilities;
            4)   Educational facilities, including colleges and trade schools;
            5)   Elementary and secondary schools;
            6)   Governmental uses that provide services directly to the public
or places of public assembly including facilities which provide services that
are critical for public health and safety (such as fire protection, police
communications, sewage or water treatment, and water storage);
            7)   Hospitals, extended care facilities, and assisted living
centers;
            8)   Hotels, resorts, and other lodging facilities, including group
camps;
            9)   Indoor public assembly, including amusement or recreational
enterprises;
            10)   Indoor recreation, including clubhouses and swimming pools,
etc.;
            11)   Landfills;
            12)   Manufacturing and processing of chemical, petroleum, rubber,
or other hazardous or highly flammable materials;
            13)   Outdoor public assembly, including stadiums, amphitheaters,
and amusement or recreational enterprises;
            14)   Outdoor recreation (such as picnic areas, swimming pools, and
playgrounds) which provide places for people to gather;
            15)   Residential;
            16)   Restaurants and other eating and drinking establishments;
            17)   Retail sales, including direct retail sales of agricultural
products; and
            18)   Wholesale trade, warehousing, and distribution of chemical,
petroleum, and rubber products or other hazardous or highly flammable
materials.
         c.   Safety Requirements. The following apply to nonresidential uses:
            1)   Maximum employee occupancy: thirty employees per acre of net
lot area.
            2)   Minimum project site area: three acres.
            3)   Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): fifty percent of the project
site area.
         d.   Exceptions. The following are exceptions to prohibited uses and
minimum project site area in ADC-1:
            1)   Business, personal, professional and semi-professional
services, including general offices, clinics, repair and rental services,
restaurants and other eating and drinking establishments, and retail sales,
including direct retail sales of agricultural products, are permitted in the
CB-1 and CB-2 zones if the zone existed before January 16, 2009.
            2)   Single detached or one-family dwelling units (including
manufactured homes and factory-built (modular) residential buildings and
excluding mobile homes and trailers), accessory buildings or uses, home
occupations, guest houses, and secondary dwellings are permitted if the
property is zoned TH, RH, GR-1, SR, SR-2, SH, CR-1, CR-2, CR-3, CR-4, CR-5, TR,
CMH-1, or CMH-2 and the use is a permitted use within the zone, except:
               (i)   The cluster development option as described in Section
18.09.040 is not permitted except for property partially within ADC-1, the
cluster development option is permitted if residential units are not located
within ADC-1.
               (ii)   Residential development is limited to a maximum density
one dwelling unit per acre.
            3)   Parcels less than three acres that are either recorded or
proposed within an approved tentative plat prior to January 16, 2009 may be
developed in conformance with all other requirements specified in subsections
(E)(1)(a) through (E)(1)(d) of this section, with exception of subsection (E)
(1)(c)(2) of this section.
            4)   Parcels less than three acres that are neither recorded nor
proposed within an approved tentative plat prior to January 16, 2009 and which
are proposed for nonresidential use must be part of a development plan which
encompasses at least three acres.
      2.   ADC-2.
         a.   Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted within ADC-2 if
the use is a permitted or conditional use within the underlying zone and within
any applicable noise control zone:
            1)   Agriculture, including the raising and grazing of livestock
and other animal husbandry, excluding direct accessory retail sales;
            2)   Agricultural processing facilities and services, excluding
chemical, petroleum, and rubber products or other hazardous or highly flammable
materials;
            3)   Cemeteries;
            4)   Communications facilities and utilities;
            5)   Governmental uses, excluding landfills, facilities that
provide services directly to the public, places of public assembly, and
facilities that provide services that are critical for public health and safety
(such as fire protection, police communications, sewage or water treatment, and
water storage);
            6)   Manufacturing and industrial processing, compounding,
packaging, treatment, assembling, and maintenance, excluding chemical,
petroleum, rubber, and other processes involving the use of hazardous or highly
flammable materials;
            7)   Outdoor recreation, excluding places for people to gather
(such as picnic areas, swimming pools, and playgrounds). Examples of permitted
uses include golf courses without clubhouses and parks and nature trails
without museums or exhibits;
            8)   Rail lines and roadways;
            9)   Vehicle parking, including storage of operable vehicles,
boats, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, and trucks, and inhabitable
manufactured or mobile homes not intended for salvage, and public garages for
commercial use;
            10)   Wholesale trade, warehousing, and distribution, excluding
chemical, petroleum, and rubber products or other hazardous or highly flammable
materials; and
            11)   Other similar nonresidential uses of the same class as one or
more uses enumerated above, which, under general or specific written agreement
between the zoning inspector or the zoning inspector's designee and the
official designee of Davis-Monthan Air Force Base, are compatible and
consistent with the high noise or accident potential of military airport
operations and are not otherwise unlawful, injurious to the public health,
safety, and welfare, or specifically prohibited. The uses will be analyzed for
compliance with the intent of the February 2004 Davis-Monthan Air Force Base/
Tucson/Pima County Joint Land Use Study to prohibit uses within areas of
highest potential accident impact, including ADC-2, which are associated with
concentration or attraction of people, such as high density employment,
cultural, recreation/entertainment, and retail/service uses, or which have
special safety considerations, such as uses involving significant quantities of
hazardous or explosive materials and uses critical to public health and safety.
         b.   Prohibited Uses.
            1)   Business, personal, professional and semi-professional
services, including general offices, clinics, and repair and rental services;
            2)   Child care centers;
            3)   Cultural activities, including libraries, museums, theaters,
concert halls, and religious facilities;
            4)   Educational facilities, including colleges and trade schools;
            5)   Elementary and secondary schools;
            6)   Governmental uses that provide services directly to the public
or places of public assembly including facilities which provide services that
are critical for public health and safety (such as fire protection, police
communications, sewage or water treatment, and water storage);
            7)   Hospitals, extended care facilities, and assisted living
centers;
            8)   Hotels, resorts, and other lodging facilities, including group
camps;
            9)   Indoor public assembly, including amusement or recreational
enterprises;
            10)   Indoor recreation, including clubhouses and swimming pools,
etc.;
            11)   Landfills;
            12)   Manufacturing and processing of chemical, petroleum, rubber,
or other hazardous or highly flammable materials;
            13)   Outdoor public assembly, including stadiums and
amphitheaters;
            14)   Outdoor recreation (such as picnic areas, swimming pools, and
playgrounds) which provide places for people to gather;
            15)   Residential;
            16)   Restaurants and other eating and drinking establishments;
            17)   Retail sales, including direct retail sales of agricultural
products; and
            18)   Wholesale trade, warehousing, and distribution of chemical,
petroleum, and rubber products or other hazardous or highly flammable
materials.
         c.   Safety Requirements. The following apply to nonresidential uses:
            1)   Maximum employee occupancy: twenty employees per acre of net
lot area.
            2)   Minimum project site area: five acres.
            3)   Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): thirty percent of the project
site area.
         d.   Exceptions. The following are exceptions to prohibited uses and
minimum project site area in ADC-2:
            1)   Business, personal, professional and semi-professional
services, including general offices, clinics, repair and rental services,
restaurants and other eating and drinking establishments, and retail sales,
including direct retail sales of agricultural products, are permitted in the
CB-1 and CB-2 zones if these zones existed prior to January 16, 2009.
            2)   Single detached or one-family dwelling units (including
manufactured homes and factory-built (modular) residential buildings and
excluding mobile homes and trailers), accessory buildings or uses, home
occupations, guest houses, and secondary dwellings are permitted if the
property is zoned TH, RH, GR-1, SR, SR-2, SH, CR-1, CR-2, CR-3, CR-4, CR-5, TR,
CMH-1, or CMH-2 and the use is a permitted use within the zone, except:
               (i)   The cluster development option as described in Section
18.09.040 is not permitted except for property partially within ADC-2, the
cluster development option is permitted if residential units are not located
within ADC-2.
               (ii)   Residential development is limited to a maximum density
one dwelling unit per acre.
            3)   Uses within a research park as defined by Arizona Revised
Statutes Section 35-701 and restricted under Arizona Revised Statutes Section
15-1636(D).
            4)   Parcels less than five acres that are either recorded or
proposed within an approved tentative plat prior to January 16, 2009 may be
developed in conformance with all other requirements specified in subsections
(E)(2)(a) through (E)(2)(d) of this section, with exception of subsection (E)
(2)(c)(2) of this section.
            5)   Parcels less than five acres that are neither recorded nor
proposed within an approved tentative plat prior to January 16, 2009 and which
are proposed for nonresidential use must be part of a development plan which
encompasses at least five acres.
      3.   ADC-3.
         a.   Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted within ADC-3 if
the use is a permitted or conditional use within the underlying zone and is
permitted in Noise Control Zone-A, if applicable:
            1)   Agriculture, including direct accessory retail sales of
agricultural products and the raising and grazing of livestock and other animal
husbandry;
            2)   Agricultural processing facilities and services, excluding
chemical, petroleum, and rubber products or other hazardous or highly flammable
materials;
            3)   Business, personal, professional and semi-professional
services, including general offices, clinics, and repair and rental services;
            4)   Cemeteries;
            5)   Communications facilities and utilities;
            6)   Cultural activities, including libraries, museums,
auditoriums, concert halls, and religious facilities;
            7)   Educational facilities, including colleges and trade schools,
but excluding elementary and secondary schools and child care centers;
            8)   Governmental uses, excluding landfills and facilities that
provide services that are critical for public health and safety (such as fire
protection, police communications, sewage or water treatment, and water
storage);
            9)   Hotels, resorts, and other lodging facilities, including group
camps;
            10)   Indoor public assembly, including amusement or recreational
enterprises;
            11)   Indoor recreation;
            12)   Outdoor public assembly, including stadiums and
amphitheaters;
            13)   Outdoor recreation;
            14)   Manufacturing and industrial processing, compounding,
packaging, treatment, assembling, and maintenance, excluding chemical,
petroleum, rubber, and other processes involving the use of hazardous or highly
flammable materials;
            15)   Rail lines and roadways;
            16)   Restaurants and other eating and drinking establishments;
            17)   Retail sales;
            18)   Vehicle parking, including storage of operable vehicles,
boats, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, and trucks, and inhabitable
manufactured or mobile homes not intended for salvage, and public garages for
commercial use;
            19)   Wholesale trade, warehousing, and distribution, excluding
chemical, petroleum, and rubber products or other hazardous or highly flammable
materials; and
            20)   Other similar nonresidential uses of the same class as one or
more uses enumerated above, which, under general or specific written agreement
between the zoning inspector or the zoning inspector's designee and the
official designee of Davis-Monthan Air Force Base, are compatible and
consistent with the high noise or accident potential of military airport
operations and are not otherwise unlawful, injurious to the public health,
safety, and welfare, or specifically prohibited. The uses will be analyzed for
compliance with the intent of the February 2004 Davis-Monthan Air Force Base/
Tucson/Pima County Joint Land Use Study to prohibit uses within areas of
heightened potential accident impact, including ADC-3, which are associated
with populations in need of special protection, such as school children, or
with special safety considerations, such as uses involving significant
quantities of hazardous or explosive materials and uses critical to public
health and safety.
         b.   Prohibited Uses.
            1)   Child care centers;
            2)   Elementary and secondary schools;
            3)   Governmental uses that provide services directly to the public
including facilities which provide services that are critical for public health
and safety (such as fire protection, police communications, sewage or water
treatment, and water storage);
            4)   Hospitals, extended care facilities, and assisted living
centers;
            5)   Landfills;
            6)   Manufacturing and processing of chemical, petroleum, rubber,
or other hazardous or highly flammable materials;
            7)   Residential; and
            8)   Wholesale trade, warehousing, and distribution of chemical,
petroleum, and rubber products or other hazardous or highly flammable
materials.
         c.   Safety Requirements. The following apply to nonresidential uses:
            1)   Minimum project site area: five acres.
            2)   Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): forty percent of the project
site area for industrial/manufacturing and wholesaling/storage uses and twenty
percent of the project site area for all other nonresidential uses.
            3)   Maximum building height: sixty-two feet.
         d.   Exceptions. The following are exceptions to prohibited uses and
minimum project site area in ADC-3:
            1)   Single detached or one-family dwelling units (including
manufactured homes and factory-built (modular) residential buildings and
excluding mobile homes and trailers), accessory buildings or uses, home
occupations, guest houses, and secondary dwellings are permitted if the
property is zoned TH, RH, GR-1, SR, SR-2, SH, CR-1, CR-2, CR-3, CR-4, CR-5, TR,
CMH-1, or CMH-2 and the use is a permitted use within the zone, except:
               (i)   The cluster development option as described in Section
18.09.040 is not permitted except for property partially within ADC-3, the
cluster development option is permitted if residential units are not located
within ADC-3.
               (ii)   Residential development is limited to a maximum density
one dwelling unit per acre.
            2)   Parcels less than five acres that are either recorded or
proposed within an approved tentative plat prior to January 16, 2009 may be
developed in conformance with all other requirements specified in subsections
(E)(3)(a) through (E)(3)(d) of this section, with exception of subsection (E)
(3)(c)(1) of this section.
            3)   Parcels less than five acres that are neither recorded nor
proposed within an approved tentative plat prior to January 16, 2009 and which
are proposed for nonresidential use must be part of a development plan which
encompasses at least five acres.
      4.   NCZ-A (between the sixty-five and seventy Ldn noise contours):
         a.   Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted within NCZ-A if
the use is a permitted or conditional use within the underlying zone and within
any applicable approach-departure corridor:
            1)   Agriculture including direct accessory retail sales of
agricultural products and the raising and grazing of livestock and other animal
husbandry;
            2)   Agricultural processing facilities and services;
            3)   Arenas and similar places of indoor public assembly;
            4)   Business, personal, professional and semi-professional
services, including general offices, clinics, and repair and rental services;
            5)   Cemeteries;
            6)   Communications facilities and utilities;
            7)   Cultural activities, including libraries, museums,
auditoriums, concert halls, and religious facilities;
            8)   Educational facilities, including colleges and trade schools,
but excluding elementary and secondary schools and child care facilities;
            9)   Governmental uses;
            10)   Hotels, resorts, and other lodging facilities, including
group camps;
            11)   Indoor recreation, including clubhouses and swimming pools,
etc.;
            12)   Manufacturing and industrial processing, compounding,
packaging, treatment, assembling, and maintenance;
            13)   Outdoor recreation;
            14)   Professional and scientific equipment manufacturing;
            15)   Rail lines and roadways;
            16)   Restaurants and other eating and drinking establishments;
            17)   Retail sales;
            18)   Vehicle parking, including storage of operable vehicles,
boats, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, and trucks, and inhabitable
manufactured or mobile homes not intended for salvage, and public garages for
commercial use;
            19)   Wholesale trade, warehousing, and distribution; and
            20)   Other similar nonresidential uses of the same class as one or
more uses enumerated above, which, under general or specific written agreement
between the zoning inspector or the zoning inspector's designee and the
official designee of Davis-Monthan Air Force Base, are compatible and
consistent with the high noise or accident potential of military airport
operations and are not otherwise unlawful, injurious to the public health,
safety, and welfare, or specifically prohibited. The uses will be analyzed for
compliance with the intent of the February 2004 Davis-Monthan Air Force Base/
Tucson/Pima County Joint Land Use Study to limit exposure of people and noise-
sensitive uses and activities to high noise levels, including the modeled
average noise exposure of NCZ-A. Considerations shall include whether or not
the uses or activities can be sound-attenuated, e.g., an indoor or outdoor use
or activity and the sensitivity of the use to noise interference with sleep or
activities such as speech, music, meditation, and concentration on reading or
visual material.
         b.   Prohibited Uses.
            1)   Child care centers;
            2)   Elementary and secondary schools;
            3)   Hospitals, extended care facilities, and assisted living
centers;
            4)   Outdoor public assembly, including stadiums and amphitheaters;
and
            5)   Residential.
         c.   Performance Standard. The following uses must be sound-attenuated
to reduce the interior noise level from exterior sources to a maximum of forty-
five Ldn in accordance with adopted noise level reduction construction and
design standards:
            1)   All residential uses, except manufactured homes that are
documented as built to provide sound attenuation meeting the forty-five Ldn
maximum interior noise level are otherwise exempt from other provisions of the
noise level reduction construction and design standards.
            2)   All indoor areas where the primary purpose is to receive the
public.
            3)   All office areas, except those office areas subordinate and
incidental to and co-located with primary uses which do not otherwise require
sound attenuation.
            4)   All noise-sensitive indoor areas or indoor areas where normal
noise level is low, including libraries, schools, and religious facilities.
         d.   Exceptions. The following are exceptions to prohibited uses in
NCZ-A:
   Single detached or one-family dwelling units (including manufactured homes
and factory-built (modular) residential buildings and excluding mobile homes
and trailers), accessory buildings or uses, home occupations, guest houses, and
secondary dwellings are permitted if the property is zoned TH, RH, GR-1, SR,
SR-2, SH, CR-1, CR-2, CR-3, CR-4, CR-5, TR, CMH-1, or CMH-2 and the use is a
permitted use within the zone.
      5.   NCZ-B (between the seventy and seventy-five Ldn noise contours, the
seventy-five and eighty Ldn noise contours, and within the eighty Ldn noise
contour area):
         a.   Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted within NCZ-B,
with some exceptions within the eighty Ldn noise contour area, if the use is a
permitted or conditional use within the underlying zone and within any
applicable approach-departure corridor:
            1)   Agriculture, including direct accessory retail sales of
agricultural products (except within the eighty Ldn noise contour area), and
the raising and grazing of livestock and other animal husbandry;
            2)   Agricultural processing facilities and services;
            3)   Arenas and similar places of indoor public assembly, except
within the eighty Ldn noise contour area;
            4)   Business, personal, professional and semi-professional
services, including general offices, clinics, and repair and rental services,
except within the eighty Ldn noise contour area;
            5)   Communications facilities and utilities, except within the
eighty Ldn noise contour area;
            6)   Governmental uses, except within the eighty Ldn noise contour
area;
            7)   Hotels, resorts, and other lodging facilities, including group
camps, except within the eighty Ldn noise contour area;
            8)   Indoor recreation, including clubhouses and swimming pools,
etc., except within the eighty Ldn noise contour area;
            9)   Manufacturing and industrial processing, compounding,
packaging, treatment, assembling, and maintenance, excluding professional and
scientific equipment manufacturing within the eighty Ldn noise contour area;
            10)   Outdoor recreation;
            11)   Rail lines and roadways;
            12)   Restaurants and other eating and drinking establishments,
except within the eighty Ldn noise contour area;
            13)   Retail sales, except within the eighty Ldn noise contour
area;
            14)   Vehicle parking, including storage of operable vehicles,
boats, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, and trucks, and inhabitable
manufactured or mobile homes not intended for salvage, and public garages for
commercial use;
            15)   Wholesale trade, warehousing, and distribution; and
            16)   Other similar nonresidential uses of the same class as one or
more uses enumerated above, which, under general or specific written agreement
between the zoning inspector or the zoning inspector's designee and the
official designee of Davis-Monthan Air Force Base, are compatible and
consistent with the high noise or accident potential of military airport
operations and are not otherwise unlawful, injurious to the public health,
safety, and welfare, or specifically prohibited. The uses will be analyzed for
compliance with the intent of the February 2004 Davis-Monthan Air Force Base/
Tucson/Pima County Joint Land Use Study to limit exposure of people and noise-
sensitive uses and activities to high noise levels, including the modeled
average noise exposures of NCZ-B. Considerations shall include whether or not
the uses or activities can be sound-attenuated, e.g., an indoor or outdoor use
or activity and the sensitivity of the use to noise interference with sleep or
activities such as speech, music, meditation, and concentration on reading or
visual material.
         b.   Prohibited Uses.
            1)   Cemeteries;
            2)   Child care centers;
            3)   Cultural activities, including libraries, museums, theaters,
concert halls, and religious facilities;
            4)   Educational facilities, including colleges and trade schools;
            5)   Elementary and secondary schools;
            6)   Hospitals, extended care facilities, and assisted-living
centers;
            7)   Outdoor public assembly, including stadiums and amphitheaters;
and
            8)   Residential.
         c.   Additional prohibited uses within the eighty Ldn noise contour
area only:
            1)   Arenas and similar places of indoor public assembly;
            2)   Business, personal, professional and semi-professional
services, including general offices, clinics, and repair and rental services;
            3)   Governmental uses;
            4)   Hotels, resorts and other lodging facilities, including group
camps;
            5)   Indoor recreation, including clubhouses and swimming pools;
            6)   Professional and scientific equipment manufacturing;
            7)   Restaurants and other eating, and drinking establishments; and
            8)   Retail sales, including direct retail sales of agricultural
products.
         d.   Performance Standard. The following uses must be sound-attenuated
to reduce the interior noise level from exterior sources to a maximum of forty-
five Ldn in accordance with adopted noise level reduction construction and
design standards:
            1)   All residential uses, except manufactured homes that are
documented as built to provide sound attenuation meeting the forty-five Ldn
maximum interior noise level are otherwise exempt from other provisions of the
noise level reduction construction and design standards.
            2)   All indoor areas where the primary purpose is to receive the
public.
            3)   All office areas, except those office areas subordinate and
incidental to and co-located with primary uses which do not otherwise require
sound attenuation.
            4)   All noise-sensitive indoor areas or indoor areas where normal
noise level is low, including libraries, schools, and religious facilities.
         e.   Exceptions. The following are exceptions to prohibited uses in
NCZ-B:
            Single detached or one-family dwelling units (including
manufactured homes and factory-built (modular) residential buildings and
excluding mobile homes and trailers), accessory buildings or uses, home
occupations, guest houses, and secondary dwellings are permitted if the
property is zoned TH, RH, GR-1, SR, SR-2, SH, CR-1, CR-2, CR-3, CR-4, CR-5, TR,
CMH-1, or CMH-2 and the use is a permitted use within the zone.
   F.   Administrative Procedures. Administrative procedure provisions are in
accordance with Section
18.57.030(E) (Administrative procedures).
(Ord. 2008-118 § 4, 2008)
18.57.040   Requirements for private airport facilities.
   A.   Purpose: This section provides establishment standards and procedures
for the development of private airports to ensure their safe operation and
compatibility with noise-sensitive land uses.
   B.   Requirements:
      1.   Permitted zones: RH, IR or an industrial zone.
      2.   Minimum site area: Refer to FAA Advisory Circular for Utility
Airports (AC 150/5300-4B).
      3.   Conditional use permit:
         a.   A Type III permit is required (refer to
Chapter 18.97, Conditional Use Procedures), which shall be reviewed by the
aviation review committee (refer to Section
18.99.050, Aviation review committee) prior to public hearing by the planning
and zoning commission.
         b.   Notification: The notification area shall additionally include
the approach-departure corridors.
         c.   In lieu of a preliminary development plan the following document
shall be submitted:
            1)   A text including:
               a)   The type, weight and decibel levels of aircraft using the
site;
               b)   The proposed hours of operation; and
               c)   An estimate of flight frequency.
            2)   A site plan, at one inch equals four hundred feet scale,
showing the:
               a)   Parcel boundaries and dimensions;
               b)   Runway and approach-departure corridors (as defined by the
FAA); and
               c)   Zoning on property adjacent to the site and within the
approach-departure corridors.
            3)   A site plan detail, at one inch equal forty feet scale,
showing the:
               a)   Runway, including markings and identification;
               b)   Aircraft parking, maintenance and fueling areas, and other
peripheral area;
               c)   Fencing, screening and safety barriers; and
               d)   Accessory structures and equipment, including fire-fighting
equipment.
         d.   The application shall also include:
            1)   An FAA airspace letter of determination stating no objection,
with or without conditions, to the proposed facility; and
            2)   A statement describing the impact of the airport on the
regional aviation system plan.
         e.   The board of supervisors may restrict the number of flights and
hours of operation due to the proximity and intensity of noise-sensitive land
uses.
      4.   Heliports and helistops on private airports shall meet the
requirements of
Chapter 18.58.*
* As of the time of codification of this chapter, the ordinance creating Ch.
18.58 was pending.
   C.   Variance procedures: Refer to
Chapter 18.93 (Board of Adjustment Variances, Temporary Use Permits and
Interpretations).
(Ord. 1986-188 § 1 (part), 1986)
18.57.050   Requirements for general aviation airstrips and ultralight
facilities.
   A.   General aviation airstrip:
      1.   Permitted zones: SR, RH, IR or an industrial zone.
      2.   Minimum site area:
         a.   Length: The length required for safe operation as shown in the
flight manual of the largest aircraft to use the site (also refer to FAR Part
23.1587, Airworthiness Standards), and an additional two hundred forty feet at
each end of the runway.
         b.   Width: Two hundred forty feet centered on the runway.
      3.   Conditional use permit: A Type II permit is required (refer to
Chapter 18.97, Conditional Use Procedures) including the requirements and
restrictions of Section
18.57.040(B)(3)(b), (c) and (e).
   B.   Ultralight flightpark:
      1.   Permitted zones: RH, IR or an industrial zone.
      2.   Minimum site area: Ten acres.
      3.   Conditional use permit: A Type II permit is required (refer to
Chapter 18.97, Conditional Use Procedures) including the requirements and
restrictions of Section
18.57.040(B)(3)(c) and (e).
   C.   Ultralight airstrip:
      1.   Permitted zones: SR, RH, IR or an industrial zone.
      2.   Minimum site area:
         a.   SR: Ten acres,
         b.   Other zones: Five acres.
      3.   Conditional use permit:
         a.   SR: A Type II permit is required (refer to
Chapter 18.97, Conditional Use Procedures) including the requirements and
restrictions of Section
18.57.040(B)(3)(c).
         b.   Other zones: A Type I permit is required (refer to
Chapter 18.97, Conditional Use Procedures) including the requirements and
restrictions of Section
18.57.040(B)(3)(c).
      4.   Minimum runway setback:
         a.   SR: One hundred fifty feet from all property lines.
   D.   Variance procedures: Refer to
Chapter 18.93 (Board of Adjustment Variances, Temporary Use Permits and
Interpretations).
(Ord. 1986-188 § 1 (part), 1986)
18.57.060   Maps.
   A.   Tucson International Airport:
      1.   Airport Height Overlay Zone; and
      2.   Airport Land Use Overlay Zone.
   B.   Ryan Field:
      1.   Airport Height Overlay Zone; and
      2.   Airport Land Use Overlay Zone.
   C.   Davis-Monthan Air Force Base:
      1.   Airport Height Overlay Zone; and
      2.   Airport Land Use Overlay Zone.
   D.   Pinal Airpark:
      1.   Airport Height Overlay Zone; and
      2.   Airport Land Use Overlay Zone. (See Fig-ures 18.57.060(A)—(D))
(Ord. 2008-118 § 6, 2008; Ord. 1992-102 § 2, 1992; Ord. 1986-188 § 1 (part),
1986)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4435.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4433.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4431.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4429.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4427.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4425.png]
Figure 18.57.060(D)(1) 
PINAL AIRPARK 
Airport Height Overlay Zone 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4423.png]
Figure 18.57.060(D)(2) 
PINAL AIRPARK 
Airport Height Overlay Zone 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4416.png]
Chapter 18.58
HELIPORTS AND HELISTOPS
18.58.010   Purpose and applicability.
18.58.020   Definitions.
18.58.030   Permitted zones and locations.
18.58.040   Siting and operations standards.
18.58.050   Permits.
18.58.010   Purpose and applicability.
   A.   Purpose. This chapter provides standards and requirements for the
establishment and operation of heliports and helistops for the purpose of
protecting the health, safety and welfare of the public by:
      1.   Providing criteria for the location of heliports and helistops;
      2.   Ensuring heliport and helistop compatibility with noise-sensitive
land uses;
      3.   Protecting noise-sensitive land uses from distributing levels of
helicopter noise;
      4.   Ensuring safety in the use of heliports and helistops; and
      5.   Protecting property values.
   B.   Applicability. This chapter regulates private heliports and helistops
established after April 7, 1987, except those within the boundaries of Tucson
International Airport and Ryan Field. This section does not exempt those
helicopter operations not legally established on April 7, 1987.
(Ord. 1987-61 § 1 (part), 1987)
18.58.020   Definitions.
   A.   Certain terms used in this chapter shall be defined, for purposes of
this chapter, as follows:
      1.   "Ambient noise level (ANL)" means the existing background noise
level exclusive of noise emitted by a helicopter, as measured by a Class 1 or 2
sound level meter meeting the standards of the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI-SI.4-1983) and measured in dBA.
      2.   "Approach-departure path" means the flight path of a helicopter as
it approaches or departs from a designated takeoff and landing area.
      3.   "Decibel A (dBA)" means the A-weighted sound pressure level.
      4.   "FAA" means the Federal Aviation Administration.
      5.   "FAR" means the Federal Aviation Regulation.
      6.   "Helicopter" means a rotary-wing aircraft capable of vertical
takeoff and landing.
      7.   "Helicopter noise level (HNL)" means the maximum noise level
generated by a helicopter, as measured by a Class 1 or 2 sound level meter
meeting the standards of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI-SI.4-
1983) and measured in dBA.
      8.   "Helicopter operation" or "operation" means the combined takeoff and
landing of a helicopter.
      9.   "Heliport" means a designated land area used for helicopter
operations and any appurtenant areas, including fueling facilities, terminal
buildings and maintenance and repair facilities.
      10.   "Helistop" means a designated land area or roof structure used for
the pickup of discharge of passengers and cargo, which does not provide
helicopter maintenance and repair facilities or fueling services.
      11.   "Noise-sensitive land use" means:
         a.   A land use subject to interference or annoyance by the intrusion
of helicopter noise. Examples include, but are not limited to: residential
uses; educational, cultural and religious facilities; health services; tourist
lodging services; outdoor recreational or entertainment facilities; offices;
research laboratories; and government designated wilderness areas or monuments;
or
         b.   Such unconstructed uses as listed above, having an approved
subdivision plat, development plan or building permit.
      12.   "Slant range measurement" means the measurement taken from the
closest point of the perimeter of the landing pad in a straight line to the
closest point of a property line.
(Ord. 1987-61 § 1 (part), 1987)
18.58.030   Permitted zones and locations.
   A.   Heliports. CI-2, CI-3 and private airports (as defined in Section
18.57.020).
   B.   Helistops. CI-1, CI-2, CI-3, private airports and hospitals.
(Ord. 1987-61 § 1 (part), 1987)
18.58.040   Siting and operations standards.
   A.   Setbacks:
      1.   Heliports. The landing pad perimeter shall be a minimum of:
         a.   Fifty feet from a property line of the parcel;
         b.   One thousand two hundred feet from a property line of a noise-
sensitive land use;
         c.   Two thousand four hundred feet from the perimeter of the landing
pad of another heliport or helistop; and
         d.   Three hundred feet from a public right-of-way.
      2.   Heliport accessory structures. Maintenance and fueling facilities
shall be a minimum of fifty feet from a property line of the parcel.
      3.   Helistops. The landing pad perimeter shall be a minimum of:
         a.   Fifty feet from a property line of the parcel;
         b.   One thousand two hundred feet from a property line of a noise-
sensitive land use;
         c.   Two hundred feet from a property line of a noise-sensitive land
use for hospital helistops;
         d.   Three hundred feet from a public right-of-way;
         e.   A slant range shall be used to measure the above setbacks for
rooftop helistops.
   B.   Permitted hours of operation are between seven a.m. and seven p.m.
   C.   Noise Testing.
      1.   If the perimeter of the landing pad is within one mile of a noise-
sensitive land use, the applicant shall perform a noise test before submitting
the permit application. The test shall be taken:
         a.   By a member of the Acoustical Society of America, Audio
Engineering Society or Institute of Noise Control Engineering;
         b.   At the property line of the nearest noise-sensitive land use; and
         c.   Within the hours of operation seven a.m. to seven p.m.
      2.   Testing shall be performed in accordance with the Helicopter Noise
Testing Manual which has been approved by resolution of the board of
supervisors.
      3.   The applicant shall provide written notification to the county
zoning inspector two weeks prior to the testing date.
      4.   The following shall help determine the potential number of
operations:
         a.   Legend:
            ANL = Ambient noise level (measured in dBA and averaged over twelve
hours);
            HNL = Helicopter noise level (measured in dBA as the maximum
reading taken during an operation);
            dBA = the A-weighted sound pressure level.
         b.   If the ANL at the property lien of the nearest noise-sensitive
land use is less than or equal to fifty-five dBA the following applies:
 
HNL Decibel Range Less Than or Equal to 55 Maximum Number of Operations Per Day
dBA                                        Limitations set out in Section
                                           18.58.040D. Limits
Above 55 dBA to 60 dBA                     8
Above 60 dBA to 65 dBA                     4
Above 65 dBA to 70 dBA                     2
Above 70 dBA to 75 dBA                     1
Above 75 dBA                               0
 
         c.   If the ANL exceeds 55 dBA the following applies:
            1)   If the HNL does not exceed the ANL, then the operation limits
in Section
18.58.040D apply;
            2)   If the HNL exceeds the ANL, then operations shall be limited
by the applicable decibel ranges listed above.
   D.   Number of Operations.
      1.   Heliports may be subject to limitations on the number of operations
as a condition of the use permit. After one year an applicant may request an
increase in the numbers of operations by means of the Type III conditional use
permit procedure.
      2.   Helistops shall not exceed ten operations per day.
      3.   The board of supervisors or the party responsible for approving the
permit may establish a lower number of permitted operations due to the
proximity and number of noise-sensitive land uses.
   E.   Approach-departure path shall avoid noise-sensitive land uses and
follow major streets when possible.
   F.   Operations Log. The heliport or helistop permit holder shall log the
identification, operation number and arrival-departure time of helicopters
using the facility. Upon request the county zoning inspector shall receive a
copy of the operation log.
   G.   Exemptions. Helistops for hospitals are exempt from all but the setback
requirements of this section.
(Ord. 1987-61 § 1 (part), 1987)
18.58.050   Permits.
   A.   Heliport/Helistop Type III Conditional Use Permit:
      1.   Notification. The notification area shall be one thousand three
hundred twenty feet measured from the subject property line.
      2.   Submittals. An applicant for a heliport or helistop permit shall
file an application as required in Section
18.97.030 except in place of the preliminary development plan the application
shall contain the following:
         a.   An FAA airspace letter-of-determination stating no objection,
with or without conditions, to the proposed facility.
         b.   A text describing the following information:
            1)   The type, weight and noise emission level (obtained from the
manufacturer or FAA) of helicopters anticipated to use the site;
            2)   The requested number of helicopter operations;
            3)   The requested days and hours of operation of the facility; and
            4)   An explanation of how the facility will be compatible with the
purpose of this chapter.
         c.   A surroundings plan, at one inch equal two hundred feet scale, of
the area within a two thousand six hundred forty foot radius of the center of
the helipad, showing the:
            1)   Parcel boundaries and dimensions;
            2)   Approach-departure path(s) (refer to FAA Advisory Circular
150/5390-XX);
            3)   Obstructions, as defined in FAR Part 77, within and adjacent
to the approach-departure path(s);
            4)   Location of noise-sensitive land uses within two thousand six
hundred forty feet of the center of the helipad and within the approach-
departure path(s); and
            5)   Location of public rights-of-way within three hundred feet of
the center of the helipad.
         d.   A site plan, at one inch equals forty feet scale, showing the:
            1)   Landing area, including markings and identification;
            2)   Aircraft parking, maintenance and fueling areas, and
peripheral areas;
            3)   Location of fencing, screening and safety barriers;
            4)   Points of access to the landing pad, i.e., gates, elevators
and stairwells; and
            5)   Location of accessory structures and equipment, including fire
fighting equipment (when applicable).
         e.   A noise test in accordance with Section
18.58.040C.
      3.   Conditional use permit approval. A conditional use permit for a
heliport or helistop shall comply with the purpose (Section
18.58.010), the permitted zones and locations (Section
18.58.030) and the standards (Section
18.58.040) of this chapter and be approved by the board of supervisors in
accordance with Chapter
18.97.030H.
      4.   Conditional use permit approval for a helistop shall be valid for
three years.
      5.   Reapplication for a Helistop Permit. An application for subsequent
helistop conditional use permits on the same site shall be subject to the same
procedures and standards as a first-use permit. The applicant shall not offer
and the county shall not consider the applicant's reliance on or expenditures
under the first-use permit.
   B.   Temporary Helistop Permits.
      1.   Fourteen-day permit. The chief zoning inspector may grant a one-time
fourteen-day permit for a helistop in any zone if he determines that the
granting of the permit will not have an adverse impact on nearby noise-
sensitive land uses.
         a.   The application shall contain submittal information from Section
18.58.050A2b, c and d, unless waived by the chief zoning inspector;
         b.   The hours of operations and number of operations shall be
approved by the chief zoning inspector in accordance with Section
18.58.040B and D2.
      2.   Nine-month permit. The board of supervisors may grant a one-time
nine-month permit for a helistop in any zone in accordance with Type III
conditional use permit procedures except as amended below:
         a.   Notification shall be in accordance with Section
18.58.050A1;
         b.   The applicant shall meet the standards of Sections
18.58.040 and
18.58.050A2.
      3.   One-day permit. An annual one-day operation may occur on property
that is a minimum of twenty acres and is undeveloped or in a rural zone. The
applicant shall inform the county zoning inspector of the property tax code.
The county zoning inspector may permit the operation upon verification of the
above information.
      4.   Two-day permit. The board of supervisors may grant a two-day permit
for a helistop in any zone for any parcel of a minimum of twenty acres in
accordance with Type II conditional use permit procedures except as amended
below:
         a.   The application shall contain submittal information from Section
18.58.030A2b, c and d;
         b.   The total number of operations shall not exceed ten;
         c.   The hours of operation shall be in accordance with Section
18.58.040B;
         d.   No more than two permits per year shall be granted for any parcel
under this provision; and
         e.   The board may waive the noise test for this permit.
(Ord. 1987-61 § 1 (part), 1987)
Chapter 18.59
GC GOLF COURSE ZONE
18.59.010   Purpose and use.
18.59.020   Definitions.
18.59.030   Supporting and related uses.
18.59.040   Performance standards.
18.59.050   Golf course development plan requirements.
18.59.060   Procedures and limitations.
18.59.010   Purpose and use.
   A.   Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to permit the development of golf
courses in Pima County while preserving and enhancing water resources, scenic
vistas, neighborhoods, property uses and values.
   B.   Use.
      1.   This zone, when superimposed upon any zoning district permits the
use of golf courses. Other provisions and requirements of the underlying zones
remain applicable.
      2.   Associated business, commercial and residential uses which are not
directly in support of the golf course use shall be excluded from the golf
course zone. These associated uses shall be provided in the zones with which
the golf course zone is combined.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.59.020   Definitions.
   Certain terms used in this chapter shall be defined as follows:
      1.   Irrigation water: directly served effluent, reclaimed water or
Central Arizona Project (CAP) water, and shall not include effluent, reclaimed
water or CAP water stored and recovered pursuant to Title 45, Chapter 3.1,
Arizona Revised Statutes.
(Ord. 2006-96 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.59.030   Supporting and related uses.
   A.   Supporting, related and other uses shall be allowed only as approved
with the development plan or by later resolution of the board of supervisors,
provided such uses are consistent with the purpose of the golf course zone.
(Ord. 2006-96 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.59.040   Performance standards.
   A.   Design Standards. The following standards shall control the design,
maintenance and operation of golf courses:
      1.   Irrigation.
         a.   Required Water. A golf course zoned on or after January 1, 2007
shall utilize irrigation water, unless otherwise exempted by the board of
supervisors. Where a golf course zoned prior to January 1, 2007 is not using
irrigation water, water withdrawn for irrigation shall be offset by prior or
concurrent recharge of an equivalent amount of CAP water in the Tucson Active
Management Area.
         b.   Conversion. If at any time the board of supervisors determines
that irrigation water has become available for purchase and a conveyance system
for such directly served water is within three miles of the boundary of a golf
course established prior to January 1, 2007, the board may direct the golf
course to convert to irrigation water. The board may set a reasonable time for
conversion;
      2.   Minimum irrigation of fairways and roughs;
      3.   Rough and fairway areas shall make maximum use of existing landforms
and indigenous grasses and vegetation;
      4.   Use of "landing areas" rather than fully grassed fairways;
      5.   Landscaping shall be in harmony with the desert environment:
         a.   Trees, shrubs, and groundcovers shall be drought tolerant, non-
invasive, low pollen-dispersing, and low water use,
         b.   Use of inorganic groundcovers, rather than turf, is encouraged;
      6.   Water features shall be in context with the area and shall utilize
the same source as irrigation water, excluding swimming pools and spas;
      7.   Irrigation water shall be metered;
      8.   Provision shall be made for on-site storage of irrigation water.
Storage ponds shall have sealed bottoms;
      9.   The most advanced water conserving irrigation systems shall be
employed. Drip irrigation, where feasible, is the preferred method;
      10.   Natural drainageways shall be retained to the maximum extent;
      11.   Golf course design shall respond to the natural topography and
drainageways of the site, and employ minimal clearing of native vegetation.
Mass grading shall be avoided;
      12.   Buffers shall be provided to protect existing neighborhoods by
mitigating the adverse impacts of sound, visibility, and traffic. Buffers may
include landscaping, walls, fences, pathways, drainageways, natural features,
existing vegetation and open space.
   B.   Off-street Parking. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in
adequate number to serve person employed, residing or visiting on the premises
so as to prevent congestion of surrounding streets and promote the safety of
the public.
(Ord. 2006-96 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1999-22 § 1, 1999; Ord. 1998-47 § 1, 1998;
Ord. 1995-65 § 1, 1995; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.59.050   Golf course development plan requirements.
   A.   The golf course development plan shall be prepared by professional
designers and planners in accordance with
Chapter 18.71 (Development Plan) and shall address graphically and in writing
the elements of this section. This development plan requirement may be
satisfied by a development plan of which a golf course is an element.
   B.   Site analysis. A rezoning site analysis (
Chapter 18.91, Rezoning Procedures) may substitute for the golf course site
analysis. The site analysis shall include:
      1.   Topography, including the effect of the proposed treatment upon
existing land forms;
      2.   Effect of development on views, both on and off-site;
      3.   Existing and projected traffic circulation, including the functional
relationship of roads and paths;
      4.   Inventory of existing vegetation and wildlife and analysis of the
effect of development;
      5.   Hydrology, including detention, recharge opportunity, drainage,
erosion and flood control;
      6.   Applicability of the hillside development zone (
Chapter 18.61, HD Hillside Development Zone) and the Buffer Overlay zone (
Chapter 18.67, Buffer Overlay Zone);
      7.   Trails opportunities and access provisions;
      8.   Open space and buffers;
      9.   Soils suitability analysis;
   C.   Landscape Plan. The landscape plan shall include:
      1.   Graphic representation of all elements of the development, such as
golf course, water features, roads, paths, recreation elements, buildings,
walls, patios, and parking areas, as they relate to the landscaping;
      2.   List and legend by common and scientific names of all plants to be
used, indicating location and size of plant materials;
      3.   Irrigation plan, including schedules and estimated consumption of
irrigation water;
      4.   Identification and location of existing native vegetation intended
to be left undisturbed.
   D.   Grading Plan. A Type 2 grading plan shall be required in accordance
with Section
18.81.060 (Grading), and the plan shall include appropriate notes or comments
relative to special features, conditions or techniques that relate to the golf
course.
   E.   Context Analysis: The plans shall also show the existing development
and improvements of adjacent properties within six hundred feet of the proposed
golf course zone and its associated land uses.
(Ord. 2006-96 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1986-187 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-82
(part), 1985)
18.59.060   Procedures and limitations.
   A.   Establishment and Removal. Requests for establishment or removal of a
golf course zone shall be processed in accordance with
Chapter 18.91 (Rezoning Procedures), and is supplemented by the requirements
outlined in this chapter.
   B.   Submission of Plan. The petitioners for a golf course zone shall submit
a golf course preliminary development plan for the entire zone and its
associated land uses at the time of application.
   C.   Notice.
      1.   Notice of all public hearings shall be given to owners of property
within six hundred feet of the proposed golf course zone.
      2.   Failure to give notice shall not invalidate decisions made.
   D.   Effective Date and Phasing.
      1.   The certificate of compliance for the golf course zone shall be
issued when the construction of the golf course and its supporting facilities
have been completed in substantial compliance with the approved development
plan.
      2.   If a golf course is constructed in phases, a construction schedule
must be submitted and approved with the development plan.
      3.   A certificate of compliance for each phase of the golf course zone
shall be issued only for that phase completed in substantial compliance with
the approved development plan.
   E.   Grading Permits.
      1.   No clearing, brushing or grubbing, grading or development shall be
allowed in the proposed golf course zone prior to approval of a Type 2 grading
plan and the issuance of a grading permit.
      2.   A golf course grading plan will be accepted and approved only as an
element of the required golf course development plan.
      3.   Grading permits will be issued in conjunction with grading plan
review and approval by the department of transportation and flood control
district.
(Ord. 2006-96 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1986-187 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-82
(part), 1985)
Chapter 18.61
HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE*
18.61.010   Purpose.
18.61.020   Definitions.
18.61.030   Applicability.
18.61.040   Protected peaks and ridges designations.
18.61.041   Protected peaks and ridges standards.
18.61.042   Special use permits and addition permits for protected areas of
level one peaks or ridges.
18.61.043   Application and public notice for special use or addition permit in
protected areas.
18.61.050   Development mitigation and performance standards.
18.61.051   Average cross slope calculations.
18.61.052   Slope density requirements.
18.61.053   Natural areas.
18.61.054   Grading requirements.
18.61.055   Site restoration requirements.
18.61.056   Color requirements.
18.61.057   Minor modifications.
18.61.060   Hillside development manual.
18.61.070   Review procedures.
18.61.080   Exceptions.
18.61.090   Conflict, enforcement, and interpretation.
18.61.100   Illustrations and maps.
18.61.010   Purpose.
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for hillside
areas which conserve and maintain the character, identity, and image of Pima
County and promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare
by:
      1.   Conserving the unique natural resources of hillside areas;
      2.   Permitting intensity of development (density) compatible with the
natural characteristics of hillside terrain, such as steepness of slope and
significant land forms;
      3.   Reducing the physical impact of hillside development by encouraging
innovative site and architectural design, minimizing grading, and requiring
more intense restoration of graded areas;
      4.   Minimizing disturbance of existing drainage patterns and soil
erosion problems incurred in development alteration of hillside terrain;
      5.   Providing safe and convenient access to hillside development; and
      6.   Ensuring the efficient expenditure of public funds.
   B.   The purpose of the Hillside Development Manual, a companion document
adopted by resolution of the board of supervisors, is to promote compliance
with this chapter by establishing technical requirements, implementation
standards, guidelines, and procedures.
(Ord. 2000-52 § 1 (part), 2000)
18.61.020   Definitions.
   A.   Certain terms used in this chapter shall be defined for purposes of
this chapter only, as follows:
      1.   Development. Any human alteration to the existing state of the land,
including its vegetation, soil, geology, topography or hydrology for any
commercial, industrial, residential or accessory facilities, or any other use,
including any and all utilities, sewers, septic systems and circulation areas,
such as streets, private roads, parking areas or driveways.
      2.   Divide. To separate an existing land parcel into two or more land
parcels.
      3.   Grading. The clearing, brushing, grubbing, excavating, or filling of
a site.
      4.   Land parcel. An area of land with boundaries recorded in the Pima
County recorder's office.
      5.   Mitigation. The replacement and/or restoration of a damaged or
disturbed site feature or a high resource value element on-site to a condition
that replicates the natural undisturbed condition that historically existed on-
site or in the neighborhood. (See also Restoration).
      6.   Natural area. A land area, unimproved and not occupied by any
structures or man-made elements, set aside for the conservation of permanent,
undisturbed open space.
      7.   No practicable alternative. When used, the term means that the
property owner has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the planning official
that due to physical conditions existing on the property, compliance with the
requirements of a section cannot reasonably be practically or functionally
achieved.
      8.   Peak point. The single highest elevation spot of a peak from which
the protected area is measured.
      9.   Perimeter exposed fill slope. For a development category 1 or 2
project on the grading requirements table, the outward most, outward facing
exposed fill slope located on or adjacent to the project property line, or
located on the perimeter of the project's mass graded area.
      10.   Perimeter wall. For a development category 1 or 2 project on the
grading requirements table 18.71.054-1, the outward most, outward facing free
standing wall which may be located on or adjacent to the project property line,
within a bufferyard, on or adjacent to a perimeter exposed slope, or on the
perimeter of a mass graded area.
      11.   Practicable alternative. When used shall mean an alternative that
is functionally and environmentally acceptable, can be practically and
functionally achieved, and in conformance with the purpose provisions of
Section
18.61.010 as demonstrated to and confirmed by the planning official.
      12.   Project site. An area consisting of one or more land parcels that
is planned, reviewed and developed as a unified project, including designated
natural areas.
      13.   Protected area of a peak. The circular area defined by a 150-foot
radius (map distance) from the peak point.
      14.   Protected area of a ridge. The oval area defined by lines running
parallel to and on either side of the ridge line at a map distance of 150 feet,
combined with and terminating at a 150-foot radius (map distance) from the end
points. For all previously adopted ridge lines, the protected area is the area
depicted on the maps.
      15.   Restoration. The process of repairing a previously disturbed,
damaged, or graded site area or site feature and replicating its previously
undisturbed, undamaged, or ungraded condition of vegetation, plant communities,
geologic structures, grade, drainages, and riparian habitat that historically
existed on site or in the neighborhood. Restoration of previously disturbed
areas will include enhanced revegetation, and may include corrective grading,
natural and artificial rock, and top dressing.
      16.   Ridge line. A ground line running center and parallel to the long
axis of a ridge, designated by the identification of two end points.
      17.   Structural development perimeter. A generally contiguous area on
site defined by the outer surfaces or edges of curbs, walls, paving areas,
utilities, and individual septic systems.
      18.   Twenty-five percent (25%) or greater slope(s). When the term is
used it shall apply to any twenty-five percent (25%) or greater sloped area on
a parcel, lot, or project site which is both longer than 50 feet when measured
in any horizontal direction and greater than 7.5 feet when measured vertically.
(Ord. 2003-17 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 2000-52 § 1 (part), 2000; Ord. 1998-50 §
1, 1998)
18.61.030   Applicability.
   A.   Applicable Lands.
      1.   This chapter applies to any land parcel, lot, or project site
containing slopes of fifteen percent (15%) or greater, which are both longer
than fifty feet (50') when measured in any horizontal direction and higher than
seven and one-half feet (7.5') when measured vertically.
      2.   This chapter does not apply to a lot that is located within a
subdivision for which a complete tentative plat was filed with the county
between August 11, 1998, and July 7, 2000, and for which the final plat has
been recorded within 18 months after July 7, 2000. All lots on the final
recorded plat shall comply with the grading requirements of
Chapter 18.61 in effect prior to July 7, 2000, except that grading on all lots
in a nonmass graded subdivision are subject to the grading requirements of
section
18.61.054G of this ordinance.
   B.   Prohibited Development.
      1.   A rezoning to TR, RVC, CB1, CB2, CPI, CI1, CI2 or CI3 zone is not
permitted on a land parcel, lot, or project site having an average cross slope
of fifteen percent (15%) or greater.
      2.   Nonresidential conditional uses (refer to
Chapter 18.97) within a rural or residential zone are not permitted on land
parcels, lots or project sites having average cross slopes of fifteen percent
(15%) or greater.
      3.   A rezoning for residential uses with overall densities greater than
1.20 residences per acre is not permitted on land parcels with an average cross
slope greater than fifteen percent (15%) prior to the exclusion of any natural
area.
(Ord. 2003-17 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 2000-52 § 1 (part), 2000)
18.61.040   Protected peaks and ridges designations.
   A.   Initiation of Protection for Peaks and Ridges. The designation of
protected areas for certain peaks and ridges shall be initiated by the board of
supervisors or the planning and zoning commission or as part of the
comprehensive plan update program (refer to Section
18.89.050).
   B.   Criteria for Evaluation. Peaks and ridges shall be evaluated for
designation as protected areas using the following criteria:
      1.   The peak point or ridge line lies within one mile of a public
preserve;
      2.   The peak point or ridge line is within 300 feet of land subject to
the buffer overlay zone (
Chapter 18.67);
      3.   The peak or ridge is a dominant feature in the surrounding landscape
or constitutes a significant linking element of such geographic feature;
      4.   The peak or ridge is an extension of a mountain, major hill or
ridge, or other significant terrain feature, from a designated public preserve.
      5.   The peak or ridge is visible from a scenic route or a road leading
to a designated trailhead;
      6.   The peak or ridge is visible to the community at large.
   C.   Level One and Level Two Designation. The board of supervisors shall
designate protected peaks and ridges as level one or level two protected areas
based upon their prominence and visibility to the community at large, with
level one protected peaks and ridges being the most prominent and dominant.
      1.   A level one peak or ridge has communitywide viewshed significance
based on the criteria one through six.
      2.   A level two peak or ridge may meet one or more of the criteria one
through six. A level two peak or ridge shall include a topographic feature that
has dominance in a local neighborhood area and has some degree of local
viewshed significance. However, unlike a level one peak or ridge, a level two
peak or ridge does not have communitywide view-shed significance or the
likelihood for future inclusion into a public preserve.
      3.   Development is prohibited in level one protected areas, except as
permitted by this chapter.
      4.   View mitigation standards shall be complied with for all development
in level two protected areas in accordance with this chapter.
      5.   All protected peaks and ridges adopted prior to the effective date
of this ordinance are designated as level one protected areas.
   D.   Public Notice Procedure for Designation.
      1.   Planning and zoning commission public hearing: A minimum of fifteen
(15) days prior to the hearing, the planning division shall provide notice by:
         a.   Publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county seat;
         b.   Posting of the property or area to be considered at the hearing;
and
         c.   Mailing written notice to all property owners of the proposed
protected peak or ridge, as defined by its proposed protected area, and all
property owners within a minimum 1,000 feet of the proposed protected area.
      2.   Board of supervisors public hearing. As required for the commission.
      3.   Expansion of notice. The commission or supervisors may expand the
notification area to greater than 1,000 feet, which shall be noticed prior to a
public hearing.
      4.   Failure to provide notice. Notice is based on the ownership of the
property as shown on the county assessor records. The unintentional failure to
give written notice to a property owner or the unintentional omission of the
name of a property owner shall not invalidate an action of the commission or
supervisors.
   E.   Map Notation. Protected peaks and ridges, and their protected areas,
shall be shown on county zoning maps by their underlying zone designation plus
the suffix PR-1 for level one features and PR-2 for level two features.
(Ord. 2003-17 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 2000-52 § 1 (part), 2000)
18.61.041   Protected peaks and ridges standards.
   A.   Development Restrictions in and near Protected Areas.
      1.   All development is prohibited within the protected area of a peak or
ridge except with a special use permit, level two permit, or addition permit as
provided in this chapter.
      2.   On land parcels approved for rezoning after August 11, 1998, all
development is further prohibited within one hundred fifty feet (map distance)
from a level one protected area.
      3.   All development within a level two protected area must comply with
the level two protected area mitigation standards as provided in this chapter.
   B.   Color Requirements in and near Protected Areas. All exposed exterior
walls and roofs of buildings (unless a roof is screened by a parapet wall
extending at least three feet above the building), retaining walls, accessory
structures, roads and utility structures located within the protected area of a
peak or ridge or within a horizontal radius (map distance) of three hundred
fifty feet from the protected area of a peak or ridge shall be earthtone in
color to blend with the natural setting. Colors shall not exceed a light-
reflective value of thirty-eight percent. The earthtone color palette is below
in Section
18.61.041(C)(7).
   C.   Level Two Protected Area Mitigation Standards. All development within
the level two protected area shall be reviewed for a level two permit with the
following standards:
      1.   Native trees and shrubs shall be planted and spaced in at most
twenty foot intervals to screen all building walls. An alternative vegetation
that would achieve the same results may be used if approved by the planning
official or his assigned designee. In all cases, fifteen-gallon plants or
larger shall be used, and they must be connected to an irrigation system;
      2.   Roadway edges shall be revegetated in accordance with Section
18.61.055;
      3.   Building height shall not exceed eighteen feet;
      4.   Roof mounted antennas shall not be visible above the roofline;
      5.   Development activity shall comply with Section
18.61.042(C)(3)(c) through (f);
      6.   Lighting shall be in accordance with the county outdoor lighting
code (Title 15); and
      7.   Building wall colors shall be earthtone and selected from a color
palette of browns, adobes, rusts, tans, beiges, sepias, olives, mauves, and
grays.
      8.   The width of a private driveway that must cross the protected area
of a level two protected peak or ridge shall not exceed ten feet, and the width
of a private roadway providing two-way access that must cross the protected
area of a level two protected peak or ridge shall not exceed eighteen feet.
      9.   All utilities that cross the protected area of a level two peak or
ridge shall be underground, with no accessory utility structures allowed within
the protected area of the peak or the ridge, and the pathway to construct and
install the utilities shall be completely revegetated.
   D.   Development Review Adjacent to Protected Peaks or Ridges.
      1.   When development is proposed within three hundred fifty feet of a
level one or level two protected area, the developer shall submit to the
development services department a topographic map (scale no smaller than one
inch equals one-hundred feet with ten-foot contour intervals) delineating the
protected area of the peak or ridge, the peak point or ridge line, and
elevations.
      2.   This map shall be submitted in conjunction with a grading plan for
building permit review purposes, tentative plat or development plan. This
requirement shall also apply when a road or development is proposed within a
protected area, subject to the granting of a special use or an addition permit
in accordance with Section
18.61.042.
   E.   Site Design Guidelines for Level Two Peaks and Ridges. Development
within the level two protected area shall be guided by the adopted Site Design
Guidelines for Level 2 Peaks and Ridges.
(Ord. 2011-2 § 14, 2011; Ord. 2004-21 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 2003-17 § 1
(part), 2003)
18.61.042   Special use permits and addition permits for protected areas of
level one peaks or ridges.
   A.   Special Use Permit within Level One Protected Areas of Peaks or Ridges.
      1.   The board of supervisors may grant a special use permit for
development within the protected area of a level one protected peak or ridge
when such development can be proven by the developer to serve a need that
outweighs the need for the restrictions of Section
18.61.041(A).
      2.   No permit shall be issued that:
         a.   Is contrary to the purpose and intent of this chapter;
         b.   Allows a use not allowed on a property by other chapters of this
code; or
         c.   Allows a use that substantially injures the use of adjacent
property conforming to the restrictions of this chapter.
      3.   Grounds for issuing a special use permit shall not include:
         a.   That the issuance of the permit would allow a more profitable
use; or
         b.   Any condition resulting from a division of land parcels made
after July 1, 1976.
      4.   The supervisors may place conditions on the permit to carry out the
purpose and intent of this chapter.
      5.   The permit shall be void if not used to obtain building permits
within two years of its issuance. The permit shall run with the land, but only
after the construction of any authorized structures.
   B.   Addition Permit within Level One Protected Areas of Peaks and Ridges.
      1.   An addition permit may be granted so long as the main use is
permitted and is a legal nonconforming use within a level one protected area.
      2.   An addition permit applies to an addition to the property such as
additions to the main use, accessory structures and uses, including guest
houses, swimming pools, walls and similar structures within level one protected
areas of protected peaks or ridges in accordance with the provisions of this
subsection if the main structure or use is a permitted dwelling. The granting
of an addition permit shall not waive or modify any applicable building or fire
codes.
      3.   Standards. The director of the development services department or an
assigned designee may grant an addition permit only after a finding is made
that the visual impact can be minimized by applying all the following standards
and only conditioned upon all the standards being addressed:
         a.   The height of the property addition shall not exceed the highest
point in elevation of the main dwelling;
         b.   The addition shall be located in such a manner that views of the
prominent land forms, unusual stands of vegetation, and public preserves are
not obstructed. If the addition cannot be reasonably and practicably located as
required by this section, the addition shall result in the least reasonably
possible obstruction of such viewshed;
         c.   Drainage from the property addition shall not adversely affect
adjoining properties and public rights-of-way;
         d.   The property addition shall not significantly interfere with the
air temperature/solar radiation orientation of buildings on adjoining
properties;
         e.   The location of the property addition shall not impose
objectionable noise levels or odors on adjoining properties;
         f.   No additional utility poles shall be erected. All utilities shall
be underground.
      4.   Notice to owners of affected properties.
         a.   Mailed notice including a sketch plan shall be sent to property
owners within one thousand feet of the subject property;
         b.   The director of the development services department or an
assigned designee may waive the giving of notice, if the applicant submits
written consent of the addition permit by all property owners of affected
property as defined in Section
18.61.042(C)(4)(a) above.
      5.   Decision by the director of development services or an assigned
designee.
         a.   The director of the development services department or an
assigned designee shall review all the submitted information and provide a
written response to the applicant;
         b.   The response shall state the reasons for the decision if the
request is denied;
         c.   If the director of the development services department or an
assigned designee approves the permit, it may be issued for the property
addition.
      6.   Appeals or referrals to the board of adjustment.
         a.   The applicant may appeal the decision of the director of the
development services department or an assigned designee to the applicable board
of adjustment in accordance with Section
18.93.030 to be treated as a variance request.
         b.   If a protest to a proposed addition within the protected area of
a peak or ridge is submitted in writing within fifteen days of the date of the
mailing of notice by an owner of affected property, as specified above, the
director of the development services department or an assigned designee shall
refer the application to the board of adjustment to be heard in accordance with
Section
18.93.030. Protests shall be based solely upon characteristics of the proposed
property addition.
      7.   The director of the development services department or an assigned
designee may refer any application to the board of adjustment to be heard in
accordance with Section
18.93.030.
      8.   A separate fee is required for appeals filed with the board of
adjustment in accordance with the standard fee for variance applications (as
specified in the Planning and Development Services Fee Schedule).
(Ord. 2003-17 § 1 (part), 2003)
18.61.043   Application and public notice for special use or addition permit in
protected areas.
   A.   Submittal Requirements. A request for a special use permit or addition
permit for development within a level one protected area of a peak or ridge
shall be made on an application form provided by the development services
department. The application shall include the following:
      1.   A legal description of the subject site;
      2.   Signatures of the property owners of record or the authorized agent
of the owner;
      3.   Letter of authorization if the property owner is represented by an
agent;
      4.   A site plan showing color of proposed development, existing and
proposed buildings and structures, access driveways, parking, utility
easements, and distances from buildings and structures to property lines as
well as to other buildings and structures;
      5.   An elevation drawing showing all existing and proposed buildings or
structures and their building heights;
      6.   A revegetation plan (including rip-rapping) showing existing
vegetation, graded areas to be revegetated, the manner of revegetation and
revegetation time schedule;
      7.   A statement describing the ability and intent of the property owner
to apply for necessary county permits within nine months of receiving approval
of an addition and within two years of receiving a special use permit;
      8.   A statement describing how the proposal complies with the applicable
standards in Section
18.61.042C for an addition permit and in Section
18.61.042A for a level one special use permit;
      9.   Any other information required by the development services
department as reasonably necessary to evaluate the application;
      10.   An application fee in accordance with the planning and development
services fee schedule.
   B.   Public Notice for Special Use or Addition Permits within Level One
Protected Areas of Peaks and Ridges.
      1.   Public notice and meeting for level one special use permit. The
request for a level one special use permit shall be considered by the board of
supervisors at an advertised public hearing with mailed notice to owners of
property within 1,000 feet of the subject protected area.
      2.   Public notice for level one addition permit. Pima County shall mail
notice, including copies of the submitted sketch plan, to owners of property
within 1,000 feet of the applicant's property lines. The director of the
development services department or an assigned designee may waive the giving of
notice if the applicant submits written consents to the modification signed by
all owners of property within 1,000 feet of the applicant's property lines.
      3.   Failure to provide notice. Notice is based on the ownership of the
property as shown on the county assessor records. The unintentional failure to
give written notice to a property owner or the unintentional omission of the
name of a property owner shall not invalidate an action of the committee,
commission, or supervisors.
(Ord. 2003-17 § 1 (part), 2003)
18.61.050   Development mitigation and performance standards.
   Unless otherwise expressly excepted by this chapter, the development
mitigation and performance standards set forth in Sections
18.61.051 to and including
18.61.057 apply to any and all development on lands subject to this chapter.
(Ord. 2000-52 § 1 (part), 2000)
18.61.051   Average cross slope calculations.
   A.   Average Cross Slope. A method of determining the cross slope of a
parcel or project site, by using the following equation:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4437.png]
   Where:
 
I      = Contour interval (maximum 10') in feet;
L      = Combined length in feet of all contour lines measured on the parcel or
         project site;
0.0023 = Conversion of square feet into acres × 100;
A      = Project site or parcel area in acres.
 
   B.   The average cross slope shall be rounded off to the nearest whole
number. When .5 or higher is computed, the number shall be rounded off to the
next highest whole number.
   C.   The average cross slope of a parcel or project site proposed for
residential purposes only may be reduced by establishing a natural area on the
parcel or project site and revising the average cross slope calculation to
delete the natural area from the equation.
   D.   Natural areas set aside in any division of land shall not be included
in the average cross slope calculation, neither in the combined length of
contour (L) nor in the project site area (A). The total acreage of the project
site may be used to calculate the number of dwelling units based on allowable
density, provided that all other applicable provisions of this section are met.
   E.   The average cross slope is used for determining slope density
requirements for residential development only.
(Ord. 2000-52 § 1 (part), 2000)
18.61.052   Slope density requirements.
   A.   On land parcels or project sites with average cross slopes of fifteen
percent (15%) or greater, dwelling unit density shall not exceed that allowed
by either the existing zoning on the parcel or the following
table 18.61.052-1, whichever is more restrictive.
Table 18.61.052-1
Average Cross Slope (%) Average Area (acres) per Dwelling Unit (density)
Average Cross Slope (%) Average Area (acres) per Dwelling Unit (density)
15                      1.0
16                      1.12
17                      1.25
18                      1.37
19                      1.5
20                      2.0
21                      2.25
22                      2.5
23                      3.5
24                      4.5
25                      6.0
26                      7.0
27                      8.6
28                      10.4
29                      12.8
30                      16.0
31                      23.5
32                      31.0
33 and greater          36.0
 
   B.   The provisions of Section
18.61.052A. do not apply to residential development on unsubdivided land
parcels recorded in the county recorder's office prior to July 1, 1976.
   C.   If land parcels are divided or used for multifamily development after
July 1, 1976, all appropriate provisions of this chapter shall apply.
   D.   Land parcels recorded with the county recorder's office after July 1,
1976, and prior to August 11, 1998, that are less in area than the required
area per dwelling unit may be developed with a single dwelling unit, provided
that all other applicable requirements of this chapter and code are met
including the set-aside of natural area set forth in Section
18.61.053. All of the land area on the parcel outside of the allowable amount
of grading shall be restricted as natural area in conformance with the
requirements of
18.61.053C.
   E.   The slope density requirements shall not apply when the cluster
development option (refer to Section
18.09.040) is used on land parcels with an average cross slope of less than
twenty percent (20%), as calculated prior to the exclusion of natural areas.
   F.   The slope density requirements in Table 18.61.052-1 shall not apply to
Conservation Subdivisions (Section
18.09.100) with an average cross slope of twenty percent (20%) or less provided
that such Conservation Subdivisions have a minimum average area per dwelling
unit of one (1) acre.
(Ord. 2001-22 § 2, 2001; Ord. 2000-52 § 1 (part), 2000)
18.61.053   Natural areas.
   A.   Grading or development shall not be permitted within the legally
described boundaries of a natural area except as follows:
      1.   If utility or sewer trenches cannot reasonably be provided without
crossing natural areas of the project site, such trenches may be permitted,
provided they are revegetated in accordance with Section
18.61.055.
      2.   Development within previously disturbed parts of a natural area for
the purposes of plant enhancement and mitigation is permitted in conformance
with the natural area mitigation provisions in Section
18.61.055.D.5.
   B.   Natural areas are to be established as large contiguous areas, rather
than small, disconnected areas scattered over the site. Natural areas are
permanent, once established and recorded.
   C.   Natural areas shall be surveyed and clearly delineated in a surveyable
manner on all final plats, development plans, and grading plans submitted with
building permit applications, and shall be sealed by a registered land
surveyor. Natural areas shall be clearly labeled "HDZ Natural Area" on final
plats, development plans and grading plans, and the plat or survey shall be
recorded.
   D.   Natural areas shall be incorporated into a subdivision plat as either a
portion of privately owned lots or as land parcels under the ownership of a
homeowners' association. Where natural areas are located adjacent to major
public parks, such areas may be deeded to Pima County, subject to approval by
the county parks and recreation department and acceptance by the board of
supervisors.
   E.   Land parcels which include a natural area designation shall not be
further divided.
(Ord. 2000-52 § 1 (part), 2000)
18.61.054   Grading requirements.
   A.   Except as otherwise provided herein, the following requirements of this
Section
18.61.054 shall apply to grading on any land that is subject to this chapter,
as determined by Section
18.61.030. A.1 and A.2.
   B.   Exceptions. Grading on a land parcel, lot or project site is not
subject to the requirements of Section
18.61.054C., G.1., G.2., G.4., G.5., and H.1 if any one of the following apply:
      1.   Exclusion of fifteen percent (15%) slopes. When all of the fifteen
percent (15%) or greater slopes are excluded from that portion of the parcel,
lot or project site proposed to be graded.
      2.   Incidental encroachment. If the grading or disturbance of fifteen
percent (15%) or greater slopes does not exceed 100 square feet on an
individual graded residential lot or 1,000 square feet on a mass graded
subdivision or a "Development Category 1" project, as shown in the Grading
Requirements
Table 18.61.054-1.
      3.   Vehicular access. If the grading or disturbance of fifteen percent
(15%) or greater slopes is limited to grading for vehicular access as follows:
         a.   Within an unsubdivided, single residential lot or a single
residential lot not located in a mass graded subdivision:
            1)   A single lane, twelve feet (12') wide driveway, with a maximum
six feet (6') wide graded area on either side of the driveway, that extends
from the property line to the garage or carport, and no possible practicable
access alternative exists that will avoid grading slopes of fifteen percent
(15%) or greater; or
            2)   A recorded vehicle access easement that provides access to two
(2) or more residential lots.
         b.   For a mass graded subdivision or a Development Category 1 project
as set forth in the Grading Requirements
Table 18.61.054-1, grading is for an access street(s) that provides access from
the property line to the mass graded area. This exception does not apply if the
access street(s) encroaches into twenty-five percent (25%) or greater slopes,
unless there is no practicable alternative to grading twenty-five percent (25%)
or greater slopes for the access street(s).
      4.   Existing grading. When the grading or disturbance of slopes of
fifteen percent (15%) or greater is limited to areas of existing, non-permitted
grading and disturbance on a lot, parcel, or project site, provided that all of
the following apply:
         a.   The existing grading and disturbance occurred two (2) years or
more before the effective date of the ordinance that establishes this
provision, and
         b.   The existing grading and disturbance was not created during the
current owner's ownership of the lot, parcel, or project site.
         c.   An application for a building or grading permit on a lot that
meets the preceding conditions in 1) and 2) shall be accompanied by a
mitigation and revegetation plan which mitigates the existing grading and
disturbance in conformance with the requirements of Section
18.61.055D.
      5.   Building envelopes delineated on a recorded plat. If a grading
envelope or building envelope is described on a lot in a subdivision plat
recorded prior to July 7, 2000, the platted lot is exempt from the grading
requirements of Section
18.61.054C., G.1., G.2., G.4., and G.5. However, grading within a platted
building envelope on a lot is subject to the six foot (6') grading limitation
in Section
18.61.054G.3.e.
      6.   When a lot to be individually graded is located within a CR-
1 cluster development option subdivision (Section
18.09.040) or a CR-1 lot reduction option subdivision (Section
18.09.050) recorded prior to August 11, 1998; provided, however, that grading
on the lot complies with the horizontal grading limitations in Section
18.61.054G.4.
         a.   Natural open space is required by the plat; and
         b.   Such natural open space is described on the plat as a common
area, or an easement or a dedication to the public, or any combination thereof;
and
         c.   The natural open space so reserved has been maintained in a
substantially undisturbed condition.
   C.   The total area of all grading shall conform with the grading
requirements in the Grading Requirements
Table 18.61.054-1 except as modified by other provisions in Section
18.61.054:
Grading Requirements Table 18.61.054-1 
Development Category Parcel/Lot Size Per Grading Calculation Maximum Grading
                     Dwelling Unit
Development        Parcel/Lot Size Per Grading Calculation  Maximum Grading
Category           Dwelling Unit
1. Multiple
dwellings/business
offices/existing   varies              80% of the project   80% of the project
commercial and                         site                 site
industrial (mass
graded)
2. Single attached
or detached                            50% of the project   50% of the project
dwelling units     <20,000 sq. ft.     site *               site *
(mass graded
subdivisions)
3. Single detached
dwelling units     <20,000 sq. ft.     50% of the lot       50% of the lot
(individually
graded lots)
4. Single detached                     10,000 sq. ft. or
dwelling units     20,000 sq. ft. to   40% of lot,          10,000 - 17,424 sq.
(individually      43,560 sq. ft. **   whichever is greater ft.
graded lots)
5. Single detached                     17,425 sq. ft. or
dwelling units     >43,560 sq. ft. to  30% of lot,          17,425 - 21,600 sq.
(individually      72,000 sq. ft.      whichever is greater ft.
graded lots)
6. Single detached                     21,601 sq. ft. or
dwelling units     >72,000 sq. ft. to  17% of lot,          21,601 - 24,480 sq.
(individually      144,000 sq. ft.     whichever is greater ft.
graded lots)
7. Single detached                     24,481 sq. ft. or
dwelling units     >144,000 sq. ft. to 15% of lot,          24,481 - 27,000 sq.
(individually      180,000 sq. ft.     whichever is greater ft.
graded lots)
8. Single detached                     27,001 sq. ft. or
dwelling units     >180,000 sq. ft.    10% of lot,          27,001 sq. ft.
(individually                          whichever is
graded lots)                           greater.
 
* Under Section
18.61.054.H.1., grading may be increased in 5% increments for each 10% of the
site that is not on 15%+ slopes, up to a maximum of 70% of the site.
** Minimum lot size: cluster option and standards in riparian areas have their
own set-aside calculations.
   D.   All grading shall be performed in accordance with
Chapter 18.81, except as modified by this
Chapter 18.61 and the Hillside Development Manual. The exceptions set forth in
18.81.020(D) do not apply to fifteen percent (15%) or greater slopes.
   E.   The portions of the parcel, lot or project site to be left ungraded are
to remain undisturbed and are not to be used for stockpiling of materials or
excess fill, construction vehicle access, storage of vehicles during
construction, or similar uses. Temporary fencing shall be installed in
conformance with the Hillside Development Manual at the perimeter of the area
to be graded in order to prevent encroachment into the undisturbed area.
   F.   Cut and Fill Requirements: General Requirements:
      1.   Except as modified by Sections
18.61.054G, H, or I, the vertical distance of an exposed slope shall not exceed
fifteen feet (15') as measured in:
         a.   Fill areas. Lowest adjacent finished floor elevation (F.F.E.) to
bottom of slope; or
         b.   Fill areas. Lowest adjacent finished elevation of a deck, step or
other non-vehicular paving area to the bottom of slope. The exposed slope shall
be a minimum horizontal distance of twenty feet (20') from any building roof
and not a part of another structure higher than five feet (5'); or
         c.   Cut areas. Lowest adjacent finished floor elevation (F.F.E.) to
top of slope; or
         d.   Cut areas where finished floor elevation has been placed below
natural grade: Natural grade (N.G.) to top of slope.
      2.   No cut and fill shall encroach upon any floodplain, except as
provided for in the floodplain management regulations (Title 16) or any
adjacent properties except by the mutual written consent of all parties
affected. Such consent is to be filed with the development services department.
      3.   Excess cut or fill material shall not be disposed of over the sides
of hills or ridges, or on a project site, but instead shall be hauled off the
site in accordance with the requirements of
Chapter 18.81 (Grading Standards).
   G.   Individually Graded Lots. The following provisions apply on single,
unsubdivided residential lots or single residential lots not located within a
mass graded subdivision:
      1.   Grading increases. Except as provided in paragraph G.2 of this
section, the maximum grading area in the Grading Requirements
Table 18.61.054-1 may be increased for:
         a.   Grading areas located on less than fifteen percent (15%) slopes
for the following:
            1)   roof area of a dwelling and accessory buildings meant for
human occupancy subject to a fifty percent (50%) area limitation for that
portion of a roof overhang or cantilever that extends more than six feet (6')
beyond exterior walls;
            2)   septic field, and utility areas.
         b.   Grading within a utility easement or a vehicular access easement
that provides the only legal access to the subject lot and one (1) or more
additional lots.
         c.   One (1) single lane, maximum twelve feet (12') wide driveway
except that an increase for grading into fifteen percent (15%) or greater
slopes shall be allowed only when there is no other practicable alternative to
the encroachment.
      2.   Grading increases permitted under subsection G.1. above are
prohibited when grading encroaches into a twenty-five percent (25%) or greater
slope, except that the following grading of twenty-five percent (25%) or
greater slopes does not prohibit the grading increases:
         a.   A maximum five hundred (500) square feet;
         b.   A single lane twelve foot (12') wide driveway with a maximum six
foot (6') wide shoulder that encroaches into twenty five percent (25%) or
greater slopes and there is no practicable alternative to the encroachment;
         c.   A utility easement, if the development services department
determines that a utility trench in the driveway is not a practicable
alternative;
         d.   A recorded vehicular access easements that provides the only
legal access to 2 or more lots.
      3.   Cut and Fill Requirements.
         a.   The cut and fill requirements in Section
18.61.054F. apply, except that any exposed slope with a vertical distance
greater than ten feet (10') shall include planting areas and terraced plant
benches as follows:
            1)   a minimum six foot (6') wide planting area at the toe of the
exposed slope; and
            2)   a minimum six foot (6') wide terraced plant bench at the ten
foot (10') height of the exposed slope; and
            3)   planting areas and plant benches shall extend the length of
the exposed slope; and
            4)   the planting areas and plant benches shall be vegetated with
plants in conformance with the revegetation standards in Section
18.61.055D.5.
         b.   Exposed fill slopes shall be separated by a minimum twenty-foot
(20') wide enhanced natural area buffer, except that the exposed fill slopes
may be connected by a maximum six-foot (6') wide walkway in the natural area
buffer.
         c.   Any combination of exposed slopes on a lot with a combined
vertical distance greater than ten feet (10') shall have:
            1)   a minimum six-foot (6') wide planting area adjacent to the toe
of each exposed slope; and
            2)   planting areas shall extend the length of their adjacent
exposed slopes.
         d.   All planting areas shall be vegetated in conformance with the
requirements of Section
18.61.055D.5.
         e.   The vertical distance of a driveway exposed slope shall not
exceed six feet (6') measured from the outer edges of the driveway and
shoulders cross section, except that the six foot (6') vertical limitation may
be increased if the planning official confirms that there is no practicable
alternative to the increase.
      4.   Grading shall not extend more than six feet (6') horizontally beyond
the structural development perimeter and six feet (6') on either side of the
center line of a utility trench. The six foot (6') horizontal limitation beyond
the structural development perimeter may be increased to a maximum of twelve
feet (12') on slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%) that extend upward and
are perpendicular to the structural development perimeter.
      5.   Additions and expansions. New grading required for an addition or
expansion on a lot inclusive of temporary access roads and construction roads
shall comply with the requirements of
Chapter 18.61 subject to the following provisions:
         a.   If new grading encroaches into 15% or greater slopes, then the
grading requirements of Section
18.61.054C., G.1., and G.2. apply for the total grading area inclusive of new
and existing grading.
         b.   If new grading does not encroach into 15% or greater slopes, then
new grading is exempt from the requirements of Section
18.61.054C., G.1., and G.2.
      6.   Freestanding walls and retaining walls not a part of a building:
         a.   In a yard abutting a street, the total height of freestanding
walls, retaining walls, or any vertical combination thereof that are separated
horizontally from each other by less than six feet (6'), shall be a maximum six
feet (6'); and
         b.   The total vertical distance between the highest point of a
building's parapet, mansard roof, or roof ridgeline and the lowest natural
grade adjacent to the building or adjacent to a freestanding wall, retaining
wall, or riprap slope located less than twelve feet (12') from the building
shall not exceed the maximum building height permitted by the zone.
         c.   The top of any freestanding wall or retaining wall not located in
a yard abutting a street and not a part of the dwelling, shall not exceed ten
feet (10') above the highest first floor elevation of the dwelling, except that
a retaining wall more than ten feet (10') above the highest first floor
elevation that is finished with a veneer rock facing is allowed.
         d.   All other freestanding walls and retaining walls not regulated in
subsection a. through c. above shall be a maximum ten feet (10') high from
existing natural grade to top of wall.
      7.   Mitigation of walls and riprap. Freestanding walls, retaining walls,
and riprap allowed by sections
18.61.054G.6. and
18.61.055, that are more than four feet (4') high that face outward from a
dwelling and are located in a yard abutting a street, and all other walls and
riprap higher than six feet (6') located in other yards and that face outward
from a dwelling shall include the following minimum plantings:
         a.   One 15-gallon can tree spaced at an average twenty five (25)
horizontal feet; and
         b.   Four 5-gallon can shrubs between every two trees and all planting
areas shall be hydroseeded;
         c.   These plantings shall be added within six (6) horizontal feet
beyond the toe of the wall or riprap. All plantings shall be in conformance
with the revegetation plants in Section
18.61.055D.5. and the requirements of the Hillside Development Manual.
      8.   Riprap placement. Riprap shall not be placed on slopes less than 3:
1, except as part of an access bridge, apron, or flood control structure or
channel that conveys runoff from off-site.
   H.   Mass-graded residential subdivisions. The following provisions apply to
mass-graded residential subdivisions:
      1.   Grading increases. For each ten percent (10%) of a project site that
is on less than fifteen percent (15%) slopes, the maximum grading area
permitted in the Grading Requirements
Table 18.61.054-1 on the project site may be increased in five percent (5%)
increments, up to a maximum seventy percent (70%) of the project site, provided
that:
         a.   The maximum amount of grading of fifteen percent (15%) or greater
slopes does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the area on the project site
containing such slopes;
         b.   The five percent (5%) incremental increase does not apply to
project sites on which any grading encroaches into twenty-five (25%) or greater
slopes with the following exception:
            1)   When the grading and disturbance of twenty-five percent (25%)
or greater slopes does not exceed five hundred (500) square feet.
            2)   The five percent (5%) incremental project site grading
increases permitted above may apply to grading of twenty-five percent (25%) or
greater slopes in excess of five hundred (500) square feet for internal project
streets, but only if there is no practicable alternative to encroaching in
excess of five hundred (500) square feet, and the encroachment into twenty-five
percent plus (25%+) slopes for internal project streets is reviewed and
approved by the DRC.
            3)   When the grading and disturbance of twenty-five percent (25%)
or greater slopes is for access roads from the subdivision boundary to the mass
graded area and there is no practical alternative to grading of 25% or greater
slopes for access roads.
      2.   Cut and fill requirements for mass graded subdivisions. The cut and
fill requirements in Section
18.61.054F. apply subject to the following provisions:
         a.   The vertical distance between adjacent finish floor elevations
(F.F.E.) on two (2) adjoining residential lots shall be a maximum fifteen feet
(15'), and
         b.   An exposed slope greater than ten feet (10') high shall include a
minimum six foot (6') wide planting area running the length of the toe of the
exposed slope; and
         c.   The planting area shall be planted in conformance with the
vegetation requirements of Section
18.61.055D.5. and the Hillside Development Manual.
         d.   Exception. The cut and fill requirements in this Section
18.61.054H.2.a. through c. above and Section
18.61.054F. do not apply to Perimeter Exposed Slopes and Perimeter Walls.
      3.   Perimeter Exposed Fill Slopes And Perimeter Walls:
         a.   The height of a perimeter wall shall not exceed six feet (6')
from finished grade;
         b.   The height of a perimeter exposed fill slope shall not exceed six
feet (6') above the average natural grade, except that the height from natural
grade shall not exceed eight feet (8') over a maximum eighty feet (80')
horizontal section and the horizontal section shall have a minimum six foot
(6') wide planting area adjacent to the bottom of the horizontal section in
conformance with the vegetation requirements of Section
18.61.055D.5. and the type and amount of planting specified for a hillside
bufferyard in the HDZ Manual;
         c.   The combined heights of a perimeter exposed fill slope plus a
connected or adjacent perimeter wall shall not exceed twelve feet (12') above
the average natural grade;
         d.   Wherever the combined height of a perimeter exposed fill slope
and a connected or adjacent perimeter wall exceeds twelve feet (12') above
natural grade, the perimeter exposed fill slope and the perimeter wall shall be
separated by a minimum six feet (6') wide planting area in conformance with the
vegetation requirements of Section
18.61.055D.5. and the type and amount of planting specified for a hillside
bufferyard in the Hillside Development Manual. The planting area and the
adjacent or connected perimeter exposed fill slope may be included in the
required bufferyard;
         e.   Except for retaining walls, perimeter exposed fill slopes shall
be no steeper than three horizontal to one vertical (3:1) and vegetated in
conformance with Section
18.61.055D.5. and the type and amount of planting specified for a hillside
bufferyard in the Hillside Development Manual.
      4.   A Hillside Bufferyard in conformance with the requirements of the
Hillside Development Manual is required along:
         a.   The boundary of a mass graded area exposed to a down-slope view
from a public or private street; and
         b.   That portion of a mass graded subdivision that fronts on a public
or private street.
      5.   Riprap placement. Riprap shall not be placed on perimeter exposed
slopes or within a bufferyard except that riprap may be placed:
         a.   To stabilize 3:1 or steeper slopes adjacent to streets that
access the subdivision; or
         b.   As part of a bridge, apron, or flood control structure or
channel.
   I.   Development Category 1 Projects. The following provisions apply to
development of multiple dwellings, business offices, commercial and industrial
uses, which are described as Development Category 1 projects in the Grading
Requirements
Table 18.61.054-1:
      1.   Cut and fill requirements. Compliance with Section
18.61.054H.2.
      2.   Perimeter exposed slopes and perimeter walls. Compliance with
Section
18.61.054H.3.
      3.   Hillside bufferyard. Compliance with Section
18.61.054H.4.
      4.   Riprap placement. Compliance with
18.61.054H.5.
(Ord. 2003-17 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 2000-88 § 1, 2000; Ord. 2000-52 § 1
(part), 2000)
18.61.055   Site restoration requirements.
   A.   The restoration of a site shall be in accordance with Section 005 of
the Grading Design Manual (refer to
Chapter 18.81, Grading), the Hillside Development Manual and the additional
requirements of this subsection.
   B.   All slope treatment for subdivision streets shall be completed prior to
the release of assurances for the subdivision.
   C.   All slope treatment and color requirements for residential lots and
commercial developments shall be completed and approved by Pima County prior to
the request for final inspection.
   D.   Vegetation retention and revegetation:
      1.   Vegetation retention and revegetation shall be in accordance with
the requirements of this section, the vegetation and revegetation requirements
of
Chapter 18.72 (Native Plant Preservation),
Chapter 18.73 (Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening Standards) and the
Hillside Development Manual. In the event of a conflict between the
requirements of this section, the Hillside Development Manual,
Chapter 18.72 and
Chapter 18.73, the most restrictive requirement shall apply.
      2.   Existing viable trees with four-inch or greater trunk diameter and
viable cacti six feet (6') or greater in height shall be preserved in their
original locations, except for building locations and associated access, on
site septic, and utilities.
      3.   When retention of the above viable trees and cacti in their original
locations is not possible due to building, access, on-site septic and utility
locations, trees and cacti with a medium to high rate of transplantability
shall be salvaged and transplanted in areas requiring revegetation.
      4.   Cacti between one foot (1') and less than six feet (6') in height
shall be preserved in their original location, except when retention of viable
cacti between one foot (1') and less than six feet (6') in height is not
possible in their original locations due to site grading and development, cacti
with a medium to high rate of transplantability shall be salvaged and
transplanted in areas requiring revegetation.
      5.   All exposed cut or fill slopes and all areas of grading and
disturbance that are no steeper than three horizontal to one vertical (3:1) and
all utility trenches or septic leaching fields that are not located in parking
or driveway areas shall be revegetated. All plants used in revegetation shall
be the same genus and species as the native vegetation on the site or any
adjacent site prior to grading or clearing, except that plants listed in the
buffer overlay zone approved plant list (refer to
Chapter 18.67) and low-water use, drought-tolerant ground cover and seed mixes
approved by the planning official, may also be used in revegetation. Plant
benches and planting areas required by Section
18.61.054G.3 shall be planted in conformance with the revegetation requirements
of this subsection.
   E.   Slope Stabilization. All slopes steeper than a ratio of three
horizontal to one vertical (3:1), with the exception of retaining walls, shall
be stabilized with properly engineered stone riprapping or sculptured rock as
follows:
      1.   Stone riprapping shall be hand-placed on the slope;
      2.   The stabilization material used shall blend in with the natural
appearance of the site or lot and the surrounding terrain;
      3.   Vegetation retention and revegetation shall be used in conjunction
with riprapping, through the use of planting pockets on the stabilized slope.
(Ord. 2000-52 § 1 (part), 2000)
18.61.056   Color requirements.
   A.   All exposed exterior walls and roofs of buildings (unless a roof is
screened by a parapet wall extending at least three feet above the building),
retaining walls, and accessory structures that are visible from outside the
land parcel boundary shall be earthtone in color and shall blend in with the
natural setting. Colors shall not exceed a light-reflective value of 60
percent.
(Ord. 2003-17 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 2000-52 § 1 (part), 2000)
18.61.057   Minor modifications.
   A.   The planning official may grant minor modifications not exceeding ten
percent (10%) of the area, height, and width requirements of the development
mitigation and performance standards Section
18.61.054 subject to the following:
      1.   The applicant's demonstration to the satisfaction of the planning
official that the proposed alternative complies with the purpose of the HDZ
chapter and the criteria for evaluating minor modifications in the hillside.
      2.   A request for a minor modification shall be made on application
forms provided by the planning division and accompanied by a non-refundable
modification fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by Pima County
ordinance.
   B.   Exceptions. The planning official shall not grant a minor modification
to the following:
      1.   The conditions of an exception granted by the DRC.
      2.   The requirements of Sections
18.61.040 through and including
18.61.053,
18.61.054A., B., D. through F.,
18.61.054G.1. and 2.,
18.61.054H.1. and 2.,
18.61.054I.,
18.61.055,
18.61.056, Grading Requirements
Table 18.61.054-1 for development category 1 projects and development Category
2 projects (mass graded subdivisions).
(Ord. 2000-52 § 1 (part), 2000)
18.61.060   Hillside development manual.
   A.   The Hillside Development Manual, a companion document to the HDZ
Ordinance, contains technical requirements, implementation standards,
guidelines, and procedures to promote compliance with this chapter.
   B.   The Hillside Development Manual is adopted by the board of supervisors'
resolution and may be amended by resolution of the board of supervisors after a
noticed public hearing and subject to the provisions of paragraph C below.
   C.   The board of supervisors shall refer all Hillside Development Manual
amendments to the planning and zoning commission for the commission's
recommendation which shall at the minimum determine whether or not the
amendment complies with the purpose of the HDZ Ordinance Section
18.61.010. The commission may refer the amendment to the DRC for its review,
comment, and a recommendation back to the commission.
(Ord. 2000-52 § 1 (part), 2000)
18.61.070   Review procedures.
   A.   Subdivision Plats and Development Plans.
      1.   In addition to the requirements of
Chapters 18.69 (Subdivision Standards) and
18.71 (Development Plan Standards), tentative subdivision plats and development
plans submitted for county review shall depict all 15 percent or greater sloped
areas, average cross slope (both before and after the exclusion of any natural
areas), natural areas, and protected peaks and ridges. All plats and plans
shall be prepared in conformance with the standards of the subdivision and
development review committee (SDRC) and shall demonstrate conformance with this
chapter.
      2.   Final plats. All final plats shall show natural areas and protected
peaks and ridges, with the resultant protected area, in a surveyable manner. A
note shall be placed on the plat indicating that the site is subject to the HDZ
Overlay Zone.
   B.   Building Permits. A grading plan shall be submitted with a building
permit application for any parcel subject to this chapter. A grading plan that
includes grading on fifteen percent (15%) or greater slopes shall also require
a building permit application for a dwelling unit or for an addition or
expansion on a lot with an existing dwelling unit. When all proposed grading is
on slopes less than fifteen percent (15%), the grading plan may be submitted
separately from the building permit. In addition to the requirements of
Chapter 18.81 (Grading Standards), the grading plan shall contain the following
information:
      1.   Existing topography, with a minimum of two-foot (2') contours within
graded areas and ten-foot (10') contours outside graded areas;
      2.   Average cross slope (for unsubdivided parcels only);
      3.   Natural area, if applicable;
      4.   Height and steepness of cut and fill slopes;
      5.   Plan for landscaping and stabilization of graded areas and slopes in
conformance with Section
18.61.055.
   C.   Compliance. The chief zoning inspector shall enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 2003-17 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 2000-52 § 1 (part), 2000)
18.61.080   Exceptions.
   A.   Exceptions to Development Mitigation and Performance Standards (Section
18.61.053 through and including
18.61.056).
      1.   The design review committee (DRC) (refer to
Chapter 18.99) may grant exceptions to the requirements of the development
mitigation and performance standards of Sections
18.61.053 through
18.61.056, if the proposed alternative complies with the intent of this chapter
and if the material, method or work offered meets equivalent standards
prescribed in this chapter for quality, effectiveness, durability and safety.
      2.   The decision of the DRC may be appealed to the applicable board of
adjustment in accordance with the standards and procedures of
Chapter 18.93 (Boards of Adjustment).
   B.   Board of Supervisors' Exceptions to Slope Density Requirements (Section
18.61.052).
      1.   The board of supervisors may grant an exception to the slope density
requirements of Section
18.61.052, other than for the protected area of a peak or ridge, if the
requirements prevent the reasonable development of the parcel, lot or project
site.
      2.   The request for an exception shall be considered by the Supervisors
at an advertised public hearing with mailed notice to owners of property within
a minimum of three hundred feet (300') of the subject area.
   C.   Submittal Information. Applications for an exception shall be submitted
to the planning division and shall be accompanied by at least the following:
      1.   A legal description of the project site;
      2.   A site plan depicting the location of all existing structures, if
any, and the location, dimensions, design and color of all proposed development
and subject to the following:
         a.   A revegetation plan (including rip-rapping) showing existing
vegetation, graded areas to be revegetated, manner of revegetation and
revegetation time schedule;
         b.   An HDZ variance fee payable to the Pima County treasurer in
accordance with the fee schedule adopted by Pima County ordinance.
         c.   An application submitted for an HDZ exception for a property for
which an exception had been previously denied by the DRC shall include a new
application, submittal, and fee, and a detailed and precise response to the
DRC's basis for the previous denial as confirmed by the planning official.
Applications that do not include a detailed and precise response shall be
considered incomplete and not placed on an agenda for the DRC's review, and the
incomplete application shall be returned to the applicant without refund of the
fee.
   D.   Applicant Conformance with DRC Approval of an HDZ waiver: Prior to the
issuance of a brushing, clearing, grubbing or grading permit, the planning
official shall certify site plan and grading plan conformance with the DRC's
approval except that grading area (square footage) requirements shall be
certified by the county authority that issues grading permits.
(Ord. 2003-17 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 2000-52 § 1 (part), 2000)
18.61.090   Conflict, enforcement, and interpretation.
   A.   In the event of a conflict between this chapter 18.61 and another
zoning code chapter, the more restrictive requirement shall apply in
conformance with one (1) or more purpose provisions in Section
18.61.010.
   B.   In the event of a conflict between a waiver granted by the DRC, a minor
modification granted by the planning official, or any other county requirement
or regulation, the more restrictive requirements shall prevail.
   C.   Whenever a conflict arises in the enforcement of this chapter or more
than one interpretation is possible, the purpose provision Section
18.61.010 shall serve as a guideline in resolving the conflict or
interpretation.
   D.   A waiver granted by the DRC or the granting of a minor modification by
the planning official shall not waive or modify building code or fire code
regulations.
(Ord. 2000-52 § 1 (part), 2000)
18.61.100   Illustrations and maps.
   A.   Illustrations. Reserved.
   B.   Maps. Index to maps for restricted peaks and ridges (See Index To Maps
For Restricted Peaks & Ridges and Maps).
(Ord. 2000-52 § 1 (part), 2000)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4439.png]
Chapter 18.63
HISTORIC ZONE
Sections: 
18.63.010   Purpose and intent.
18.63.020   Use and special exception.
18.63.030   Definitions.
18.63.040   Criteria.
18.63.050   Establishment.
18.63.060   Historic district zone advisory boards.
18.63.070   Development zones.
18.63.080   New construction or alterations.
18.63.090   Demolition of historic structures.
18.63.100   Specific regulations—San Xavier environs historic zone (H-1).
18.63.110   Maps.
18.63.010   Purpose and intent.
   A.   Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to:
      1.   Promote the health, education, culture, and general welfare of the
community;
      2.   Insure the harmonious growth and development of Pima County, by
encouraging the preservation and rehabilitation of historic sites, buildings,
structures, objects, districts, cultural and man-made landscapes, and
archaeological sites located within historic zones; and
      3.   Protect and perpetuate the unique character of a geographic site or
district where existing historic sites, objects, architecture, archaeological
remains, or other tangible records of past eras can be of enduring value to the
people of the county in advancing education, general welfare, civic pride, and
appreciation of their cultural heritage.
   B.   Intent.
      1.   This zone is intended to ensure the preservation of significant
historic and archaeological resources, and to keep them in active use or
managed and in their original historic appearances, settings, and locations;
preserve property values, provide for future development, and promote an
awareness of Pima County's rich historical, architectural, and archaeological
landmarks among residents and visitors to the community.
      2.   It is also intended that all new or remodeled structures, located
within historic zones, as well as new roadways or other topographical changes,
either within or at the perimeter of an historic district zone, be designed and
constructed to harmonize with the structures located within their immediate
vicinity.
(Ord. 2018-9 § 2 (part), 2018: Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.63.020   Use and special exception.
   A.   Use.
      1.   The historic district zone and historic landmark zone are
superimposed over the existing zones.
      2.   The historic district zone and historic landmark zone do not modify
the uses permitted in the underlying zones, but control their implementation
to:
         a.   Insure harmonious growth and development;
         b.   Prevent dilution of the zones' historic integrity; and
         c.   Encourage the retention of early structures in their original
appearance and setting.
   B.   Special Exception. The provisions of this chapter, with the exception
of Section
18.63.100, shall not apply to the San Xavier environs historic district (H-1)
zone.
(Ord. 2018-9 § 2 (part), 2018: Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.63.030   Definitions.
   A.   For purposes of this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,
the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
      1.   Historic Zone. An overlay zone that can be either a historic
district zone or historic landmark zone established under this chapter.
      2.   Historic District Zone (H). A geographically defined area, formally
designated by the board of supervisors, which contains related historic sites,
buildings, structures, objects, archaeological sites, man-made landscapes, or
spaces in their original setting.
      3.   Historic Landmark Zone (HL). A single property or site, formally
designated by the board of supervisors, which contains one or more historic
sites, buildings, structures, objects, man-made landscapes, or spaces in their
original setting.
(Ord. 2018-9 § 2 (part), 2018: Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.63.040   Criteria.
   A.   Criteria for Historic Designation. A historic district, site, building,
structure, object, human-created, or -designed landscape, or space is subject
to designation as historic, if it can:
      1.   Be authenticated as dating from a particular significant period in
Pima County's history; or
      2.   Be associated with the lives of outstanding historical personages;
or
      3.   Be associated with significant events or occurrences; or
      4.   Be a good example of the architectural period in which it was built
and have distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style, method of
construction, or be the notable work of a master builder, designer or
architect; or
      5.   Contribute information of archaeological, historical, cultural, or
social importance relating to the heritage of the community; or
      6.   Relate to events, personages or architectural styles which are at
least fifty years old. However, outstanding examples less than fifty years
should be evaluated on their own merits.
   B.   Criteria for Establishing Historic District Zones.
      1.   In determining whether an area or district shall be established as
an historic district zone, the criteria of this subsection shall be applied.
      2.   Not all of the criteria need to be satisfied; however, a sufficient
number of the criteria should be satisfied to comply with the purpose and
intent of this chapter:
         a.   A historic district zone should include historic districts,
sites, buildings, structures, objects, human-created or -designed landscapes,
or spaces.
         b.   A historic district zone should include historic districts,
sites, buildings, structures, objects, human-created or -designed landscapes,
or spaces in their original setting which contribute to an understanding of the
heritage of the community.
         c.   The historic districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects,
human-created or -designed landscapes, or spaces should provide the area with a
sense of uniqueness, so that it is readily distinguishable from other areas of
the community.
         d.   The collection of historic districts, sites, buildings,
structures, objects, human-created or -designed landscapes, or spaces should
possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship,
feeling, and association, thus constituting a recognizable entity.
   C.   Criteria for Establishing Historic Landmark Zones.
      1.   In determining whether a single property or site may be established
as a historic landmark zone, property must:
         a.   Include archaeological sites, historic sites, historic buildings,
or historic structures which are individually listed or individually determined
to be eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places at the
local, state, or national level of significance; and
         b.   Meet one or more of the criteria of subsections
18.63.040(A) and (B).
(Ord. 2025-4, 2025: Ord. 2018-9 § 2 (part), 2018: Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.63.050   Establishment.
   A.   Historic District Zone.
      1.   Initiation/Application. An application for designation of a historic
district zone may be initiated by the owners within the proposed district zone,
or their agent, or by the planning and zoning commission upon recommendation of
the Pima County plans review subcommittee of the historical commission with the
consent of the owners, by submitting a historic district zone application to
the development services department and complying with the provisions of this
subsection.
      2.   Historic District Advisory Board. Advisory boards shall be created
in accordance with Section
18.63.060.
      3.   Submittal Requirements. The application shall include:
         a.   Legal description of the property;
         b.   A list by name and title, of all ownership interests in the
property (e.g., individual, corporation, trust, or limited partnership);
         c.   Letter of authorization for the owners' agent (if applicable);
         d.   Site plan. The base site plan shall be drawn to scale and shall
provide the following information where applicable;
            1)   The layout and elevation of all historic districts, sites,
buildings, structures and objects;
            2)   Existing significant human-created or -designed landscape
features and proposed landscaped areas, fences, walls;
            3)   The location of property lines and public rights-of-way;
            4)   Specifications as to type, color, and texture of exterior
surfaces of all historic districts, sites, building, structures and objects;
            5)   If applicable, a sign plan, drawn to scale, showing the
location, size, design, material, color, lettering and methods of attachment
and illumination of all exterior signs; and,
            6)   Any additional information deemed necessary by the development
services department or the cultural resources and historic preservation office
to properly review the site plan.
         e.   A completed National Register of Historic Places form, or
National Register nomination, or other documentation from the state historic
preservation office or the conservation lands and resources department that the
property is listed in or eligible for listing in the National Register of
Historic Places; or
         f.   Other evidence that the property has historic significance
meeting the purpose, intent, and criteria of this chapter which may include a
description of the historic resources, a recommendation of approval by the Pima
County plans review subcommittee of the historical commission, a statement of
significance, photographs, and other forms of information; and,
         g.   Most recent (available) aerial and elevation photos.
      4.   Public Notice, Planning and Zoning Commission and Board of
Supervisors Hearings. The development services department and the cultural
resources and historic preservation office shall review the submittal. Once
determined complete, staff shall schedule the request for public hearing before
the planning and zoning commission and board of supervisors. The public review,
notice and comments shall be consistent with Sections
18.91.060(B) and (C),
18.91.070,
18.91.080, as applicable, of the rezoning process except as modified by the
requirements outlined in this chapter. Conditions are not required. The
submittal materials, staff and historical commission reviews, recommendations,
and comments shall be transmitted to the planning and zoning commission and the
board of supervisors.
      5.   Staff Report. The development services department shall coordinate
with the cultural resources and historic preservation office to provide a
written review, analysis, and recommendation on the designation of the property
(ies) as a historic district zone based on the criteria established in this
chapter. The staff report may include additional considerations such as land
use impacts, as applicable.
   B.   Historic Landmark Zone.
      1.   Initiation/Application. An application for designation of a historic
landmark zone may be initiated by the owners of the property, or by the
planning and zoning commission upon recommendation of the Pima County plans
review subcommittee of the historical commission with the consent of the
owners, by submitting a historic landmark zone application to the development
services department and complying with the provisions of this subsection.
      2.   Criteria. Refer to Section
18.63.040 (Criteria).
      3.   Preliminary Review. Prior to submittal, the applicant shall obtain a
recommendation from the Pima County plans review subcommittee of the historical
commission, and the applicant shall submit that recommendation with their
application. The applicant may consult with the staff of the development
services department and cultural resources and historic preservation office
concerning submittal requirements.
      4.   Submittal Requirements. The application shall include:
         a.   Legal description of the property;
         b.   A list by name and title, of all ownership interests in the
property (e.g., individual, corporation, trust or limited partnership);
         c.   Letter of authorization for an agent;
         d.   Site plan. The base site plan that is drawn to scale and provides
the following information where applicable:
            1)   The layout and elevation of all structures and other
improvements, including where appropriate, driveways, and pedestrian ways;
            2)   Existing significant landscape features and proposed
landscaped areas, fences, walls;
            3)   The location of property lines and public rights-of-way;
            4)   Specifications as to type, color, and texture of exterior
surfaces of buildings or structures;
            5)   If applicable, a sign plan, drawn to scale, showing the
location, size, design, material, color, lettering and methods of attachment
and illumination of all exterior signs; and,
            6)   Any additional information deemed necessary by the development
services department or the cultural resources and historic preservation office
to properly review the site plan.
      e.   A completed National Register of Historic Places form, or National
Register nomination, or other documentation from the state historic
preservation office or conservation lands and resources department that the
property is listed in or eligible for listing in the National Register of
Historic Places; or
      f.   Other evidence that the property has historic significance meeting
the purpose, intent, and criteria of this chapter which may include a
description of the historic resources, a recommendation of approval from the
Pima County plans review subcommittee of the historical commission, a statement
of significance, photographs, and other forms of information; and,
      g.   Most recent (available) aerial and elevation photos.
      5.   Public Notice, Planning and Zoning Commission and Board of
Supervisors Hearings. The development services department and the cultural
resources and historic preservation office shall review the submittal. Once
determined complete, staff shall schedule the request for public hearing before
the planning and zoning commission and board of supervisors. The public review,
notice and comments shall be consistent with Sections
18.91.060(B) and (C),
18.91.070,
18.91.080, as applicable, of the rezoning process except as modified by the
requirements outlined in this chapter. Conditions are not required. The
submittal materials, staff and historical commission reviews, recommendations,
and comments shall be transmitted to the planning and zoning commission and the
board of supervisors.
      6.   Staff Report. The development services department shall coordinate
with the cultural resources and historic preservation to provide a written
review, analysis, and recommendation on the designation of the property as a
historic landmark zone based on the criteria established in this chapter. The
staff report may include additional considerations such as land use impacts, as
applicable.
(Ord. 2025-4, 2025: Ord. 2018-9 § 2 (part), 2018: Ord. 1985-141 § 1 (part),
1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.63.060   Historic district zone advisory boards.
   A.   Initiation and Establishment.
      1.   A separate advisory board shall be established for each proposed
historic district zone.
      2.   Applicants for each proposed historic district zone may submit to
staff of the cultural resources and historic preservation office a proposed
list of residents or real property owners to be considered for appointment to
the historic district zone advisory board by the board of supervisors.
      3.   The plans review subcommittee of the historical commission and staff
from the cultural resources and historic preservation office shall recommend a
list of applicants in the special qualifications category to the board of
supervisors for appointment.
      4.   The board of supervisors shall then establish the historic district
zone and appoint its members.
      5.   Vacancies may be filled in the same manner.
   B.   Composition.
      1.   Each historic district zone advisory board shall consist of at least
six, but not more than fifteen, members:
         a.   One-third shall be residents of the district;
         b.   One-third shall be real property owners within the district; and
         c.   One-third shall have special qualifications in architecture,
history, archaeology, land use planning, landscape architecture, or related
fields.
      2.   Members may be either voting or non-voting advisory members.
   C.   Terms.
      1.   The term of each member of an historic district zone advisory board
is for a maximum of four years, expiring on December 31 of the fourth year.
Terms may be staggered to assure continuity. Members are eligible for
reappointment.
   D.   Rules and Regulations.
      1.   The members of the advisory board shall receive no compensation and
shall serve at the will of the board of supervisors.
      2.   The advisory boards may adopt rules and regulations for carrying on
their assigned duties.
   E.   Duties.
      1.   The historic district advisory board designated for a proposed
historic district zone shall review the applications for that district and
assist the planning and zoning commission in designating the boundaries of the
proposed district and in selecting the sites, buildings, structures, objects,
man-made landscapes, and spaces which are to be designated as historic.
      2.   The advisory board shall also review applications involving the
erection or construction of a new building or structure, or the modification,
addition, alteration, moving, or demolition of existing structures, objects, or
landscapes located within the historic district zone.
      3.   It is intended that the advisory board continue to function after
the establishment of the related historic district zone in order to:
         a.   Review applications for building permits therein;
         b.   Monitor the building process in order to assure that the external
architectural character of the historic district is maintained as approved;
         c.   Maintain an inventory record of the historic district zone;
         d.   Formulate plans for the district's future; and
         e.   Keep the residents advised.
(Ord. 2025-4, 2025: Ord. 2018-9 § 2 (part), 2018: Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.63.070   Development zones.
   A.   Historic District Development Zones. Development zone means a certain
designated area around a lot, any part of which is being considered within a
historic district zone, as follows:
      1.   Where a lot is located in a rural or semi-rural historic district
zone in which structures are randomly and widely spaced and streets are few or
nonexistent, the development zone shall be the entire historic district zone;
      2.   Where a lot is located adjacent to a historic district zone
boundary, the development zone shall include that lot, all lots located within
the same block not to exceed six hundred feet in either direction, and those
lots located on the opposite side of any street adjoining the same block, as
well as those lots located on the opposite corners, except such portions of the
development zone which fall outside the boundary of the historic district zone;
      3.   Where a lot is an interior lot, the development zone includes that
lot, plus those lots on either side thereof fronting on the same street in the
same block not to exceed six hundred feet in either direction and all those
lots on the opposite side of said street, except such portions of the
development zone which fall outside the boundaries of the historic district
zone;
      4.   Where a lot is a corner lot, the development zone includes that lot,
plus the corner lot diagonally opposite thereto, plus all lots fronting on the
same two streets in the same block not to exceed six hundred feet in either
direction, and all lots on the opposite side of said street, except those
portions of the development zone which fall outside the boundary of the
historic district zone.
   B.   Historic Landmark Development Zones. The development zone is equivalent
to the designated historic landmark zone.
(Ord. 2025-4, 2025: Ord. 2018-9 § 2 (part), 2018: Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.63.080   New construction or alterations.
   A.   Historic District Zone New Construction or Alterations.
      1.   The creation or construction of new buildings or structures, or the
redesigning, remodeling or modification, addition, alteration, moving or
demolition of existing structures in historic district zones shall comply with
the provisions of this subsection.
      2.   Design Criteria.
         a.   The design shall properly preserve the historical and
architectural characteristics of a historic structure, object, or man-made
landscape which make it unique, and any changes shall generally conform to the
character of the structures, objects, and man-made landscapes located within
its development zone.
         b.   No specific architectural style shall be required for the design
of a new building or other structures that have not been designated as
historic. However, such buildings and structures are subject to the following:
            1)   The design of the structure shall generally conform to the
character of the buildings and structures located within its development zone;
            2)   If demolished and the area left vacant, the area shall be
maintained in a clean and inoffensive manner;
            3)   If demolished and the area converted to another use not
requiring buildings (such as a parking lot), the area shall be buffered by
landscaping or have walls or fences that conform to the character of the other
buildings and structures located within its development zone;
            4)   If demolished and new structures erected, the structures shall
generally conform to the character of the buildings located within their
development zone.
      3.   Building Permit Criteria.
         a.   The criteria of this subsection shall be used as a guide in
approving a building permit and determining if the design of a proposed
structure is compatible with the collective characteristics of the buildings or
structures located within its development zone. The criteria are exemplified in
the latest edition of the report Tucson's Historic Districts: Criteria for
Preservation and Development.
         b.   Height. New structures may be constructed no higher than the
tallest conforming building located within their development zone at the time
of the establishment of the historic district zone;
         c.   Setbacks. New structures must maintain the prevailing setback
existing within its development zone at the time of the establishment of the
historic zone;
         d.   Proportion. The relationship between the height and width of the
front elevation of the building;
         e.   Recurrent alteration of solids to voids in the front facade;
         f.   Roof types;
         g.   Surface texture of buildings;
         h.   Color of buildings, trim, roof, etc.;
         i.   Site Utilization. The width of side yards as it affects the
spacing between individual buildings and structures;
         j.   Projections and Recessions. Such as but not limited to the
presence or absence of porches, steps, awnings, and overhangs;
         k.   Architectural Details. Such as but not limited to cornices,
lintels, arches, grill work, and shutters.
         l.   Other pertinent factors generally affecting the appearance,
harmony and efficient functioning of the historic district zone may be used.
      4.   Additional Criteria.
         a.   The protection of the quality of uniqueness inherent in each
historic district may require additional provisions and criteria.
         b.   Such provisions and criteria may be adopted by the board of
supervisors, on recommendation by the planning and zoning commission and the
historical commission, following public hearings as set forth in Section
18.63.050(A)(3) through (A)(5).
      5.   Submittal Requirements and Review Procedures.
         a.   Design Plan Requirements. The design plan shall be drawn to scale
and shall provide the following information where applicable:
            1)   The proposed layout of all structures and other improvements,
including where appropriate, driveways, and pedestrian ways;
            2)   Existing significant landscape features and proposed
landscaped areas, fences, walls;
            3)   Off-street parking;
            4)   The location of property lines and public rights-of-way;
            5)   Entrances and exits and the direction of traffic flow in and
out of off-street parking areas;
            6)   The location of each parking space and areas for turning and
maneuvering vehicles;
            7)   Architectural drawings or sketches, drawn to scale, including
drainage plans, in sufficient detail to permit computation of yard requirements
and showing all elevations of the proposed structures or other improvements as
they will appear on completion of construction;
            8)   Specifications as to type, color, and texture of exterior
surfaces of proposed structures;
            9)   A sign plan, drawn to scale, showing the location, size,
design, material, color, lettering and methods of attachment and illumination
of all exterior signs;
            10)   Any additional information deemed necessary by the zoning
inspector to properly review the design plan.
      b.   Design Plan Review Procedures.
            1)   Preliminary Review.
               a)   Prior to the submittal of a design plan, the applicant may
consult with the staff of the development services department and the cultural
resources and historic preservation office concerning submission requirements.
               b)   It is also recommended that the applicant review the
proposed design plan with the applicable historic district advisory board.
            2)   Application and Compliance Review.
               a)   Application for historic district zone design review shall
be made on forms provided by the development services department and shall be
accompanied by five copies of a design plan.
               b)   The zoning inspector shall review each design plan for
compliance with established application requirements and shall formally accept
or reject the application within two working days.
            3)   Plan Transmittal. The zoning inspector shall, within one
working day, transmit a copy of the accepted design plan to the Pima County
plans review subcommittee of the historical commission and one copy to the
appropriate historic district zone advisory board for their review and
recommendation.
            4)   Historic District Zone Advisory Board Recommendation.
               a)   The appropriate historic district zone advisory board shall
submit its recommendation to the design review committee within fifteen working
days.
               b)   If no recommendation is received in that time, it shall be
considered approved.
            5)   Review and Decision by the Pima County Plans Review
Subcommitee of the Historical Commission.
               a)   The Pima County plans review subcommittee of the historical
commission shall notify the applicant and the appropriate historic district
zone advisory board as to the time and place of the preliminary review and the
applicant shall be heard.
               b)   The Pima County plans review subcommittee of the historical
commission shall review the proposed design plan for its compliance with the
purpose and intent of the historic district zone and applicable standards and
criteria and shall approve, approves subject to conditions, or disapprove the
design plan.
               c)   In no event shall the Pima County plans review subcommittee
of the historical commission act on the proposed design without having
considered the recommendations of the applicable advisory board.
               d)   After completing the preliminary review, if the Pima County
plans review subcommittee of the historical commission and the historic
district zone advisory board are in agreement, the Pima County plans review
subcommittee of the historical commission shall forward the application to the
zoning inspector for processing.
               e)   The Pima County plans review subcommittee of the historical
commission may require additional information from the applicant or it may
require modifications of the proposed design plan to comply with the
requirements of this chapter, in which case the Pima County plans review
subcommittee of the historical commission shall hold a second review.
               f)   The applicant and appropriate historic district zone
advisory board shall be notified of the time and place thereof and shall be
heard by the Pima County plans review subcommittee of the historical
commission.
            6)   Appeals Procedure.
               a)   The decision of the Pima County plans review subcommittee
of the historical commission may be appealed to the board of supervisors by:
                  i.   The applicant;
                  ii.   A member of the applicable historic district zone
advisory board;
                  iii.   Any real property owners of the applicable historic
district zone; or
                  iv.   Any resident of the applicable historic district zone.
               b)   Filing. The appeal shall be filed in writing with the clerk
of the board of supervisors within thirty days or the action shall be final.
               c)   Notice. Notice shall be sent to the applicant, to the
applicable historic district zone advisory board, and to all interested
parties, indicating the time and place for appeal hearing and the applicant
shall be heard.
               d)   Decision by the board of supervisors. The board of
supervisors, shall uphold, modify, or reverse the decision, after considering
the appeal, and the recommendations of the Pima County plans review
subcommittee of the historical commission and the applicable historic district
zone advisory board.
            7)   Issuance of Permits.
               a)   The central permitting office shall not issue a building
permit for:
                  i.   The erection or construction of new structures;
                  ii.   The modification, addition, alteration, moving or
demolition of existing structures; or
                  iii.   The installation of a sign within an historic district
zone, without the written certification of the chief zoning inspector, stating
that the application for such a permit has complied with all the requirements
of this chapter.
               b)   The zoning inspector shall authorize the issuance of a
building permit only upon approval of a design plan in accordance with the
procedures of this section.
   B.   Historic Landmark Zone New Construction or Alterations.
      1.   Additional Construction or Alterations. An application for the
creation or construction of new buildings or structures, or the redesigning,
remodeling or modification, addition, alteration, or moving of existing
historic buildings, historic structures, or historic objects, human-created or
-designed landscapes, or spaces in historic landmark zones may be initiated by
the owners of the property and submitted to the development services
department, and shall comply with the provisions of this subsection.
      2.   Criteria.
         a.   The design shall properly preserve historical and architectural
characteristics of historic site, historic building, historic structure,
historic object, or human- created or designed landscape or space which make it
unique, and any changes shall generally conform to the intrinsic and unique
character of the existing historic landmark zone.
         b.   Height. No higher than the tallest existing and conforming
building taking into account similar types and styles of buildings such as a
main or accessory structure;
         c.   The following features shall be generally consistent with the
existing historic building(s) and/or historic structure(s), with the prevailing
existing structural proportions, and with the historic period in which the
existing structure was built: Front setbacks; roof types regarding
architectural configuration, mass, and materials; building surface texture;
site utilization; projections and recessions such as but not limited to
porches, steps, awnings, overhangs, entrances, and windows; architectural
details such as but not limited to cornices, lintels, arches, grillwork, and
shutters, window and door trims, and canales; building form regarding size,
mass, and scale; and rhythm regarding proportion and pattern;
         d.   To provide flexibility in the review of applications, other
pertinent factors generally affecting the appearance, harmony, and efficient
functioning of the historic landmark zone may be considered as appropriate such
as: color and landscaping consistent with the style of the building or
structure and with the historic period; enclosures compatible with
architectural style and not blocking views of the primary façade from public
viewpoints; utilities located underground where possible and the use of utility
boxes on front façades reviewed for appropriateness and compatibility; and
compatibility of the appearance, color, size, position, method of attachment,
texture of materials, and design of signs.
      3.   Preliminary Review. Prior to submittal, the applicant shall obtain a
recommendation from the Pima County plans review subcommittee of the historical
commission, and the applicant shall submit that recommendation with their
application. The applicant may consult with the staff of the development
services department and the cultural resources and historic preservation office
concerning submittal requirements.
      4.   Submittal Requirements. Based on the original or base site plan and
highlighting the proposed amendments, an amended site plan shall be drawn to a
legible scale and shall provide the following information where applicable,
plus the most recent aerial and elevation photos, and written reasons for the
proposed changes:
         a.   Legal description of the property;
         b.   A list by name and title, of all ownership interest in the
property (e.g., individual, corporation, trust or limited partnership);
         c.   Letter of authorization for an agent;
         d.   Site plan.
            1)   The layout and elevation of all structures and other
improvements with amended features highlighted, including where appropriate,
driveways, and pedestrian ways;
            2)   Existing significant landscape features and proposed
landscaped areas, fences, walls;
            3)   The location of property lines and public rights-of-way;
            4)   Architectural drawings or sketches, drawn to a legible scale
in sufficient detail to show all elevations of the proposed structures;
            5)   Specifications as to type, color, and texture of exterior
surfaces of proposed structures;
            6)   If applicable, a sign plan, drawn to a legible scale, showing
the location, size, design, material, color, lettering and methods of
attachment and illumination of all exterior signs;
            7)   Any additional information deemed necessary by the development
services department or the cultural resources and historic preservation office
to properly review the site plan.
         e.   Written support for the proposed changes;
         f.   Most recent (available) aerial and elevation photos.
      5.   Public notice, Planning and Zoning Commission and Board of
Supervisors Hearings. The development services department and cultural
resources and historic preservation office shall review the submittal. Once
determined complete, staff shall schedule the request for public hearing before
the planning and zoning commission and board of supervisors. The public review,
notice and comments shall be consistent with Sections
18.91.060(B) and (C),
18.91.070,
18.91.080, as applicable, of the rezoning process except as modified by the
requirements outlined in this chapter. The submittal materials, staff and
historical commission reviews, recommendations, and comments shall be
transmitted to the planning and zoning commission and the board of supervisors.
      6.   Staff Report. The development services department shall coordinate
with the cultural resources and historic preservation office to provide a
written review, analysis, and recommendation on the requested additional
construction or alteration of the historic landmark zone based on the criteria
established in this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-4, 2025: Ord. 2018-9 § 2 (part), 2018: Ord. 1985-144 § 1 (part),
1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.63.090   Demolition of historic structures.
   A.   Historic District Zone.
      1.   Scope.
         a.   No permit shall be issued by the building official for demolition
of all or any significant part of a structure or building which has been
designated as historic prior to a review and recommendation from the Pima
County plans review subcommittee of the historical commission for consideration
and subsequent permit approval by the planning and zoning commission.
         b.   In making their decision, the Pima County plans review
subcommittee of the historical commission and the planning and zoning
commission shall determine if the applicant has shown that the preservation of
the structure is physically and/or economically unfeasible.
      2.   Historical Commission Action.
         a.   If the Pima County plans review subcommittee of the historical
commission finds that preservation is physically and/or economically
unfeasible, such finding shall be included in its recommendation.
         b.   If the preservation of the structure is found to be feasible, the
Pima County plans review subcommittee of the historical commission shall make a
recommendation to notify persons or groups interested in historic preservation
who may attempt to convince the owner to preserve the building or structure;
or, if the owner does not agree, to attempt to have the property purchased by
someone who will agree to preserve the building or structure in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
         c.   Staff from the cultural resources and historic preservation
office and the development services department shall include the Pima County
plans review subcommittee of the historical commission's findings in their
report to the planning and zoning commission.
      3.   Planning and Zoning Commission Action.
         a.   If preservation of the building or structure is found to be
physically and/or economically unfeasible, the planning and zoning commission
shall notify the zoning inspector that the issuance of the demolition permit is
approved. The site may be left vacant or a new building constructed in
accordance with the provisions set forth in Section
18.63.070(B) and (C).
         b.   If the planning and zoning commission finds that preservation of
the structure is feasible, the planning and zoning commission shall notify
persons or groups interested in historic preservation who may either attempt to
convince the owner to preserve the building or structure or, if the owner does
not agree, to attempt to have the property purchased by someone who will agree
to preserve the building or structure in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
         c.   If the owner is not convinced to retain the building or structure
and does not make an agreement to that effect and no one has agreed to purchase
it within one hundred eighty days after public notification of the application
for a demolition permit, the commission shall notify the building official that
the issuance of a permit to demolish the building or structure is approved and
the provisions set forth in Section
18.63.070(B) and (C) shall apply.
      4.   Authority of the Building Official. Approval by the planning and
zoning commission of the issuance of a permit does not mandate the granting of
a permit by the building official if the official should find reasons and deny
it under other provisions of the county building code (Title 15).
   B.   Historic Landmark Zone. Demolition of historic buildings, historic
structures, or historic objects, human-created or -designed landscapes, or
spaces.
      1.   Demolition. An application for demolition on site may be initiated
by the owners of the property and submitted to the development services
department, and shall comply with the provisions of this subsection.The
development services department shall not consider an application for
demolition if the board of supervisors has denied a demolition request on the
same property within the previous thirty-six months.
      2.   Criteria. The intent of this section is to preserve the historic and
architectural resources within a historic landmark zone in their original
appearance, setting, and placement. Demolition of a historic landmark can cause
an irreplaceable loss to the quality and character of Pima County. However, it
is recognized that there can be circumstances beyond the control of a property
owner that may result in the necessary demolition of a structure within a
historic landmark zone.
      The applicant shall submit evidence meeting one or more of the following
criteria:
         a.   The structure or site is of no historic or architectural value or
significance and does not contribute to the historic value of the property;
         b.   Loss of the structure would not adversely affect the integrity of
the historic landmark zone;
         c.   The owner will not have a reasonable economic use of the property
if a demolition permit is not approved;
         d.   Preservation is physically and/or economically unfeasible;
         e.   Reasonable measures cannot be taken to save the site, building,
structure, object, man-made landscape, or space in their original setting from
further deterioration, collapse, arson, vandalism, or neglect; and
         f.   Adequate discussion regarding alternatives to demolition has
occurred. If potential parties of interest in the historical preservation
community have been contacted and incorporated into the discussion of
alternatives.
      3.   Preliminary Review. Prior to submittal, the applicant shall obtain a
recommendation from the Pima County plans review subcommittee of the historical
commission which shall be submitted with their application. The applicant may
consult with the staff of the development services department and the cultural
resources and historic preservation office concerning submittal requirements.
      4.   Submittal Requirements. The cultural resources and historic
preservation office shall determine the required evidence for a complete
demolition submittal. Evidence may include and be submitted in the form of:
         a.   Most recent assessed values and appraisals of the land and
improvements;
         b.   Title/title acquisitions;
         c.   real estate taxes for the previous two years;
         d.   Any annual debt service documentation for the previous two years;
         e.   Sale or rent listings; any consideration by the owner as to
profitable adaptive uses for the property;
         f.   Rehabilitation cost estimates; annual gross income from the
property for the previous two years;
         g.   Itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous two
years;
         h.   Annual cash flow for the previous two years;
         i.   Proof of effort toward attaining a reasonable return; and
         j.   Other applicable materials.
      5.   Public notice, Planning and Zoning Commission and Board of
Supervisors Hearings. The development services department, and the cultural
resources and historic preservation office shall review the submittal. Once the
submittal is determined to be complete , development services staff shall
schedule the request for public hearing before the planning and zoning
commission and by the board of supervisors. The public review, notice, and
comments shall be consistent with Sections
18.91.060(B) and (C),
18.91.070, and
18.91.080 as applicable.
      6.   Staff Report. The development services department shall coordinate
with the cultural resources and historic preservation office to provide a
written review, analysis, and recommendation on a requested demolition on the
historic landmark zone property based on the criteria established in this
chapter.
(Ord. 2025-4, 2025: Ord. 2018-9 § 2 (part), 2018: Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.63.100   Specific regulations—San Xavier environs historic zone (H-1).
   A.   Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to promote the public health,
safety, convenience and general welfare through conservation of the historical
heritage of Pima County by delimiting an area of influence from an established
historic site and by providing for certain appropriate controls.
   B.   Definitions.
      1.   Established historic site. A registered national historic landmark
or historic place (or state of Arizona historic landmark or historic place) as
incorporated in the National (or State) Register of Historic Places.
   C.   Use Restrictions Zone A.
      1.   Scope. Within an area of one mile from an established historic site,
the additional regulations of this subsection shall apply and shall be
superimposed over an existing zone.
      2.   Density. The density shall not exceed two living units per thirty-
six thousand square feet of lot area.
      3.   Development Standards.
         a.   No off-site signs shall be permitted, and all on-site signs shall
comply with the sign regulations in
18.79.050(O) (Sign Standards).
         b.   All outdoor lighting shall be in accordance with the county
outdoor lighting code (Title 15).
         c.   Commercial and industrial uses shall also comply with Section
18.63.100(C)(3)(b) and (C)(3)(c). All developments shall provide planting
screens or approved walls on the side or sides oriented towards the historic
site no less than six feet in height.
         d.   Regardless of any other regulation no structure shall exceed two
stories (maximum height: Thirty feet).
         e.   The requirements of this section shall not apply to the
alteration of another established historic site within the influence zone.
         f.   The color of all structures shall be earth tones.
         g.   The planning and development services director shall require
landscaping appropriate to the natural vegetation of the area.
   D.   Use Restrictions Zone B.
      1.   Scope. Within an area of one and one-quarter of a mile and one mile
from an established historic site, the additional regulations of this
subsection shall apply and shall be superimposed over an existing zone.
      2.   Density. A density of four units per thirty-six thousand square feet
shall be permitted; provided, that the developer obtain the proper zoning as
provided in
Chapter 18.91 (Zoning Code Amendments and Zone Changes);
      3.   Development Standards. In accordance with Section
18.63.100(C)(3).
   E.   Use Restriction Zone C.
      1.   Scope. Within an area of one and one-half of a mile to one and one-
quarter mile from an established historic site, the additional regulations of
this subsection shall apply and shall be superimposed over an existing zone.
      2.   Density. A density of six units per thirty-six thousand square feet
shall be permitted, provided that the developer obtain the proper zoning as
provided in
Chapter 18.91 (Zoning Code Amendments and Zone Changes);
      3.   Development Standards. In accordance with Section
18.63.100(C)(3).
   F.   The cultural resources and historic preservation office and the
development services department shall review all development plans within a
mile and one-half of the San Xavier Mission for conformance to this section,
and consult with the Tohono O'odham Nation, as appropriate. Appeals shall be
directed to the board of supervisors.
(Ord. 2025-4, 2025: Ord. 2011-2 § 15 (part), 2011; Ord. 1985-141 § 1 (part),
1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.63.110   Maps.
   San Xavier environs historic zone (H-1) map: See
Map 18.63.110A.
(Ord. 2025-4, 2025: Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
Map 18.63.110A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4445.png]
Chapter 18.65
(RESERVED)
Chapter 18.67
BUFFER OVERLAY ZONE
18.67.010   Purpose.
18.67.020   Definitions.
18.67.030   Applicability.
18.67.040   Critical and sensitive biological communities maps.
18.67.050   Performance standards for issuance of permit.
18.67.060   Exceptions and variances.
18.67.070   Rezoning and specific plan procedural requirements.
18.67.010   Purpose.
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to:
      1.   Preserve and protect the open space characteristics of those lands
in the vicinity of the public preserves while at the same time permitting the
economically reasonable use of lands;
      2.   Protect and enhance existing public preserves in Pima County as a
limited and valuable resource;
      3.   Establish mechanisms that will protect the public preserves and
result in an ecologically sound transition between the preserves and more
urbanized development;
      4.   Assure the continued existence of adequate wildlife habitat and
foster the unimpeded movement of wildlife in the vicinity of Pima County's
public preserves;
      5.   Provide for an aesthetic visual appearance from and to Pima County's
public preserves;
      6.   Promote a continued economic benefit to the region by protecting the
public preserves for the enjoyment of residents and visitors alike; and
      7.   Neither promote nor discourage changes in underlying zoning, but
rather provide continuing performance standards for the unique lands within the
buffer overlay zone.
(Ord. 1998-51 § 3, 1998; Ord. 1988-16 § 1 (part), 1988)
18.67.020   Definitions.
   A.   Certain terms used in this chapter shall be defined, for the purpose of
this chapter only, as follows:
      1.   Class I habitat. The areas identified on the Critical and Sensitive
Biological Communities Maps as Class I habitat.
      2.   Class II habitat. The areas identified on the Critical and Sensitive
Biological Communities Maps as Class II habitat.
      3.   Fence or wall: A structure intended for confinement, prevention of
intrusion, boundary identification or screening of an activity or land
use—includes fences and walls of four feet or less.
      4.   Land parcel: An area of land with boundaries recorded in the Pima
County Recorder's Office.
      5.   Master plan development: An area consisting of one or more land
parcels or a portion of a land parcel for which a master subdivision plat is to
be recorded with the general intent that, in a phased manner, individual lots
are to be resubdivided or be subject to a development plan.
      6.   Native: Growing in the Arizona portion of the Sonoran Desert,
without cultivation, and not introduced after 1920. A plant which occurs within
the range of Sonoran Desert plants, but only in Mexico, is not native.
      7.   Private area: A land area adjacent to a residential structure,
enclosed by a fence, wall or native vegetative screening, and not exceeding
one-half acre.
      8.   Public preserve: An area under public ownership and management that
is designated at the federal, state, or county level as a special status
recreation or conservation area.
      9.   Riparian habitat: An association of plant and animal communities
containing a high density and diversity of species, occurring in, on or
immediately adjacent to a watercourse. It is typically composed of mesquite,
catclaw acacia, desert broom, whitehorn acacia and blue palo verde, providing
uninterrupted vegetative cover.
(Ord. 1998-51 § 3, 1998; Ord. 1998-38 § 1 (part), 1998; Ord. 1988-116 § 1
(part), 1988)
18.67.030   Applicability.
   A.   Public Preserves.
      1.   The following lands are designated as public preserves for the
purpose of this chapter:
         a.   Saguaro National Park (Rincon Mountain and Tucson Mountain
districts);
         b.   Tucson Mountain County Park;
         c.   Coronado National Forest (Santa Catalina Mountains unit);
         d.   Coronado National Forest (Santa Rita Mountains unit);
         e.   Catalina State Park;
         f.   Tortolita Mountain Park;
         g.   Coronado National Forest (Whetstone Mountains unit) (rural);
         h.   Coronado National Forest (Tumacacori Mountains unit) (rural);
         i.   Coronado National Forest (San Luis Mountains unit) (rural);
         j.   Cienega Creek Preservation Area;
         k.   Colossal Cave Mountain Park;
         l.   Empire/Cienega Resource Conservation Area;
         m.   Santa Rita Experimental Range and Wildlife Area;
         n.   Buenos Aires National Wildlife Refuge (rural);
         o.   Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument (rural);
         p.   Cabeza Prieta National Wildlife Refuge (rural);
         q.   Coyote Mountains Wilderness Area (rural);
         r.   Baboquivari Peak Wilderness Area (rural).
      2.   The boundaries of the above designated public preserves, for the
purposes of this chapter, are the administrative boundaries of the public
preserves as they existed on August 11, 1998.
      3.   Public preserves listed above that are noted "rural" are designated
as rural public preserves.
   B.   Applicable Lands. The buffer overlay zone applies to:
      1.   That portion of a land parcel of 25 acres or more on August 11,
1998, which is located within one mile of a public preserve, except as noted in
Subsection
18.67.030.C;
      2.   That portion of a land parcel of 25 acres or more on August 11,
1998, that is classified as either resource conservation (RC) or resource
transition (RT) in the area adjacent to the Tucson Mountain section of Saguaro
National Park and Tucson Mountain Park, lying within special area 5-01 Tucson
Mountains North, as described in the document entitled Comprehensive Plan
Regional and "Special Area" Plan Policies and as designated on the
comprehensive plan land use plan;
      3.   Land parcels of 25 acres or more on August 11, 1998, located within
the administrative boundary of a designated public preserve;
      4.   A rezoning request or a specific plan request, any portion of which
is subject to the buffer overlay zone.
   C.   Excluded lands:
   The buffer overlay zone does not apply to:
      1.   Any portion of a land parcel that is located more than one mile from
a designated public preserve, except as noted in Subsection
18.67.030.B;
      2.   That area within the Mount Lemmon community plan as adopted by the
board of supervisors on April 7, 1980;
      3.   Any portion of a land parcel that is located more than one-quarter
mile from the Cienega Creek Preservation Area as shown on Exhibit 1 to
Ordinance 1998-51 and county zoning maps.
   D.   Allowed uses: All uses of the underlying zone are allowed in the buffer
overlay zone, except as may be restricted by a condition of rezoning or
specific plan. The development standards of the underlying zone apply except
when in conflict with this chapter, in which case, this chapter applies.
   E.   Map notation: Land subject to the buffer overlay zone shall be shown on
county zoning maps by its underlying zone designation plus the suffix "BZ,"
except that subject land adjacent to a rural public preserve shall be shown on
county zoning maps by its underlying zone designation plus the suffix "RBZ."
(Ord. 1998-51 § 3, 1998; Ord. 1998-38 § 1 (part), 1998; Ord. 1992-96 § 1
(part), 1992; Ord. 1988-116 § 1 (part), 1988)
18.67.040   Critical and sensitive biological communities maps.
   A.   The board of supervisors shall by resolution adopt three critical and
sensitive biological communities maps. They are:
      1.   Critical and Sensitive Biological Communities Map—Northeast Sector;
      2.   Critical and Sensitive Biological Communities Map—Southeast Sector;
      3.   Critical and Sensitive Biological Communities Map—Western Sector.
   B.   The maps may be amended by resolution of the board of supervisors after
review by the planning and zoning commission.
   C.   Procedure for an amendment of a critical and sensitive biological
communities map requested by an applicant for rezoning or specific plan:
      1.   If a site analysis is not required, the applicant shall submit a
report containing, at a minimum, responses to all vegetation and wildlife
sections in the site analysis guidelines.
      2.   The site analysis or report shall establish that the natural
conditions of the site differ from that depicted on the map.
   D.   Class I habitat: Areas identified on the critical and sensitive
biological communities maps as Class I habitat include:
      1.   Deciduous riparian woodlands: Vegetative communities associated with
perennial stream flows and generally composed of cottonwood, willow, ash,
walnut, sycamore, and mesquite species;
      2.   Mesquite bosques. Nearly continuous forest canopies of mesquite
trees growing in association with water tables near the surface of annual or
perennial streams: Blue palo verde and catclaw acacia also commonly occur in
mesquite bosques;
      3.   Lakes, ponds, and wetlands with adjacent plant cover;
      4.   Important wildlife movement corridors: Desert or riparian habitats
providing uninterrupted vegetative cover extending from a public preserve; and
      5.   Major extensions of riparian habitat from public preserves: Riparian
habitats are typically composed of mesquite, catclaw acacia, desert broom,
whitehorn acacia and blue palo verde.
   E.   Class II habitat: Areas identified on the critical and sensitive
biological communities maps as Class II habitat include:
      1.   Major segments of riparian habitat not extending from a public
preserve, containing a high density and diversity of plant and animal species;
      2.   Palo verde-saguaro vegetation community: The upland habitat which is
the dominant plant association in most of the foothills regions of the Tucson
basin; and
      3.   Ironwood plant community: A community in which ironwoods are the
dominant species in association with saguaros and palo verde trees:
(Ord: 1998-51 § 3, 1998; Ord: 1998-38 § 1 (part), 1998; Ord: 1988-116 § 1
(part), 1988)
18.67.050   Performance standards for issuance of permit.
   A.   Applicability.
      1.   The performance standards of this section shall apply to new
building construction of one thousand square feet or greater, except as
specifically exempted in this section.
      2.   Requests for rezonings and specific plans that include land subject
to this chapter shall be evaluated for conformance to the performance standards
of this chapter as part of the rezoning staff report to the planning and zoning
commission.
   B.   Reserved.
   C.   Building color, reflective finish: All exposed exterior walls and roofs
of buildings (unless a roof is screened by a parapet wall extending at least
three feet above the building), retaining walls, and accessory structures that
are visible from outside the land parcel boundary, shall be earthtone in color
and shall blend in with the natural setting: Colors shall not exceed a light-
reflective value of sixty percent: Mechanical equipment shall be screened and
painted to reduce visibility.
   D.   Fences and walls:
      1.   Height: A fence or wall shall not exceed four feet in height unless
it encloses an area of less than one-half acre, or a horse corral, dog kennel,
swimming pool or spa.
      2.   Location: A fence or wall shall not be constructed:
         a.   To delineate property boundaries unless the fence or wall is four
feet or less in height; or
         b.   In a location or manner that impedes wildlife movement through
natural open space from and to off-site locations.
      3.   Barbed wire: If barbed wire fences are used, the fence shall contain
no more than four strands of wire: The bottom and top wires shall be barbless
and the middle wires may be barbed: The top wire shall be no more than forty-
eight inches from the ground surface, and the bottom wire shall be no lower
than sixteen inches from the ground.
      4.   Barbed wire fences not to exceed five feet in height are allowed for
ranching or agricultural activities in areas adjacent to a rural public
preserve: The fence shall not be structural.
   E.   Lighting.
      1.   External lighting shall be limited to that necessary to provide the
functional requirements of safety, security and identification, and shall be in
accordance with the county outdoor lighting code (Title 15).
      2.   Except for lighting that is attached to a building, light standards
for roads, parking lots, driveways and all other outdoor areas shall not exceed
forty-two inches in height and shall be in accordance the county outdoor
lighting code (Title 15).
      3.   Tennis court and horse corral exception: Lighting for tennis courts
and horse corrals shall be exempt from the restrictions of subdivision 1 of
this subsection, but shall be in accordance with the county outdoor lighting
code (Title 15).
   F.   Parking lots: Parking lots for nonresidential uses shall be located and
screened by vegetation so that visibility from roadways and public preserves is
reduced to the greatest extent possible.
   G.   Setback: No structure, parking lot, private driveway or road shall be
placed within one hundred fifty feet of a public preserve, except that the
setback shall be three hundred feet for any land parcel subject to a specific
plan or a rezoning approved on or after August 11, 1998: An exception may be
sought in accordance with Section
18.67.060.
   H.   Utilities:
      1.   All new or relocated utility lines shall be placed underground,
unless the relocated line is a one hundred fifteen kilovolt (or greater)
transmission line: All utility lines relocated due to improvement projects
shall be placed underground unless such relocated line is a forty-six kilovolt
(or greater) transmission line.
      2.   Location of underground utility lines (including sanitary sewers)
shall be planned, joint-trenched where possible, and located beneath the paved
portions of roadways or within twenty-five feet of the edge of the paved
portions whenever possible so as to minimize vegetative disruption.
      3.   When making upgrades and reinforcements to existing utilities,
existing poles shall be used wherever possible to provide the required
transition to underground service to new developments: However, a new pole, set
in line with the existing overhead system, shall not be deemed to be a new
utility when necessary to serve approved new developments: Upgrades and
reinforcements of existing overhead utilities are allowed to the extent that
the total number of cables is not increased.
      4.   Areas adjacent to a rural public preserve are exempt from the
regulations of this subsection H.
   I.   Vegetation:
      1.   Approved and prohibited plant lists: A buffer overlay zone approved
plant list and a buffer overlay zone prohibited plant list, adopted by
resolution, are incorporated in the landscape design manual, pursuant to
Section
18.73.030.
         a.   The approved plant list shall include only native plants.
         b.   The prohibited plant list shall include species that are
incompatible with natural areas and public preserves or incompatible because of
their mature height expectations.
      2.   Approved plants: Plants not on the approved plant list shall not be
planted in the buffer overlay zone outside private areas, except that:
         a.   All native species of cacti may be planted; and
         b.   Native species not included on the approved plant list may be
planted with the prior written approval of the planning director or authorized
representative.
      3.   Private areas: Any plant not on the prohibited plant list may be
planted in a private area, except for nonnative species of plant whose mature
height may reasonably be expected to exceed the ridgeline of the highest
adjacent structure.
      4.   Common areas: Only those plants on the approved plant list, or
approved pursuant to subdivision 2 of this subsection, shall be planted in
recorded common areas: A landscape or revegetation theme shall be established
emphasizing the preservation and enhancement of native plant species: Natural
open space common areas shall be further limited to on-site species.
      5.   Golf courses may be planted with Bermuda grass.
      6.   To the fullest extent possible, buildings and other improvements
shall be sited so as not to disturb native trees, shrubs or cacti: Where
removal of this plant material cannot be avoided, all reasonable efforts shall
be made to relocate this plant material in to other areas located within the
buffer overlay zone: Nursery-grown native species may be planted in lieu of
salvaging mature on-site material at a 3:1 ratio, however at least thirty
percent of the on-site material shall be salvaged when physical conditions
permit: Should revegetation and replanting be necessary, only plant material
listed in the approved plant list, or approved pursuant to subdivision 2 of
this subsection, shall be used in public, recreation, or common areas.
      7.   The restrictions of this subsection shall be imposed as covenants
running with the land for subdivisions and other development resulting from
rezonings or specific plans approved in the buffer overlay zone.
      8.   Areas adjacent to a rural public preserve are exempt from the
restrictions of this Subsection I.
   J.   Trails Access. Public access to trails identified in the Pima Regional
Trail System Master Plan Map or successor shall be reserved in subdivisions in
accordance with Section
18.69.040(D) (subdivision standards).
   K.   Washes. Washes identified on the critical and sensitive biological
communities maps, and other washes identified by the criteria applied in the
maps, shall be left in their predevelopment state, subject to the following
exceptions and requirements:
      1.   Disturbance within the wash area deemed critical and sensitive shall
be permitted in association with roadway, utility and trail crossings, however:
         a.   Encroachment for these crossings shall not reduce the width of
the critical and sensitive wash area by more than twenty percent at any cross-
section of the critical and sensitive area.
         b.   Additional reduction may occur only where necessary to provide
floodwater retention requested by the Pima County flood control district or to
provide for larger drainage structures so as not to impede movement of wildlife
as approved by the Arizona Game and Fish Department; and
         c.   Erosion protection shall only be permitted within the critical
and sensitive wash area to protect fill slopes required for roadway, utility
and trail crossings: Erosion protection measures shall be designed so as to not
hinder the movement of wildlife.
      2.   Mitigation Plans for Construction Impacts.
         a.   Construction impacts may affect up to ten percent of the low-flow
channel length where defined channels exist, or up to ten percent of the length
of the centerline of flow where braided or undefined channels exist, provided
that a mitigation plan for any construction impacts within the critical and
sensitive wash area shall be submitted to the Pima County flood control
district together with a site plan, tentative plat or development plan.
         b.   The mitigation plan shall reflect predevelopment wildlife habitat
and visual conditions as a baseline, and provide for post-development
replacement with species on the approved plant list, or approved pursuant to
subsection I.2 of this section, with a similar spatial arrangement that will
result in re-establishment of predevelopment habitat conditions.
   L.   Functional Open Space.
      1.   Functional open space which does not impede wildlife movement and is
within or immediately adjacent to an interconnected natural open space system
shall be credited as natural open space at fifty percent.
      2.   Functional open space which does not impede wildlife movement, is
part of an interconnected open space system and creates wildlife habitat
opportunities shall be credited as natural open space at one hundred percent.
      3.   All other functional open space, including golf courses, shall
receive no credit towards natural open space requirements.
      4.   On those parcels where no Class I or Class II habitat is present, or
have no areas eligible to be designated as natural open space, one hundred
percent of designated functional open space shall be credited as natural open
space.
   M.   Reserved.
   N.   Natural Open Space. Thirty percent of the land subject to the buffer
overlay zone shall be preserved as natural open space, except that fifty
percent of the land subject to the buffer overlay zone shall be preserved as
natural open space for any land parcel subject to a specific plan or a rezoning
approved on or after August 11, 1998. The landowner may, and is encouraged to,
preserve a greater percentage of natural open space. The natural open space
shall form an interconnected system. The selection and treatment of lands
comprising the natural open space requirement shall consist of the following:
      1.   One hundred percent of all Class I habitat area;
      2.   Any balance of acreage needed to achieve the natural open space
requirement shall be composed primarily of Class II habitat areas, if
available, or functional open space to be credited pursuant to subsection L of
this section.
      3.   Boundaries of designated natural open space shall be surveyed and
identified on the final plat or, where a plat is not required, may be described
in:
         a.   Covenants running with the land; or
         b.   Conservation easement pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes
Section 33-271, et seq.; or
         c.   Dedication to and acceptance by the county for the county parks
system as natural open space;
         d.   The building permit or zoning permit, where not otherwise
designated by plat, covenant or conservation easement.
      4.   Master Planned Development. Boundaries of designated natural open
space shall be surveyed and identified on a master subdivision plat. Minor
alterations of the boundary may be allowed in a resubdivision of one or more
lots of the master subdivision plat with the consent of the planning director
provided that in so doing:
         a.   The new boundaries are surveyed and identified on the
resubdivision plat;
         b.   The resubdivision does not create any less total amount of
natural open space than shown on the master subdivision plat;
         c.   The performance standards of this chapter are in no way
diminished; and
         d.   No special condition of a rezoning or specific plan is violated.
      5.   For land parcels located within the buffer overlay zone of the
Cienega Creek Preservation Area, the one hundred-year floodplain and erosion
hazard setback area shall be preserved as natural open space.
   O.   Visual Quality Standards.
      1.   This subsection shall apply only to the rezoning of land subject to
this chapter.
      2.   All development in areas identified as having high visual
sensitivity, according to the procedures set forth in county site analysis
requirements, shall have minimal visual impact. Development in these areas
shall be designed to be in harmony with the form, line, color, texture and
scale of the existing landscape.
      3.   All development in areas identified as having medium visual
sensitivity, according to procedures set forth in county site analysis
requirements, shall remain subordinate to the existing landscape when viewed in
the middle ground (one-fourth to two miles). Development in these areas shall
be designed to be in harmony with the form, line, color and scale of the
existing landscape.
      4.   Nothing contained in the visual quality standards shall limit uses
or lessen densities otherwise allowed, but may govern specific location and
design of the development.
(Ord. 2011-2 § 16, 2011; Ord. 2011-1 § 2 (part), 2011; Ord. 1998-51 § 3, 1998;
Ord. 1998-38 § 1 (part), 1998; Ord. 1988-116 § 1 (part), 1988)
18.67.060   Exceptions and variances.
   A.   General requirements for exceptions:
      1.   Exceptions to the requirements of the performance standards in
Section
18.67.050 may be granted by the Pima County design review committee (DRC),
except as otherwise noted in this section, when, due to the natural conditions
of the site or other conditions beyond the control of the property owner, the
performance standard would impose an undue hardship.
      2.   Procedure:
         a.   The applicant for an exception shall document and justify
requested exceptions. The planning director, in consultation with the county
engineer and the adjacent public preserve manager, or their authorized
representatives, shall review the request and make a written recommendation to
the DRC.
         b.   The DRC may grant exceptions to performance standards after a
public hearing with notice to owners of property within 300 feet of the site.
         c.   The decision of the DRC may be appealed to the board of
supervisors at a noticed and advertised public hearing. Written notice shall be
provided to owners of property within 300 feet of the site.
      3.   Standards. An exception may not be granted unless:
         a.   The application demonstrates that the wildlife habitat value or
visual quality of a land parcel is not diminished;
         b.   The exception will not be detrimental to the nearest public
preserves; and
         c.   The exception is in harmony with the purpose of this code and
chapter as well as the provision of this chapter from which the exception is
requested.
      4.   Conditions. Conditions may be imposed on an exception that will:
         a.   Secure the purpose of this code and chapter as well as the
provision of this chapter from which the exception is granted; and
         b.   Provide adequately for the protection of the nearest public
preserves.
   B.   Exceptions to setback requirement (Section
18.67.050.G).
      1.   If a land parcel existing on August 11, 1998, and legally conforming
to the development standards of the underlying zone, cannot be used because of
the structure setback, then the land parcel shall be allowed a single dwelling
unit, provided that all other applicable requirements of this chapter and code
are met.
      2.   If a land parcel existing on August 11, 1998, and legally conforming
to the development standards of the underlying zone, does not have reasonable
access because of the setback, the private driveway or road may be located
closer to the public preserve, provided that the planning director, after
consultation with the manager of the nearest public preserve, determines that
it is the minimum setback necessary to afford relief.
      3.   The property owner may appeal the decision of the planning director
to a board of adjustment in the same manner as an appeal from a decision of the
zoning inspector (refer to
Chapter 18.93).
      4.   Signage within the setback shall conform to
Chapter 18.79 (Sign Standards). Internally illuminated signs shall be designed
to allow only the illumination of the sign copy. The source of illumination for
internally illuminated signs shall not be visible from the public preserve.
      5.   A structure within three hundred feet of a public preserve shall
have minimal visual impact and shall be designed to be in harmony with the
form, line, color, texture and scale of the existing landscape.
   C.   Exceptions for Habitat Restoration or Enhancement.
      1.   Where determined to be biologically appropriate because of
ecological benefits, requests for special exceptions to the performance
standards of Section
18.67.050, including limited reductions in natural open space requirements, may
be granted by the board of supervisors, after review by the adjacent public
preserve manager, in exchange for restoration or enhancement of Class I and II
riparian or upland habitat, which provides, in the opinion of the Board, an
equivalent satisfaction of the purposes of this chapter.
      2.   Detailed plans for proposed restoration or enhancement shall be
provided. The plans shall include:
         a.   A description of existing habitat and quantification by a
standard biological technique of biological value;
         b.   A proposed restoration/enhancement program;
         c.   The quantification of biological value of the proposed plan as
compared to the existing situation pursuant to paragraph a of this subdivision;
         d.   Short-term and long-term maintenance plans; and
         e.   Specific known examples of the successful application of such
techniques as they relate to the species proposed for planting in a given
location such as riparian or upland habitat.
      3.   Such requests, and a determination of appropriate incentives, if
any, shall be considered pursuant to Section
18.67.060.A.
   D.   Variances to natural open space requirements (Section
18.67.050.N). A request for a variance may be made to the board of adjustment
to reduce the minimum natural open space requirement for a single-family
detached dwelling on a lot or parcel of five acres or less in accordance with
the standards and procedures of
Chapter 18.93 (Boards of Adjustment).
(Ord. 1998-51 § 3, 1998; Ord. 1988-116 § 1 (part), 1988)
18.67.070   Rezoning and specific plan procedural requirements.
   A.   Applicability. This section applies to a rezoning or to a specific plan
request, any portion of which is subject to the buffer overlay zone.
   B.   Notice.
      1.   Copies of the application for a rezoning request or for a specific
plan request, any portion of which is subject to the buffer overlay zone, shall
be sent to the managers of those public preserves within one mile of the land
parcel and those neighborhood associations within one mile of the land parcel
registered with the planning division.
      2.   Managers of public preserves and registered neighborhood
associations within one mile of the land parcel shall be notified fifteen days
prior to the date that the proposed exceptions under Section
18.67.060 go to the board of supervisors or the board of adjustment.
(Ord. 2009-59 § 6, 2009; Ord. 1998-51 § 3, 1998; Ord. 1998-38 § 1 (part), 1998;
Ord. 1988-116 § 1 (part), 1988)
Chapter 18.68
INFILL OVERLAY ZONE
18.68.010   Purpose.
18.68.020   Applicability.
18.68.030   Designation.
18.68.040   Kleindale/Dodge Infill Overlay Zone.
18.68.050   Benson Highway/Palo Verde Road Infill Overlay Zone.
18.68.010 Purpose.
   A. Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to:
      1. Promote the health, education, culture, and general welfare of the
community;
      2. Encourage livable and well-functioning neighborhoods and improved
economic development;
      3. Promote and facilitate the development and redevelopment of by-passed,
underutilized, or abandoned properties;
      4. Remediate deteriorated, blighted, and unsafe conditions in older
neighborhoods;
      5. Stimulate re-investment in properties that will contribute to the
creation of employment opportunities and improve the overall economic viability
of the community;
      6. Implement and adopt effective infill, redevelopment and revitalization
in Community Development Target Areas;
      7. Strengthen the community's tax base, increase property values, and
contribute to more efficient land-use patterns;
      8. Encourage the reuse of historic, unique or significant buildings;
      9. Provide a mix of allowable uses to support smart growth, walkable and
bikeable places, transit use, and compatible housing types and services; and,
      10. Strengthen and densify existing neighborhoods to preserve community
character and sustainability.
(Ord. 2018-31 § 2 (part), 2018)
18.68.020 Applicability.
   A. Application. This chapter applies to any new development, redevelopment,
or substantial expansion of an existing development, any of which require a
zoning permit, on any land within a designated infill overlay zone.
   B. Map. Land subject to the infill overlay zone shall be shown on county
zoning maps by its underlying zone designation plus the suffix "I-#".
(Ord. 2018-31 § 2 (part), 2018)
18.68.030 Designation.
   A. Criteria. In determining whether a site be initiated as an infill overlay
zone the following criteria shall be assessed:
      1. Large number of vacant, older, or dilapidated structures.
      2. Large number of vacant or underused parcels of property that are of
small or inappropriate sizes or that are environmentally contaminated, that are
owned by different owners and that are located in an area that lacks the
presence of development and investment activity compared to other areas in the
county.
      3. Large number of parcels of property or buildings where nuisances exist
or occur.
      4. High occurrence of crime.
      5. Continuing decline in population.
   B. Initiation submittal requirements.
      1. A written description and map showing the boundaries of the proposed
infill overlay zone;
      2. A list by name and title, of all ownership interest within the
proposed zone (e.g. individual, corporation, trust, or limited partnership);
      3. Written evidence the proposed zone has met the Purpose and Criteria of
this chapter; and,
      4. Scaled maps showing the existing zoning and existing comprehensive
plan designations of the proposed zone and abutting properties.
   C. Initiation. A request to initiate an Infill Overlay Zone may be made by:
      1. Property owners within the proposed zone; or,
      2. The Planning and Zoning Commission; or,
      3. The Board of Supervisors.
   D. Public Notice and Hearing requirements.
      1. Public notice of the hearing before the commission and the board of
supervisors shall be given including property owners within the proposed zone
and within three hundred feet of the boundaries of the proposed zone. The
public review, notice and comments, Planning and Zoning Commission review, and
Board of Supervisors review shall be consistent with Sections 18.91.060(B) and
(C), 18.91.070, 18.91.080, as applicable, of the rezoning process except as
modified by the requirements outlined in this chapter; 
      2. The Development Services Department may notice other County
departments/offices such as, but not limited to, Sheriff, public works
departments, Community Development and Neighborhood Conservation and outside
agencies to help address infill-related neighborhood issues; and,
      3. At the public hearing for the establishment of an infill overlay zone,
the residents and property owners of the surrounding area, as well as
interested citizens and organizations shall be heard.
(Ord. 2018-31 § 2 (part), 2018)
18.68.040 Kleindale/Dodge Infill Overlay Zone.
   A.   Map. Land subject to the Kleindale/Dodge Infill Overlay Zone shall be
shown on county zoning maps by its underlying zone designation plus the suffix
"I-1". The Kleindale/Dodge Infill Overlay Zone is bounded by Kleindale Road on
the north, Alvernon Way on the east, Ft. Lowell Road on the south, and Richey
Boulevard on the west.
   B.   Development standards.
      1.   Multiple Use Permit. The requirement for a Multiple Use (MU) zone
use permit is waived.
      2.   Additional Uses. The permitted uses in Sections
18.43.030 (CB-1) and
18.45.030 (CB-2) are also allowed on Multiple Use (MU) zoned properties subject
to the applicable performance standards of
Chapters 18.43 and
18.45. No conditional use permit is required for these uses. The storage
building or warehouse use is allowed if conducted within a completely enclosed
building.
      3.   Waiver of Development Plan.
         a.   Any requirement, including Section
18.37.020(A)(4), for a development plan (DP) is waived if the following
criterion is met:
            In accordance with
Ch. 18.75 (OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS), the project requires a
combination of 25 or fewer parking spaces or drive-through stacking spaces.
         b.   Infill Incentive Site Plan. If a development plan is waived, in
lieu of a development plan, a site plan showing the following features, drawn
to scale, shall be submitted with any required permit application:
            1)   General location of any buildings and structures;
            2)   Access point(s);
            3)   Septic system layout if applicable, or if sewer is proposed
the point of connection to public sewer and proposed sewer easements;
            4)   Setbacks;
            6)   Location of parking.
         c.   If the requirement for a development plan is waived and the site
is within a regulatory floodplain, a drainage report is not required when the
applicant agrees to:
            1)   Elevate — The finished floor elevation of a structure must be
1 foot above the highest flood depth on the building footprint, unless site
grading removes local depressions and/or provides for conveyance away from the
building footprint.
            2)   If a fill pad is proposed, the fill pad must be armored to
protect from erosive flows. Toe-down of the erosion protection shall be a
minimum of 2 feet below finished grade. If a stem wall is proposed, toe-down
shall be minimum of 2 feet below finished grade.
            3)   Provide depressed flow paths with water harvesting. Existing
offsite flow paths of greater than 0.5 feet depth must be accommodated by
grading so that the proposed development does not alter existing downstream
drainage patterns and velocities.
            4)   If perimeter fencing is proposed, the fencing shall be a
minimum of 25 feet from the property boundary or elevated to allow upstream
offsite flows to pass through the fencing without altering drainage patterns.
            5)   If commercial or subdivision development is proposed, on-site
retention requirement applies when more than 2,000 square feet of new
impervious surface is proposed.
      If the criteria above cannot be met or if drainage infrastructure is
required to prevent altering drainage patterns at property boundaries, an
engineering drainage report and design sealed by an Arizona registered engineer
is required.
      4.   Setbacks. The minimum side and rear yard setbacks are waived and
subject to building code requirements.
      5.   Landscaping. Landscaping requirements are waived except for:
         1.   Uses on previously-undeveloped or redeveloped sites adjacent to
Dodge Boulevard, Ft. Lowell Road, or Kleindale Road. A minimum of five trees
per 100 linear feet (based on a 10—20 foot width bufferyard) shall be required
for Dodge Boulevard and Ft. Lowell Road. A minimum of two trees per 100 linear
feet (based on a 10—20 foot width bufferyard) shall be required for Kleindale
Road;
         2.   New or redeveloped non-residential uses adjacent to residential
uses, unless written approval to waive a specific bufferyard requirement signed
by the applicable adjacent residential property owner is submitted;
         3.   Whenever landscaping is required, the first flush retention
requirements shall apply.
      6.   Lot Coverage. The maximum permitted coverage for residential,
accessory structures in the Multiple Use (MU) zone (Section
18.37.050(A)(1)) is increased to 30 percent of the lot area.
(Ord. 2018-31 § 2 (part), 2018)
18.68.050   Benson Highway/Palo Verde Road Infill Overlay Zone.
   A.   Map. Land subject to the Benson Highway/Palo Verde Road Infill Overlay
Zone shall be shown on county zoning maps by its underlying zone designation
plus the suffix "I-2". The Benson Highway/Palo Verde Road Infill Overlay Zone
includes the unincorporated MU (Multiple Use)-zoned properties located on the
south side of Benson Highway from Country Club Road to Alvernon Way, the
unincorporated CB-2 (General Business)-zoned properties located on the north
side of Benson Highway and west of S. Palo Verde Road, and the unincorporated
MU-zoned properties located on the north side of E. Felix Boulevard and west of
Palo Verde Road,
   B.   Development standards.
      1.    Multiple Use Permit. The requirement for a Multiple Use (MU) zone
use permit is waived.
      2.    Additional Uses. The permitted uses in Sections
18.43.030 (CB-1) and
18.45.030 (CB-2) are also allowed on Multiple Use (MU) zoned properties subject
to the applicable performance standards of
Chapter 18.43. No conditional use permit is required for these uses. The
storage building or warehouse use is allowed if conducted within a completely
enclosed building.
      3.    Waiver of Development Plan.
         a.    Any requirement, including Section
18.37.020(A)(4) and
18.71.010(B)(1), for a development plan (DP) is waived if the following
criterion is met: In accordance with
Chapter 18.75 (OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS), the project requires
a combination of 25 or fewer parking spaces or drive-through stacking spaces.
         b.   Infill Incentive Site Plan. If a development plan is waived, in
lieu of a development plan, a site plan showing the following features, drawn
to scale, shall be submitted with any required permit application:
            1)    General location of any buildings and structures;
            2)   Access points;
            3)   Septic system layout if applicable, or if sewer is proposed
the point of connection to public sewer and proposed sewer easements;
            4)   Setbacks;
            5)   Required landscaping; and,
            6)   Location of parking.
         c.   If the requirement for a development plan is waived, a drainage
report is not required when the applicant agrees to the following:
            1)   The finished floor elevation of a structure must be 1 foot
above the highest flood depth under the building footprint, unless site grading
removes local depressions or provides for conveyance away from the building
footprint;
            2)   If a fill pad is proposed, the fill pad must be armored to
protect from erosive flows. Toe-down of the erosion protection shall be a
minimum of 2 feet below finished grade. If a stem wall is proposed, toe-down
shall be a minimum of 2 feet below finished grade;
            3)   All buildings shall be set back at least 50 feet from the Earp
Wash;
            4)   If commercial or subdivision development is proposed, the
first flush retention requirement applies when more than 2,000 square feet of
new impervious surface is proposed;
            5)   If perimeter fencing is proposed, the fencing shall be a
minimum of 25 feet from the property boundary or elevated to allow upstream
offsite flows to pass through the fencing without altering drainage patterns.
   If the criteria above cannot be met or if drainage infrastructure is
required to prevent altering drainage patterns at property boundaries, an
engineering drainage report and design sealed by an Arizona registered engineer
is required.
      4.   Setbacks. The minimum side and rear yard setbacks are waived and
subject to building code requirements, unless the applicable adjacent property
of the setback is existing residential development. If the applicable adjacent
property of the setback is existing residential development, written
authorization from the property owner is required to waive the setback.
      5.   Landscaping. Landscaping requirements are waived except for:
         a.   Uses on previously-undeveloped or redeveloped sites adjacent to
Benson Highway, Country Club Road, Palo Verde Road or Alvernon Way shall be
required to provide the minimum number of trees according to Section
18.73.040 (Screening and bufferyard requirements), to be located primarily
along the highway or road, and subject to the minimum size, type, planting, and
maintenance standards of Section
18.73.030 (Performance standards) of
Chapter 18.73 (Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening Standards);
         b.    New or redeveloped non-residential uses adjacent to residential
uses, unless written approval to waive a specific bufferyard requirement signed
by the applicable adjacent residential property owner is submitted;
         c.    Whenever landscaping is required, the first flush retention
requirements shall apply.
      6.    Lot Coverage. The maximum permitted coverage for residential,
accessory structures in the Multiple Use (MU) zone (Section
18.37.050(A)(1)) is increased to 30 percent of the lot area.
      7.   The property owner/authorized representative shall contact the Pima
County Office of Conservation and Sustainability cultural resources staff to
discuss changes to historic buildings.
      8.   The property owner/authorized representative shall contact the
Tucson Airport Authority regarding avigation easements, disclosure forms, and
FAA forms.
(Ord. 2021-17 § 2, 2021)
Chapter 18.69
SUBDIVISION STANDARDS
18.69.010   Purpose.
18.69.020   Definitions.
18.69.030   General regulations.
18.69.040   General performance and design standards.
18.69.050   Tentative and final plat submittal requirements.
18.69.060   Review procedures.
18.69.070   Assurance requirements.
18.69.080   Waivers.
18.69.090   Residential recreation areas.
18.69.010   Purpose.
   Reserved.
18.69.020   Definitions.
   A.   For the purpose of this chapter certain words and phrases shall have
special meaning as defined herein, unless the context otherwise requires:
      1.   Alley: A secondary point of access to property which serves
primarily as a way for utilities and sanitary services.
      2.   Assurances: A commitment in the form prescribed by Section
18.69.070, guaranteeing the construction and installation of all subdivision
improvements.
      3.   Improvements:
         a.   Paved legal access to each individual subdivision lot, in
conformance with Pima County paving standards; and
         b.   Electric service to the lot line of each individual subdivision
lot: This shall not be required for commercial or industrial subdivision lots;
however, a "backbone" electrical distribution conduit system, usable by all
lots, shall be installed; and
         c.   Water service to the lot line of each individual subdivision lot;
and
         d.   Sewer service to the lot line of each individual subdivision lot
or legal access to a sewer not more than fifty feet from the lot line of each
individual lot:
            1)   This shall not be required for subdivisions not served by
sewers,
            2)   However, a statement indicating the absence of sewers shall
appear on the final subdivision plat; and
         e.   Drainage and flood control facilities depicted on the subdivision
plat or as required by ordinance or law; and
         f.   Any other construction, structure or installation specified on
the plat and necessary to render the subdivision lots developable.
      4.   Major street: Such major street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway or
boulevard so designated on the master plan and on the Major Streets and Scenic
Routes Plan.
         a.   Major Streets and Scenic Routes Plan: When used shall mean the
Pima County Major Streets and Scenic Routes Plan as provided in Section
18.77.040 Scenic Routes as amended.
         b.   Manual: When used shall mean the Subdivision and Development
Street Standards Manual.
      5.   Master plan: The master plan or any part thereof adopted pursuant to
A.R.S. Section 11-806, as amended.
      6.   Street: A way for vehicular traffic dedicated to the public or
designated as subdivision common area which affords the principal means of
access to abutting property.
      7.   Subdivided lands: See subdivision.
      8.   Subdivider: Any person who offers for sale or lease six or more
lots, parcels or fractional interests in a subdivision or who causes land to be
subdivided into a subdivision, or who undertakes to develop a subdivision.
      9.   Subdivision:
         a.   Improved or unimproved land or lands divided or proposed to be
divided for the purpose of sale, lease, or for cemetery purposes, whether
immediate or future, into six or more lots, parcels or fractional interests;
         b.   The following are not subdivisions for purposes of this chapter:
            1)   Division or proposed division of land located in Pima County
into lots or parcels each of which is, or will be, thirty-six acres or more in
area including to the centerline of dedicated roads or easements, if any,
contiguous to the lot or parcel,
            2)   Leasing of agricultural lands, or of apartments, offices,
stores, hotels, motels, or similar space within an apartment building,
industrial building or commercial building except that horizontal property
regimes as defined in A.R.S. Section 33-4.1 shall be included in this
definition,
            3)   Subdivision into or development of parcels, plots or
fractional portions within the original boundaries of a cemetery which has been
formed and approved pursuant to this chapter, if such subdivision or
development is not inconsistent with the original notice filed pursuant to
A.R.S. Section 32-2181 and the original report prepared pursuant to A.R.S.
Section 32-2183.
            4)   Division or proposed division of land for non-residential
purposes provided that the lots created by the land division comply with the
development standards for the zone.
      10.   Subdivision and Development Review Committee (SDRC): A committee
comprised of representatives of county departments and agencies who regulate or
are affected by development of land in Pima County who review a plat for
compliance with the ordinances, rules, and regulations of their respective
subject area.
(Ord. 2012-71 § 3, 2013; Ord. 2005-35 § 3 (part), 2005; Ord. 2003-16 § 1
(part), 2003; Ord. 1997-68 § 1, 1997; Ord. 1996-59 § 3, 1996; Ord. 1994-82
(part), 1994; Ord. 1990-1 § 1 (part), 1990; Ord. 1987-156 § 1, 1987; Ord. 1985-
114 § 1, 1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.69.030   General regulations.
   A.   Approval of Subdivision Required. Until a tentative plat and a final
plat of a subdivision shall have been approved in accordance with this chapter
and the Subdivision Development and Street Standards Manual, no person
proposing a subdivision within Pima County, outside the corporate limits of any
city or town shall:
      1.   Subdivide or file a record of survey, map or plat for record; or
      2.   Sell any part of said subdivision; or
      3.   Proceed with any grading, construction or other work on the same,
except as specified in Section
18.69.060G.
   B.   Lots. All lots shall be consistent with the zoning requirements.
   C.   Except as otherwise provided herein, a subdivider shall construct or
install all required subdivision improvements or provide assurances for their
installation as defined in Section
18.69.070 prior to the issuance of a building permit for any lot.
   D.   The board of supervisors delegate their approval authority of the
subdivision plats and associated procedures as provided herein to the
development services director or their designee. Once the subdivision plat has
been approved by the development services director or their designee, the final
plat shall be sent for signature by the chair of the board of supervisors for
acceptance through the clerk of the board of supervisors.
(Ord. 2025-30 § 1, 2025; Ord. 2005-35 § 3 (part), 2005; Ord. 1997-68 § 1, 1997;
Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.69.040   General performance and design standards.
   A.   Scope:
      1.   The performance and design standards of this section are general
regulations.
   B.   Subdivision and Development Street Standards Manual:
      1.   A companion Subdivision and Development Street Standards Manual,
hereinafter referred to as the "Manual" and incorporated herein by reference,
includes specific street regulations of uniform application governing plats,
development plans, and subdivisions of land within the County's area of
jurisdiction and provides for the construction of roadway systems that can
handle vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle traffic safely and efficiently.
      2.   Regulations in the manual are in the form of minimum performance and
design standards, guidelines for superior street performance, and procedures
for implementing the requirements in the manual that includes modification and
interpretation processes administered by the county engineer.
      3.   The Manual may be subsequently amended by a resolution of the Pima
County board of supervisors, after a recommendation from the county engineer.
The manual shall not be published as a part of the Pima County Zoning Code, but
shall be published as a separate booklet, copies of which shall be available
for inspection and purchase at the planning division public counter.
   C.   Streets.
      1.   The arrangements, character, extent, width, grade, and location of
all streets shall conform to the master plan, and with due consideration to
their relation to existing and other planned streets, to topographical
conditions, to surface drainage in and through the subdivision, to public
convenience and safety, and appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the
land to be served by such streets.
      2.   Where not shown in the master plan, arrangements and other features
of streets shall:
         a.   Provide for appropriate continuation of existing major streets in
surrounding areas where essential for circulation and access to community
facilities;
         b.   Conform to a plan for a neighborhood approved or adopted by the
planning and zoning commission to meet a particular situation where
topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to such
principal streets impracticable;
         c.   Be so arranged as to provide pedestrian and bicycle linkages that
contribute to safe routes or other similar pedestrian and bicycle oriented
design, insofar as practicable;
         d.   Provide sufficient right-of-way for local service or access
streets along major streets and routes, or other treatment to protect
residential properties by separation of through and local traffic;
         e.   Along a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-
way, provide a parallel street at a distance suitable for the appropriate use
of the intervening land, such as for park purposes in residential districts or
for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate locations; such distances
also to be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades
and future grade separations;
         f.   Provide street right-of-way widths in compliance with adopted
Pima County standard street cross-sections and provisions in the manual.
         g.   Avoid half streets, except where essential to the reasonable
development of the subdivision in conformity with these standards and where
dedication of the other half will be practicable when the adjoining property is
subdivided. Wherever a half street is found adjacent to a tract to be
subdivided, the other half shall be platted within such tract;
         h.   Conform with other performance and design standards and
guidelines for streets in the manual.
   D.   Access to Major Arterial and Collector Highways. Access to major
arterial and collector highways shall be in conformance with the requirements
in the manual.
      1.   All residential subdivisions and commercial or industrial
development should provide separate, legal, all-weather, paved access directly
to the nearest arterial or collector highway, where practical. When joint
access is utilized, access should minimize impacts to residential development.
      2.   Commercial and industrial developments shall not be allowed access
through any residentially zoned area on residential collector or local streets,
unless approved by the subdivision development review committee and provided
that one or more of the following criteria are met:
         a.   Legal access has been previously established;
         b.   Implementation of this subsection would prohibit access to the
public highway system;
         c.   Implementation of this subsection would cause a traffic hazard by
overloading local streets or their connections to the arterial or collector
highway system; or
         d.   Implementation of this subsection would prohibit sufficient
pedestrian and bicycle linkages that contribute to safe routes or other similar
pedestrian and bicycle oriented design.
   E.   Alleys.
      1.   Existing alleys shown on an approved plat shall not be used as the
primary access to lots.
   F.   Easements.
      1.   Utility easements and aerial easements shall be provided where
necessary, as determined and justified by:
         a.   The utility companies;
         b.   The planning and development services department;
         c.   The department of wastewater management; and
         d.   Other affected public agencies.
      2.   Drainage easements or rights-of-way shall be provided conforming
substantially with the lines of any watercourse, drainageway, channel, or
stream and such further width or construction or both as will be adequate for
the purpose, and parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection
therewith, as determined by the department of transportation and flood control
district.
      3.   Hiking, bicycling and equestrian trails easements or rights-of-way
shall be reserved on the plat:
         a.   When such trails are designated on the "Pima Regional Trail
System Master Plan Map" or successor,
         b.   To provide pedestrian and bicycle access into and out of the
subdivision in order to promote and provide safe routes, or
         c.   As may be required by the director of the natural resources,
parks and recreation department, who may approve an alternative to the trail on
the Pima Regional Trail System Master Plan Map or successor, or waive the trail
requirement entirely if the director finds that:
            1)   There exist unusual topographical or other exceptional
conditions which require relocation or deletion of a trail; or
            2)   Sufficient trails already exist in the area to provide
adequate public trail access.
      4.   No portion of a subdivision lot shall be designated as an easement
to be used as a street.
   G.   Street and lot layouts shall be determined with due regard to:
      1.   Provision of sites suitable to the type of use contemplated;
      2.   Zoning requirements as to lot size and dimensions;
      3.   Need for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of
street traffic;
      4.   Limitations and opportunities of topography;
      5.   Circulation within the tract and access to community facilities.
Subdivision streets should be laid out to allow and encourage bicycle and
pedestrian access to adjacent schools and should minimize distances travelled.
Subdivision and street layout should not direct bicycles and pedestrians to use
adjacent major streets when shorter distances may be attained via alternative
routes such as local streets, bicycle lanes or paths within and through the
subdivision. Where cul-de-sac or dead end streets are planned they should
provide for bicycle and pedestrian access to community facilities within or
through the interior of subdivisions. The preferred location for safe routes is
within public right-of-way; and
      6.   Street Lengths in conformance with the requirements and provisions
in the Manual.
(Ord. 2011-1 § 3 (part), 2011; Ord. 2009-98 § 2 (part), 2009; Ord. 2005-35 § 3
(part), 2005; Ord. 1996-76 § 1, 1996; Ord. 1995-39 § 1, 1995; Ord. 1994-147 §
7, 1994; Ord. 1994-82 (part), 1994; Ord. 1990-1 § 1 (part), 1990; Ord. 1985-82
(part), 1985)
18.69.050   Tentative and final plat submittal requirements.
   A.   Tentative Plat Requirements and Related Exhibits.
      1.   Topographic Data. Existing conditions shall be shown on the
tentative plat, including the following:
         a.   Boundary lines and approximate distances;
         b.   Easement with their dimensions and purpose;
         c.   Streets on and adjacent to the tract, name and right-of-way width
thereof;
         d.   Utilities on the tract;
         e.   Other conditions on the tract. Water courses, houses, barns,
shacks, walls, wells, tanks, and other significant features;
         f.   Other conditions adjacent to the tract affecting design of the
subdivision, and subdivision names of adjoining plats; and
         g.   Contour map at an interval and accuracy acceptable to the
department of transportation and flood control district.
      2.   Other Requirements. In addition to topographic data, the tentative
plat shall be drawn at a scale at which all necessary details may be clearly
shown, and shall show all proposals, including the following:
         a.   Name of the subdivision;
         b.   Legal description of the property to be subdivided;
         c.   Ownership;
         d.   Name of subdivider or developer;
         e.   Scale, north arrow;
         f.   Name of civil engineer or surveyor;
         g.   Date of plat;
         h.   Key map showing location of tract;
         i.   Proposed streets, alleys, other rights-of-way and easements,
location, width, purpose and proposed street names;
         j.   Approximate lot lines and typical and minimum lot sizes;
         k.   Sites, if any to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds,
or other public uses;
         l.   Building sites, if any, for multifamily dwellings, shopping
centers, churches, industry or other uses;
         m.   Site data, including gross area of the subdivision, number of
residential lots, approximate area in parks and other proposed nonresidential
uses;
         n.   Existing and proposed zoning and boundaries thereof.
      3.   Grading Plan. A Type 2 grading plan shall be submitted and approved
in accordance with Section
18.81.060 (Grading) prior to the issuance of grading permits.
   B.   Final Plat Requirements and Related Exhibits.
      1.   Final Plat.
         a.   A final plat shall be provided, drawn in ink on tracing cloth or
mylar, on sheets twenty-four inches wide by thirty-six inches long and one-inch
margin and an additional left margin of two inches, and shall be at a scale
sufficient to show all details clearly.
         b.   Where necessary the plat may be on several sheets, in which case,
each sheet shall be suitably indexed.
         c.   For large subdivisions, the final plat may be submitted for
approval progressively in contiguous sections.
      2.   The final plat shall show the following:
         a.   Survey Requirements.
            1)   Primary control points or descriptions and ties to such
control point, to which all dimensions, angles, bearings, and similar data on
the plat shall be referred, and where a coordinate system shall have been
established by the department of transportation and flood control, primary
control points shall be referenced thereto,
            2)   At least one corner of a subdivision shall be tied by course
and distance to a section corner, a quarter-section corner, or established city
or county survey monument, and the plat must include a description of the
corner marker, the final plat indicating how the bearings were determined;
         b.   Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements
and other rights-of-way, and property lines of residential lots and other
sites; with accurate dimensions, bearings, or deflection angles and radii,
arcs, semi-tangents and central angles of all curves;
         c.   Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way;
         d.   Locations, dimensions and purpose of any easements, fully
described;
         e.   Identification of each lot or site by letter or number;
         f.   Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are
dedicated;
         g.   Location and description of monuments, lot corners and other
survey points in place;
         h.   Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land
by record name, date, and book and page numbers;
         i.   Certification by a registered professional civil engineer or land
surveyor to the effect that the plan represents a survey made or certified by
same and that all the monuments shown thereon actually exist, and that their
location, size and material are correctly shown;
         j.   Certification of title and statement by owner dedicating streets,
alleys, easements, and other rights-of-way and any lands for public uses;
         k.   Title, scale, north arrow and date.
(Ord. 1994-137 § 1, 1994; Ord. 1986-187 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-82 (part),
1985)
18.69.060   Review procedures.
   A.   Preliminary Review.
      1.   Since agreement on the tentative plat is deemed a step of primary
importance in these proceedings, the subdivider may request that the initial
proposal for the subdivision be reviewed with the subdivision and development
review committee (SDRC) prior to preparation of the required tentative plat
while the plans for the proposed subdivision are still flexible. The purpose of
this stage is to make available general advice on the purpose and effect of
this chapter, the master plan, zoning, and other city and county planning,
engineering, drainage, sewerage, water system and similar standards,
requirements and plans.
   B.   Tentative Plat Submittal.
      1.   The subdivider shall prepare a tentative plat of the proposed
subdivision and other exhibits in accordance with the requirements of Section
18.69.050(A) and the development services department's latest edition of the
Procedures and Requirements for Subdivision Plats and Development Plans
(subdivision checklist). The subdivider shall submit for distribution and
review such items to the subdivision coordinator together with the appropriate
fees.
   C.   Subdivision and Development Review Committee (SDRC) Review of Tentative
Plat.
      1.   The subdivision coordinator shall transmit copies of the tentative
plat submittal to the members of the SDRC and other agencies, such as the
county health department, utilities, school or fire districts, or other
political jurisdictions, whose review and comment is deemed appropriate by the
SDRC.
      2.   The SDRC and other review agencies shall review the plat for matters
within their jurisdiction and shall report their findings, in writing, to the
subdivision coordinator who shall forward them to the subdivider. At the option
of the subdivider, a meeting may be scheduled with the SDRC to discuss the
review.
      3.   If a tentative plat conforms to the requirements of this chapter,
and all other applicable state requirements and local ordinances and
regulations, the subdivision coordinator shall send the subdivider notification
of tentative plat conformity.
      4.   If the SDRC finds that the tentative plat does not conform to the
requirements of this chapter, or any other applicable state requirements or
local ordinances or regulations, the subdivision coordinator shall send the
subdivider notification requesting revisions to the tentative plat. Except as
provided in the Manual, if the subdivider disagrees with a decision by the SDRC
as to the interpretation or applicability of any requirement, or there exists
unnecessary hardship in conforming to any provision of this chapter, the
subdivider may appeal the decision or request a modification of the regulations
as provided in Section
18.69.060(E).
   D.   Reserved.
   E.   Appeals to and Modifications by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Except as provided in this section and the manual, the planning and zoning
commission hereafter referred to as commission, shall hear and decide appeals
from a decision of the SDRC and requests for modifications only after the
department director responsible for the issue being appealed or the requested
modification has issued a final decision on the matter.
      1.   Appeals to the Commission. Any written order, requirement, decision,
grant or refusal of the SDRC made in the course of administrating or
interpreting this chapter, or the development standards and specifications
adopted pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to the commission as provided
in Section
18.69.060(C)(4) except those interpretations and modifications described in
Section
18.69.060(F) that are delegated to the county engineer or the chief building
official.
         a.   Appeals must be filed within thirty days after the decision of
the SDRC.
         b.   Appeals must clearly state the specific decision that is being
appealed and the reason the appellant believes the decision is in error.
      2.   Modifications to the Commission. Except as provided in Section
18.69.060(F), the commission shall hear and decide all requests for
modifications from the requirements of this chapter or the development
standards and specifications adopted pursuant to this chapter.
         a.   The commission shall consider the following guidelines when
approving or denying a modification request:
            1)   That because of unusual topographic conditions or other
exceptional circumstances applicable to the property, such as the topography,
size, shape, locations, or surroundings, the literal enforcement of the
requirements of this chapter will result in an unnecessary hardship;
            2)   That the exceptional circumstances are not self-imposed;
            3)   That the modification is the minimum required to afford
relief;
            4)   That the condition or situation for which the modification is
sought is not of so typical or recurrent nature as to make reasonably
practicable the formulation of a general regulation for such condition or
modification.
         b.   In granting a modification, the commission may attach such
conditions as to ensure that the modification does not constitute a grant of
special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on similar subdivisions in
the area, and as may be deemed advisable in the interest and furtherance of the
purpose of this chapter.
         c.   Exceptions. The commission may not grant a modification from a
requirement imposed by state or federal statute or regulation.
      3.   Application and Hearing. The following application and hearing
procedures apply to an appeal of a decision of the SDRC or a modification
request, or combination thereof, except as provided in section
18.69.060(F).
         a.   The application shall be in writing and shall be filed with the
secretary of the commission.
            1)   An appeal shall state why the decision of the SDRC is in error
and shall contain a concise explanation of all matters in dispute, and any
pertinent maps, drawings, data or other information in support of the appeal.
            2)   A modification request shall state the specific code section
from which the modification is requested and shall include pertinent maps,
drawings, data, or other information why the modification should be granted.
            3)   Applications determined incomplete by the planning official or
his designated representative, shall not be accepted and scheduled for hearing
before the commission.
         b.   Hearing on the application shall be scheduled before the
commission no more than thirty days from the date of the filing of the
application.
   F.   Interpretations and Modifications by the County Engineer or the Chief
Building Official. The county engineer shall decide interpretations or
modifications of the manual's elements within the present or future street
right-of-way, whether public or private, including areas outside the right-of-
way that have a direct safety, capacity, or maintenance impact on the right-of-
way. The chief building official shall decide interpretations or modifications
of the manual's elements associated with development areas outside street
right-of-way. In rendering interpretations and considering requests for
modifications, the county engineer and chief building official may seek the
assistance and recommendation of a subdivision and development street standards
committee which shall be composed of six members, at least three of which shall
be Pima County Department of Transportation employees and at least four of
which shall be registered civil engineers. The criteria and the procedures for
granting interpretations and approving requests for modifications shall be as
provided Chapter 6 of the manual.
   G.   Time Limits. Approval of the tentative plat shall be effective for one
year. A one-year time extension may be granted by the development services
director if the applicant can show there were unforeseen circumstances beyond
the applicant's control that warrant the granting of the time extension. Any
new submittal shall meet current county standards.
   H.   Initiation of Grading and Improvements. Upon approval of the tentative
plat, the subdivider may proceed with grading or street and utility
improvements in accordance with such approval of the tentative plat and
approved plans for the grading or improvements. A type 2 grading plan shall be
submitted and reviewed in accordance with Section
18.81.060 prior to the issuance of grading permits.
   I.   Maintenance.
      1.   The subdivider, including contractors and any and all agents, shall
be responsible for the keeping and maintenance in a clean and sanitary manner,
of all the described platted area.
      2.   Said maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, the removal
from the premises of all debris, rubbish, weeds and dust-producing materials.
   J.   Final Plat Submittal.
      1.   Before the transfer of title of any lots in a subdivision, the
subdivider shall prepare a final plat for recording as provided in Section
18.69.050(B) and the county's subdivision checklist. The subdivider shall
submit the plat with required documents and appropriate fees to the subdivision
coordinator.
   K.   Final Plat Review and Approval. The procedure for approval of the final
plat shall be the same as for approval of the tentative plat, provided that if
the planning and development services director finds that the final plat
conforms to the tentative plat as approved in accord with this chapter, the
director shall so certify and transmit the final plat to the board of
supervisors for final approval and recordation.
   L.   Assurances. As required by Section
18.69.070.
   M.   Final Plat Recordation.
      1.   Recordation. Upon board of supervisors' approval, the subdivision
coordinator shall record the approved final plat in the office of the Pima
County recorder.
      2.   Transmittal. The clerk shall cause prints on cloth thereof to be
transmitted to, at the expense of the subdivider and to be advanced by said
subdivider or agent, the following:
         a.   The county recorder;
         b.   The county assessor;
         c.   The department of transportation and flood control district;
         d.   The planning and development services director;
         e.   The city engineer, where the subdivision is within three miles of
the corporate limits of the city of Tucson.
(Ord. 2016-18, § 3 (part), 2016; Ord. 2005-35 § 3 (part), 2005; Ord. 1997-68 §
1, 1997; Ord. 1986-187 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.69.070   Assurance requirements.
   A.   Scope. An agreement, which shall be recorded by the county, for
appropriate improvement assurances shall be provided by the developer to assure
the installation of all subdivision improvements prior to the recordation of
any plat.
   B.   Term. Assurances shall specify the date by which the improvements shall
be completed.
   C.   Beneficiary. Pima County shall be named as beneficiary of the
assurance.
   D.   Exceptions.
      1.   No assurances shall be required for subdivisions which have had all
required improvements completed in accordance with this chapter.
      2.   The subdivision plat shall have an assurances waiver block
indicating that no assurances are required.
   E.   Posting of Assurances. The approved forms of assurances are as follows:
      1.   Cash or certified check;
      2.   Surety (performance) bonds executed by a company authorized and
licensed to do business in the state of Arizona, ensuring the performance of
the principal (developer or owner) as required by this chapter;
      3.   Certificate of deposit, United States Treasury Bills, or any
security guaranteed by the United States Government, state of Arizona, or any
political subdivision thereof;
      4.   A deposit of money or negotiable bonds, of the kind approved for
securing deposits of public monies, with a responsible escrow agent or trust
company authorized and licensed to do business in the state of Arizona;
      5.   An irrevocable letter of credit in favor of Pima County from a
third-part financial institution authorized and licensed to do business in the
state of Arizona;
      6.   The placement of the title to the subdivision in trust with a third-
party escrow agency or trust company authorized and licensed to do business in
the state of Arizona along with an agreement between the trustee and Pima
County that title to any lot or parcel within the subdivision shall not be
transferred until all improvements required by these regulations have been
installed, accepted by Pima County, and written approval for release has been
granted by Pima County to the escrow agency or trust company holding the
property in trust. The agreement shall contain a condition authorizing Pima
County to abandon the subdivision and resubdivide the property should the
required improvements fail to be installed in compliance with Pima County's
standard specifications;
      7.   A trust account in the name of Pima County in a bank or trust
company authorized and licensed to do business in the state of Arizona.
Periodic withdrawals may be made from the trust account for a progressive
payment of installation costs by a trustee selected or approved by the county.
The amount of such withdrawals shall be based upon progress work estimates and
shall be approved by the county engineer and the trustee.
   F.   Board of supervisors' Approval. The approval of the board of
supervisors shall be endorsed in writing on the plat and shall include specific
identification of an approval of the assurances required by these regulations.
   G.   Substitute Assurances and Time Extensions.
      1.   Requests for substitute assurances or assurance agreement time
extensions shall be submitted in writing to the subdivision coordinator for
review by the department of transportation and flood control district and the
wastewater management department.
      2.   These departments shall provide written recommendations within ten
working days to the subdivision coordinator who shall forward the
recommendations to the board of supervisors for final decision.
   H.   Release of Assurances.
      1.   Requests to release subdivision assurances shall be submitted in
writing to the subdivision coordinator for review by the department of
transportation and flood control district and the wastewater management
department;
      2.   These departments shall provide written recommendations within ten
working days to the subdivision coordinator, who shall forward them to the
county manager for final decision.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.69.080   Waivers.
   Procedure.
   A.   The board of supervisors may waive any or all of the requirements of
this chapter for any subdivision which is not subject to or which has received
an order of exemption from the public report requirements administered by the
Arizona Department of Real Estate. If an applicant for a subdivision waiver is
in the process of applying for an order of exemption from the Arizona
Department of Real Estate, the waiver may be granted subject to issuance of the
order of exemption.
   B.   An application for waiver of county subdivision requirements shall be
in the form provided by the county and shall be accompanied by the signatures
of all parties having an interest in the property which is the subject of the
waiver.
   C.   The waiver may be granted subject to such conditions as the board deems
necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(Ord. 1993-77 § 1, 1993)
18.69.090   Residential recreation areas.
   A.   Purpose.
      1.   The purpose of this section is to ensure that recreation areas are
available for the use and enjoyment of subdivision residents.
      2.   To protect and enhance community health and quality of life.
      3.   To ensure that new recreation areas meet minimum standards for
safety and efficacy.
      4.   To facilitate the implementation of the Eastern Pima County Trail
System Master Plan and related features and enhancements.
      5.   To encourage residential multi-modal opportunities and ensure
connectivity among parks, schools, neighborhoods and commercial areas.
   B.   Applicability. For every new subdivision created within the CB-1 or CB-
2 zones or within any rural or residential zone, a new residential recreation
area shall be created, or an existing recreation area shall be enhanced, or
both. This ordinance shall not apply to resubdivisions of subdivisions existing
as of the date of adoption hereof, unless the resubdivision is a subdivision of
a block on a block plat not previously subdivided, or unless the resubdivision
increases the density of the plat resubdivided.
   C.   General standards.
      1.   A subdivider shall submit a recreation area plan (RAP) and submittal
fee with the tentative plat.
      2.   The RAP must include one of the following, and also shall provide
safe route linkages within one-and-a-half miles of an existing or planned
public elementary school or within two-and-a-half miles of an existing or
planned middle school when reasonable linkage opportunities exist. A school
shall be considered planned if it is programmed and has a dedicated funding
source, or is required by a rezoning or specific plan:
         a.   Design of a public or private recreation area within the
subdivision or adjacent to the subdivision, providing a minimum of eight
hundred seventy-one square feet of developed recreation space per lot. The
design shall depict all recreational improvements, including structures and
facilities consistent with the recreation area design manual;
         b.   Proposal for dedication to the county of at least ten acres of
land located within the region where the subdivision is located, along with a
design for a public recreation area with the ten-acre site, depicting all
recreational improvements, including structures and facilities consistent with
the recreation area design manual;
         c.   Election to utilize the full in-lieu option if the subdivision
has sixty-five lots or fewer or is located within 0.75 mile of an existing
recreation area with sufficient capacity to accommodate the residents of the
subdivision and calculation of in-lieu fee to be paid in the amount of one
thousand five hundred dollars per lot for subdivisions of sixty-five lots or
fewer. Fees will be adjusted annually to the Consumer Price Index (CPI) on July
1 of each year with the one thousand five hundred dollars applying in base year
2004. Election to use the full in lieu fee does not relieve the subdivider of
the obligation to provide for safe routes, under this subsection;
         d.   Proposal for dedication to the county of a parcel that is located
within the region where the subdivision is located adjacent to a district or
regional park, and is of a value equal or greater than the value of the
standard requirements (park development and/or fee);
         e.   A combination of a design of a public or private recreation area
within or adjacent to the subdivision along with a calculation of an in-lieu
fee, based upon the residential recreation area matrix set forth in Table C.1.
below.
Table C.1 
Residential Recreation Area Matrix 
Acres/Money  Recreation   Square Feet % Recreation In-lieu Fee % Recreation
Ratio        Acreage Per  Per Lot     Area in      Per Lot     Area in Dollars
             1,000 people             Acreage
Acres/Money  Recreation   Square Feet % Recreation In-lieu Fee % Recreation
Ratio        Acreage Per  Per Lot     Area in      Per Lot     Area in Dollars
             1,000 people             Acreage
100/0%       8            871.0       100%         0           0%
             7.2          784.0       90%          $120.00     10%
             6.4          697.0       80%          $240.00     20%
             5.6          610.0       70%          $360.00     30%
             4.8          523.0       60%          $480.00     40%
50/50%       4            436.0       50%          $600.00     50%
             3.2          348.0       40%          $720.00     60%
             2.4          261.0       30%          $840.00     70%
             1.6          174.0       20%          $960.00     80%
             0.8          87.0        10%          $1,080.00   90%
1%           0.08         8.7         1%           $1,188.00   99%
 
   The above matrix is based on the following formula:
Divide the amount of square footage to be provided per lot for recreation park
area by eight hundred seventy-one. The derived percentage will be multiplied by
one thousand two hundred dollars to determine the in-lieu fee per lot.
      3.   Subdivisions of sixty-six lots or more, other than common wall
townhouse or condominium projects, may elect to utilize the full in-lieu fee
option only if such subdivisions are located within 0.75 mile of an existing
recreation area with sufficient capacity to accommodate the residents of the
subdivision. Otherwise, consistent with subsection (C)(2), such subdivisions
shall provide a minimum of four hundred thirty-six square feet of developed
recreation area per lot within the subdivision and the appropriate in-lieu fee,
or shall dedicate and develop a ten-acre recreation area located within the
region where the new subdivision is located and is of a value equal to or
greater than the value of the standard requirements (park development and fee).
      4.   Subdivisions of sixty-five lots or fewer may utilize the full in-
lieu fee option in accordance with the development services fee schedule.
      5.   The RAP must be approved by the Pima County Natural Resources, Parks
and Recreation Department (PCNRPRD) as a condition of approval of the tentative
plat. (See recreation area design manual for guidelines.)
      6.   The RAP must be implemented, as follows:
         a.   In-lieu fees, if any, shall be paid or assurances shall be
provided prior to final plat approval;
         b.   Public recreation areas, if any, including not only recreation
features, but also street paving, curbs, gutters, traffic control devices,
landscaping, sidewalks, parking areas and utility connections must be
constructed to Pima County standards, with inspections at thirty, sixty, ninety
and one hundred percent completion stages to ensure compliance. In addition,
as-built drawings shall be provided to Pima County upon completion of
construction of public recreation areas;
         c.   The recreation area, if any, shall be constructed by the
subdivider; and
         d.   Dedication of land outside the subdivision, if any, shall be
recorded prior to the recording of the final plat.
      7.   The developer / property owner shall submit a safe routes to school
plan, with documentation of a meeting with and review comments from the
applicable school district with the tentative plat or development plan. The
plan shall include a map(s) showing existing schools, existing roadways,
current attendance boundaries, current bus routes, current pedestrian and
bicycle routes to existing schools from residential neighborhoods, planned
schools, planned roadways, and planned pedestrian and bicycle routes to
existing and planned schools. The plan shall also address how the proposed
project provides safe access to any affected schools. The proposed safe route
may go along the perimeter of the proposed development provided that it
provides safe and convenient access to the school and associated facilities.
   D.   Recreation area standards.
      1.   Recreation areas may include trails, trails within natural open
space or shallow retention/detention basins, or other functional open space;
      2.   Recreation areas shall avoid known archeological and historical
sites, and shall be designed and constructed in an environmentally-sensitive
manner that minimizes the disturbance of the site's natural vegetation, and
mitigates effects on adjacent upland areas, washes, wildlife corridors, and
natural open space;
      3.   Recreation areas shall include appropriate structures and facilities
to meet residents' recreational needs, such as areas for active sports and
recreation, and passive recreation, and other active and passive design
features constructed in accordance with the recreation area design manual.
      4.   Access to recreation areas must be provided for all subdivision
residents; and
      5.   Bicycle racks and at least one paved, on-site parking space for
automobiles at recreation areas must be provided for every twenty dwelling
units, unless sufficient unobstructed on-street parking is available adjacent
to the recreation area.
   E.   Integration of recreation areas with other county park and trail plans.
      1.   In the event the residential subdivision is adjacent to a trail
identified on the Pima Regional Trail System Master Plan Map or successor or
identified as a significant trail corridor by the PCNRPRD, the subdivider shall
provide a connection to the trail from the subdivision's recreation area.
      2.   In the event a trail listed in the Pima Regional Trail System Master
Plan Map or successor or identified as a significant trail corridor by the
PCNRPRD passes through the residential subdivision, the subdivider shall
construct the trail segment consistent with the standards manual of the Eastern
Pima County Trail System Master Plan.
      3.   In the event the residential subdivision is adjacent to or includes
a Pima County linear park, the subdivider shall provide a corridor at least one
hundred feet wide to accommodate the park. The area of the park corridor, if
dedicated to Pima County, shall be credited towards the required recreation
area of the subdivision.
   F.   Private recreation areas.
      1.   Privately-owned recreation areas shall be constructed in accordance
with the RAP and maintained by the private property owners of the subdivision.
(See recreation area design manual for guidelines.)
   G.   Public recreation areas.
      1.   Pima County may accept dedication of a recreation area if it is at
least ten acres in size and is adjacent to a public collector street.
      2.   Recreation areas constructed with the intent of transfer to Pima
County shall be constructed to Pima County standards with plans being submitted
to the PCNRPRD for review at thirty, sixty, ninety, and one hundred percent
completion stages to ensure compliance. As-built drawings shall be provided at
the completion of the recreation area.
      3.   The subdivider shall provide the recreation area with the following:
         a.   All street improvements and utility connections including, but
not limited to, curbs, gutters, street paving, traffic control devices,
landscaping, and sidewalks for land which is dedicated pursuant to this
section;
         b.   Improved drainage through the recreation area; and
         c.   Other improvements essential to the acceptance of the land for
recreation purposes, including the development of actual park recreation
features and elements.
   H.   In-lieu fees.
      1.   In-lieu fees shall be paid to PCNRPRD prior to final plat approval
or assurances shall be provided prior to final plat approval guaranteeing that
fees will be paid to PCNRPRD at the time that subdivision assurances are
released for the subdivision in question. Substitute assurances acceptable to
the county may be provided in the case of a sale of an entire subdivision, or
block on a block plat, or a bulk sale of a minimum of twenty lots within a
subdivision to a subdivider or builder.
      2.   The in-lieu fees collected will be kept in a fund maintained by the
PCNRPRD to be used for the acquisition of land, development of recreation
facilities, planning for the future development of recreation areas and /or
related expenses. The fees will be applied for use in the region in which the
fees were generated for the acquisition of land, development of recreation
facilities, or creation of plans for the future development of recreation
areas.
      3.   The regions are identified as follows: Far West Region — west of
Range 6E; Northeast Region — east of Range 13E and north of Township 14S;
Southeast Region — east of Range 13E and south of Township 13S; Southwest
Region — west of Range 14E to Range 5E, and south of Township 13S; Northwest
Region — west of Range 14E to Range 5E and north of Township 14S. Each of the
above described regions extends to the county boundaries.
(Ord. 2011-2 § 17, 2011; Ord. 2011-1 § 2 (part), 2011; Ord. 2009-98 § 2 (part),
2009; Ord. 2004-88 § 1, 2004; Ord. 2003-16 § 1 (part), 2003)
Chapter 18.70
MINOR LANDS DIVISION
18.70.010   Purpose.
18.70.020   Definitions.
18.70.030   Permit required.
18.70.040   Applicability.
18.70.050   General requirements.
18.70.060   Procedures.
18.70.070   Exceptions.
18.70.080   Violations, Penalties, and Enforcement.
18.70.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare by providing for the review of all land divisions, unless otherwise
excepted by this Chapter, in order to determine whether the resulting lots,
parcels, or fractional interests meet or provide for the following:
   A.   Minimum applicable zoning requirements.
   B.   Legal access.
   C.   Physical access.
   D.   Reservation of utility easements on the lots, parcels, or fractional
interests being created.
(Ord. 2005-34 § 2, 2005)
18.70.020   Definitions.
   A.   Applicant: Owner or owner's authorized agent of land subject to this
chapter.
   B.   Minimum applicable county zoning requirements: The minimum acreage and
dimensions of the resulting lot, parcel or fractional interest as required by
the Pima County Zoning Code.
   C.   Legal access: A right of legal ingress and egress to and between the
lots, parcels, or fractional interests being created.
   D.   Lot: Refer to section
18.03.020(L)(3).
   E.   Physical access: Access that is traversable by a two-wheel drive
passenger motor vehicle.
   F.   Subdivision: Refer to section
18.69.020(A)(14)(a).
(Ord. 2005-34 § 2, 2005)
18.70.030   Permit required.
   A.   No land may be divided into five or fewer lots, parcels, or fractional
interests, any of which is ten acres or smaller, unless a land division permit
has been issued by Pima County.
   B.   Payment of an applicable land division fee in accordance with the
adopted fee schedule is required as a condition of obtaining a land division
permit.
(Ord. 2005-34 § 2, 2005)
18.70.040   Applicability.
   A.   The provisions of this chapter apply to all land divisions of a parcel
into five or fewer lots, parcels, or fractional interests, any of which is ten
acres or smaller in size, unless otherwise excepted by this chapter.
   B.   County issuance of a land division permit under this ordinance is not a
representation that the division complies with state laws or county ordinances
regarding the subdivision of land.
   C.   It is unlawful for a person, or group of persons acting in concert, to
attempt to avoid the provisions of this chapter or other county ordinances and
state subdivision laws by dividing a parcel of land into six or more lots,
parcels, or fractional interests or to sell or lease six or more lots, parcels,
or fractional interests, by using a series of owners or conveyances.
   D.   Failure to obtain a land division permit prior to dividing land into
lots, parcels, or fractional interests shall be a violation of this code.
(Ord. 2005-34 § 2, 2005)
18.70.050   General requirements.
   A.   No parcel of land may be divided into five or fewer lots, parcels, or
fractional interests without complying with this chapter and obtaining a land
division permit, unless otherwise excepted by this chapter.
   B.   All improvements to and development of land divided pursuant to this
chapter must comply with all other applicable Pima County Code provisions.
   C.   A building, or use permit shall not be issued for development on any
lot, parcel, or fractional interest that does not comply with the provisions of
this Chapter.
   D.   A land division application that does not comply with one or more of
the items listed in section
18.70.060(A) may still have a permit issued if the applicant signs and records
an acknowledgment that no building or use permit will be issued until the lot,
parcel or fractional interest meets the minimum zoning requirements, has legal
access, physical access, and has reserved utility easements.
   E.   The granting or issuance of any certificate, permit, registration or
other approval pursuant to this chapter requires compliance with all other
applicable laws and Pima County Code provisions.
(Ord. 2005-34 § 2, 2005)
18.70.060   Procedures.
   A.   Submittal of Application. The applicant must submit a properly
completed and filled out land division application and any required supporting
documentation for staff review as set forth below.
      1.   An application applies to all land divisions described in Section
18.70.040(A) and requires:
         a.   All of the following:
      1.   A complete land division application and a survey sealed by a
registered land surveyor showing the property boundary lines, the locations of
existing structures, legal access, average cross slope, lot area, lot width,
and utility easements for each lot, parcel, or fractional interest being
created. The applicant may substitute an ALTA survey for the purposes of
meeting this requirement at its discretion;
      2.   A standard preliminary title report demonstrating that there is
legal access to each lot, parcel, or fractional interest being created from a
public right-of-way;
      3.   A statement from a registered professional engineer or a licensed
surveyor stating that the resulting lots, parcels, or fractional interests
being created will have physical access that is located within the boundaries
of the legal access;
      4.   Identification of all topographic, hydrologic or other site
constraints, requirements or limitations that must be addressed as a condition
of the eventual issuance of a building or use permit, including, but not
limited to, identifying all areas for each lot, parcel, or fractional interest
being created that lie within the hillside development overlay zone or
regulatory floodplain as defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) or by Pima County. For Section
18.70.060, there shall be no requirement for independent studies; or
         b.   A signed written acknowledgment from the property owner that has
been recorded with the Pima County Recorder's Office and acknowledges that no
building permit or use permit will be issued until the lot, parcel, or
fractional interest meets the minimum zoning requirements, has legal access,
will have physical access from a public right of way, and has reserved utility
easements.
   B.   Review of Application
      1.   Applications shall be reviewed in 30 days pursuant to an application
checklist. The thirty-day time period shall start once the application is
determined to be complete by the Development Services Director or the
Development Services Director's designee.
      2.   Upon review, staff will issue a land division permit or return the
application to the applicant as an incomplete submittal.
      3.   A complete application that is not reviewed within the thirty-day
time period shall be deemed approved.
(Ord. 2005-34 § 2, 2005)
18.70.070   Exceptions.
   The following are excepted from the requirements of this Chapter:
   A.   Creation or realignment of a public right-of-way by a public agency;
   B.   Creation or realignment of a conservation easement, public easement,
private easement, or any other easement as recognized by Pima County;
   C.   Creation or realignment of a special assessment district;
   D.   Sale, lease, transfer or development of space within an apartment,
industrial or commercial building;
   E.   Compliance with a court order to divide the land;
   F.   Cemetery lots;
   G.   Subdivisions created under the authority of A.R.S. Titles 11 and 32,
and
Chapter 18.69 of the Pima County Zoning Code;
   H.   Division of land within a commercial or industrial zoning district;
   I.   Division of land within the Transitional (TR) and Multiple Use (MU)
zoning district, if used solely for nonresidential purposes;
   J.   Division of land for sale, lease, or exchange between adjacent property
owners, if the sale, lease or exchange does not create additional lots, parcels
or fractional interests of sufficient size and configuration that would require
a building or use permit under the Pima County Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2005-34 § 2, 2005)
18.70.080   Violations, Penalties, and Enforcement.
   A.   The enforcement of this chapter and conditions of the land division
permit shall be in accordance with
Chapter 18.95 (Compliance and Enforcement).
   B.   Penalties
   A violation of this Chapter shall result in the assessment of civil
penalties in an amount provided by Section
18.95.040. Payment of a civil penalty shall not relieve any person from the
requirement to comply with the terms of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2005-34 § 2, 2005)
Chapter 18.71
DEVELOPMENT PLAN STANDARDS*
18.71.010   Purpose and scope.
18.71.020   Definitions.
18.71.030   Development plan submittal requirements.
18.71.040   Review procedures.
18.71.060   Requirements and procedures for RVC zoning.
18.71.010   Purpose and scope.
   A.   Purpose. To require submittal of sufficient information by the
developer to assure that zoning code requirements and other applicable county
ordinances, regulations, and policies are met.
   B.   Scope.
      1.   A development plan shall be submitted to the development services
center for review and approval for any proposed development other than four
residential units or less located on an individual lot.
      2.   This requirement shall also apply to substantial expansion of an
existing development other than four residential units or less on an individual
lot. Substantial expansion shall be defined as greater than two thousand square
feet of gross floor area or land use area.
      3.   Refer to Section
18.71.060 for development plan requirements and procedures for RVC zoning.
(Ord. 2025-8 § 5, 2025; Ord. 1992-58 § 1 (part), 1992; Ord. 1986-40 § 1 (part),
1986)
18.71.020   Definitions.
   A.   Workday. Monday through Friday except official holidays as specified by
A.R.S. Section 1-301.
   B.   Gross Floor Area. The total floor area within the walls of, or under
the roof (excluding roof overhang) of any building or structure.
(Ord. 1986-40 § 1 (part), 1986)
18.71.030   Development plan submittal requirements.
   A.   All development plans shall contain sufficient information to evidence
compliance with all applicable county ordinances, regulations and policies
including but not limited to the Subdivision and Development Street Standards.
See checklist requirements in development services.
   B.   If the site is subject to special constraints or considerations,
additional information and detail shall be submitted. Determination of whether
site constraints and considerations are sufficient or require such additional
submittal, and the type, detail and form of such additional information, shall
be within the reasonable discretion of the development services administrator.
Special constraints or considerations include but are not limited to flooding,
traffic, slope, and soils conditions which may affect development of the site.
   C.   For every new development of residential apartments, a new residential
recreation area shall be created. The recreation area must include 460 square
feet per unit and must include recreational facilities and structures. The
applicant shall submit a proposed recreation area plan (RAP) with the
development plan. The RAP must depict all recreational facilities and
structures to be developed, which may include, but are not limited to, the
following: turfed areas, swimming pool, paths, ramada, recreational center, tot
play lot. The RAP must be approved by Pima County Natural Resources, Parks and
Recreation Department as a condition of development plan approval.
   D.   Commercial developments that encompass or abut trail corridors listed
on the Pima Regional Trail System Master Plan Map or successor, including
linear park corridors, shall provide space to accommodate the subject trail
corridor, and shall construct the segment of the trail or linear park,
consistent with the standards and requirements of the Pima County Natural
Resources, Parks and Recreation Department.
(Ord. 2016-18, § 2 (part), 2016; Ord. 2011-1 § 2 (part), 2011; Ord. 2003-16 §
3, 2003; Ord. 1992-58 § 1 (part), 1992; Ord. 1986-187 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord.
1986-40 § 1 (part), 1986)
18.71.040   Review procedures.
   A.   Determination of Conformance with Rezoning Conditions. If the property
was the subject of a rezoning case, Pima County shall review the development
plan for conformance with the preliminary development plan presented to the
board of supervisors at time of conditional rezoning in accordance with
Chapter 18.91 (Rezoning Procedures).
   B.   Approval.
      1.   The development plan shall be considered approved if review is not
completed within thirty-five working days after any original or subsequent
submittal.
      2.   Approval of the development plan shall be valid for a period of one
year. A development plan shall be considered permanently in effect if building
permits and/or development permits have been issued and substantial
construction has been started, i.e., slabs and foundations poured, and streets,
curbs, and utilities installed. Determination of substantial expansion shall be
by the development services administrator whose decision may be appealed to the
hearing officer.
   C.   Tentative Plat Submittal. If a tentative plat is submitted as provided
in Section
18.69.050A (Subdivision Standards), it may be acceptable in lieu of a
development plan if it contains sufficient information to determine compliance
with applicable regulations with respect to each individual lot or block which
is required to submit a development plan.
   D.   Fees. Upon submittal of a development plan, fees are payable to the
Pima County treasurer in accordance with the fees schedule adopted by Pima
County.
(Ord. 1992-58 § 1 (part), 1992; Ord. 1986-40 § 1 (part), 1986)
18.71.060   Requirements and procedures for RVC zoning.
   A.   Scope. A development plan shall be submitted to the design review
committee (refer to Section
18.99.030, Design Review Committee) for its review on each proposed village
center.
   B.   Requirements. The plan shall consist of the requirements of Section
18.69.050A (Subdivision Standards) and also preliminary building site plans and
elevations:
      1.   Site Plans.
         a.   Driveways showing access to and from and circulation within the
proposed development and relation to planned geometric design of adjacent
streets and thoroughfares;
         b.   Areas assigned for parking, off-street loading and unloading,
curbs, islands, landscaping, pedestrian ways, malls, sidewalks, etc.;
         c.   Building floor plans and/or building sites, with sites numbered
and described as to general purpose;
         d.   On-site improvements.
      2.   General Building and Site Plan Elevations. Typical building
elevations keyed to the general grading and site plan.
   C.   Design Review.
      1.   Intent and Purpose. Each development, building, addition and
alteration within this zone, with the exception of detached dwelling units,
shall be subject to review with regard to the architectural design by the
design review committee. The purpose of this review is to afford the applicant
an opportunity to promote harmony with the scenic character of the area and
among the buildings of the center.
      2.   Responsibilities of Committee. The commit-tee's report shall be
submitted to the commission and the applicant at the commission's next regular
meeting.
      3.   Review Considerations. The following shall be considered in review
of plans:
         a.   Location on the lot;
         b.   Front and side elevation;
         c.   Location of mechanical equipment;
         d.   Signs;
         e.   Landscaping;
         f.   Conformity to overall design of the development to ensure that
one architectural flavor is maintained for the entire center.
(Ord. 2003-118 § 2, 2003; Ord. 1986-40 § 1 (part), 1986)
Chapter 18.72
NATIVE PLANT PRESERVATION
18.72.010   Purpose and scope.
18.72.020   Findings.
18.72.030   Definitions.
18.72.040   Protected native plants and safeguarded species.
18.72.050   Applicability and exceptions.
18.72.060   General requirements.
18.72.070   Professional qualifications.
18.72.080   Preservation plan submittal, review, and appeal.
18.72.090   Native plant preservation plan methods.
18.72.100   Components of native plant preservation plan methods.
18.72.110   Tagging, color-coding, plant protection and planting operations.
18.72.120   On-site monitoring and replacement of dead, damaged, or dying
plants.
18.72.130   Harvesting process.
18.72.140   Compliance, conflict, violations, penalties, assurances.
18.72.150   Amendments.
18.72.010   Purpose and scope.
   A.   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the preservation of
individual plants and plant communities of protected and primarily upland plant
species native to Pima County, Arizona, by adopting comprehensive requirements
for the preservation-in-place, transplanting on-site, and mitigation of
protected native plants and native plant communities.
   B.   Scope. This chapter provides requirements and regulations for the
preparation and implementation of native plant preservation plans. These
requirements promote protection of the public health, safety, and general
welfare by reinforcing the findings in Section
18.72.020 of this chapter. Standards and procedures for implementing the
requirements of this chapter are located in the native plant preservation
manual adopted by resolution of the board of supervisors. Reference materials,
guidelines, and administrative procedures for this chapter are available at the
planning division.
(Ord. 1998-39 § 1 (part), 1998)
18.72.020   Findings.
   A.   The preservation of protected native plants and native plant
communities:
      1.   Promotes a sense of place and enhances community appearance;
      2.   Helps maintain a region's identity, which contributes to economic
development by attracting tourism, new businesses, and business expansions;
      3.   Promotes and sustains property values, improves and helps maintain
the quality of life, and supports life-styles which the community values and
enjoys;
      4.   Contributes to the stabilization of desert soils, decreases erosion,
and maintains original features of habitats that are important to native
wildlife species;
      5.   Promotes water conservation by retaining established, existing
drought-tolerant vegetation that requires no supplemental irrigation and
minimal maintenance after establishment, and assists in climate modification to
reduce energy costs;
      6.   Contributes to the reduction of nonnative plant allergens and the
improvement of air quality by not requiring the preservation of nonnative
allergen producing plants.
   B.   Native plants and native plant communities can be preserved by the
following methods:
      1.   The preservation-in-place and set-aside of existing native plants
and native plant communities;
      2.   The transplanting of native plants existing on-site to a new
location on-site or the transplanting of existing native plants from an
adjacent lot to a location on-site.
      3.   The mitigation of plants destroyed or removed from the site.
   C.   The most effective methods for preserving protected native plants are
the set-aside of native plant communities and the preservation-in-place of
individual protected native plants. Both methods minimize the disturbance of
existing native plants, their understory plantings and animal habitats; and
maximizes the preservation and beneficial effects of existing native plants and
native plant communities. Transplanting and mitigation methods are
progressively less effective but have merit. Transplanting and mitigation
methods may be used in combination with the preservation in-place and set-aside
methods.
(Ord. 1998-39 § 1 (part), 1998)
18.72.030   Definitions.
   A.   The following definitions in addition to the definitions in
Chapter 18.03 will apply to this chapter:
      1.   Caliper: A measurement of diameter taken on a circular tree trunk at
twenty-four (24) inches above the highest natural grade at the tree trunk base;
for a noncircular specimen, use the average of the shortest and longest
measurements of diameter twenty-four (24) inches above the highest natural
grade at the tree trunk base and for a multi-trunked specimen, use the sum of
the measurements of diameter of the two (2) largest trunks twenty-four (24)
inches above the highest natural grade at the tree's multi-trunk base.
      2.   Damaged: The condition of a viable inventoried plant previously
identified on the approved native plant preservation plan as a preserved-in-
place, salvage and transplant, replacement, or supplemental plant, which has
little chance of survival in a healthy and attractive manner due to injury,
infestation, or disease as confirmed by the monitor or the county.
      3.   Destroyed or destruction: The condition of an existing plant after
it has been demolished or eliminated as shown on the approved native plant
preservation plan.
      4.   Development: Any permitted or nonpermitted human alteration to land
and its vegetation, soil, geology, drainage, hydrology and surface features;
changing the appearance and character of land; and including but not limited to
the acts of grubbing, clearing, and grading of land, and placing improvements
on the land such as buildings, structures, signs, paving, vegetation, and
outdoor use areas.
      5.   Drip line: For cacti, an area around the plant that overlays the
mature root system: For trees and shrubs, an area under the undisturbed canopy
of the tree or shrub.
      6.   Endangered Species Act Of 1973: A federal law enacted for the
protection of endangered and threatened species in the continental United
States, also referred to in this chapter as "Endangered Species Act."
      7.   Mitigation: The replacement of a specimen(s), an inventoried plant
(s) rated medium to high viability, that is destroyed or removed from the site
as shown on the approved plant preservation plan with a plant(s) of the same
genus and species from off site in good physical condition with a high rating
for health, age, and form.
      8.   Native plant preservation plan: A plan for the preservation of
protected native plants prepared and submitted in conformance with this
chapter, also referred to as "preservation plan."
      9.   Native plant preservation manual: The standards and procedures for
implementing the requirements of
Chapter 18.72, Native Plant Preservation, also referred to as "preservation
manual" or "manual."
      10.   Plant community: A biologic grouping of vegetation frequently found
under natural conditions due to their common soils, moisture, climate and
orientation requirements; also means a plant association.
      11.   Preservation-in-place: No disturbance of one or more plants and the
associated understory plants, or no disturbance of a plant community as in the
set-aside method: Preservation-in-place is promoted by site planning and design
that retains existing plant genus and species in their current location, grade,
and configuration and promotes their future health and growth.
      12.   Property owner, developer, applicant: The person(s) or legal entity
that has fee title to the site or a legal right to control development of the
site, or a designated representative on the property owner's behalf.
      13.   Protected native plant: Any living plant on the protected native
plants list found in
Table 18.72.040-1 Protected Native Plants: For the purpose of this chapter,
also referred to as "native plant(s)."
      14.   Regulated riparian habitat areas: Also referred to as "riparian
habitat" shall mean riparian habitat areas identified on the county's riparian
habitat maps as established by Article X of the "Pima County Floodplain and
Erosion Hazard Management Ordinance."
      15.   Riparian regulations: When used will mean Article X of the "Pima
County Floodplain and Erosion Hazard Management Ordinance," entitled
"Watercourse and Riparian Habitat Protection and Mitigation Requirements" which
includes approved hydroriparian, mesoriparian, and xeroriparian plant and seed
lists.
      16.   Safeguarded plants: All species listed in the "highly safeguarded"
category of the Arizona native plant law, A.R.S: § 3-901 et seq.; also referred
to as "safeguarded species."
      17.   Set-aside: A method of plant preservation identified in this
chapter; shall also mean the permanent protection of land and all vegetation in
an undisturbed state within an area designated as a set-aside area.
      18.   Site: Refers to a single lot or a combination of contiguous lots
(or parcels), or a leased area on a lot that meets the minimum zoning standards
of the applicable zone.
      19.   Specimen or specimen plant: A single inventoried plant (native
plant or safeguarded plant) rated medium to high viability.
      20.   Transplantability: The relative ability of a native plant to be
successfully transplanted.
      21.   Viable plant, also a viable inventoried plant: An inventoried
native plant in good physical condition with a medium or high rating for
health, age and form, but which may or may not meet the "transplantability"
standards of this chapter.
(Ord. 1998-39 § 1 (part), 1998)
18.72.040   Protected native plants and safeguarded species.
   A.   For the purpose of this chapter, the plants in the following
Table 18.72.040-1 Protected Native Plants are categorized as protected native
plants and may be referred to as "native plant(s)."
   B.   For the purpose of this chapter, the plants in the following
Table 18.72.040-1B Arizona Safeguarded Species have been categorized as Arizona
safeguarded species in conformance with the requirements of the Arizona native
plant law. For the purpose of this chapter, Arizona safeguarded species may be
referred to as "safeguarded species." The board of supervisors may, from time
to time, revise this table as required to comply with changes to the list of
safeguarded species in compliance with the Arizona native plant law after first
giving notice of the required change.
TABLE 18.72.040-1 
PROTECTED NATIVE PLANTS 
NO. GENUS SPECIES VARIATION COMMON NAME
NO. GENUS                SPECIES          VARIATION      COMMON NAME
1   Acacia               constricta                      whitehorn acacia
2   Acacia               greggii                         cat's claw acacia
3   Agave                species list 1                  century plant
4   Carnegiea            gigantea                        saguaro/crested
                                                         saguaro
5   Celtis               pallida                         desert hackberry
6   Celtis               reticulata                      canyon hackberry
7   Cercidium            floridum                        blue palo verde
8   Cercidium            microphyllum                    foothills palo verde
9   Chilopsis            linearis         arcuata        western desert-willow
10  Corypantha           scheeri          valida         needle-spined cory
                                                         cactus
11  Corypantha           screeri          robustipina    pima pineapple cactus
12  Echinocactus         horizonthalonius Nicholii       blue barrel cactus
13  Echinomastus         erectrocentrus   acunensis
14  Echinomastus         erectrocentrus   erectrocentrus needle-spined
                                                         pineapple cactus
15  Ferocactus           species list 2                  compas barrel cactus
16  Fouqueria            splendens                       coachwhip ocotillo
17  Mammillaria          thornberi                       thornber clustered
                                                         pincushion
18  Olneya               tesota                          ironwood
19  Peniocereus          greggi           transmontanus  desert thread cereus
20  Peniocereus          striatus                        dahlia-rooted thread
                                                         cereus
21  Prosopis             velutina                        velvet mesquite
22  Prosopis             pubescens                       screwbean mesquite
23  Stenocereus          thurberi                        thurber organ pine
                                                         cactus
24  Yucca                species list 3                  soaptree yucca
    1 Agave species list
    Agave                chrysantha                      century plant
    Agave                deserti          simplex        simple-rosetted desert
                                                         agave
    Agave                murpheyi                        hohokam agave
    Agave                palmeri                         palmer agave
    Agave                parryi           parryi         parry agave
    Agave                parviflora                      santa cruz striped
                                                         agave
    Agave                schottii         treleasei      trelease agave
    2 Ferocactus species list
    Ferocactus           cylindraceus     eastwoodiae    cliff barrel cactus
    Ferocactus           cylindraceus     lecontei       leconte barrel cactus
    Ferocactus           emoryi                          red-spined barrel
                                                         cactus
    Ferocactus           wislinzenii                     fishhook barrel cactus
    3 Yucca species list
    Yucca                arizonica                       Arizona yucca
    Yucca                elata            elata          soaptree yucca
    Yucca                schottii                        mountain yucca
    Yucca                thornberi                       thornber yucca
 
TABLE 18.72.040-1B 
ARIZONA SAFEGUARDED SPECIES* 
NO. GENUS SPECIES VARIATION COMMON NAME
NO. GENUS        SPECIES          VARIATION    COMMON NAME
E   Agave        arizonica                     Arizona agave
E   Amsonia      kearneyana                    Kearney's blue-star
T   Asclepias    welshii                       Welsh's milkweed
E   Astragalus   cremnophylax     cremnophylax Sentry milk-vetch
T   Carex        specuicola                    Navajo sedge
E   Coryphantha  scheeri          robustispina Pima pineapple cactus
T   Coryphantha  robbinsorum                   Cochise pincushion cactus
T   Cycladenia   humilis          jonesii      Jones cycladenia
E   Echinocactus horizonthalonius nicholii     Nichol's Turk's head cactus
E   Echinocereus triglochidiatus  arizonicus   Arizona hedgehog cactus
E   Lilaeopsis   schaffneriana    recurva      Huachuca water-umbel
E   Pediocactus  bradyi                        Brady pincushion cactus
T   Pediocactus  sileri                        Siler pincushion cactus
E   Pediocactus  peeblesianus     peeblesianus Peebles Navajo cactus
E   Purshia      subintegra                    Arizona cliffrose
T   Senecio      franciscanus                  San Francisco Peaks groundsel
E   Spiranthes   delitescens                   Canelo Hills ladies' tresses
 
* As approved by the Department of the Interior in compliance with the
Endangered Species Act of 1973
(Ord. 1998-39 § 1 (part), 1998)
18.72.050   Applicability and exceptions.
   A.   Applicability. Except as provided in paragraph B below, the
requirements of this chapter apply to all development for which any of the
following conditions apply:
      1.   On sites for which a grading plan is required or the total area
covered by all grading permits is fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet or
more;
      2.   On sites for which approval of a development plan or subdivision
plat is required and for which a tentative plat or development plan is first
submitted:
         a.   After the effective date of this chapter; or
         b.   Prior to the effective date of this chapter and for which a final
plat or development plan is not approved within one (1) year of the effective
date of this chapter.
      3.   On sites with a subdivision plat or development plan that was
approved more than one (1) year prior to the effective date of this chapter and
for which permitted on-site infrastructure construction for at least one (1) of
the following major site improvement categories has not commenced prior to the
effective date of this chapter and has not been completed within one (1) year
of the effective date of this chapter:
         a.   Mass grading and drainage improvements;
         b.   Water or sewer mains or treatment facilities; or
         c.   Major streets.
      4.   On sites for which a preservation plan has been approved prior to
the effective date of this chapter, except that only the requirements of
Sections
18.72.120 and
18.72.140 apply to such sites.
   B.   Exceptions. The requirements of this chapter do not apply to the
following:
      1.   Utility construction within a public utility easement or public
right-of-way associated with a development plan, subdivision plat, or lot
development.
      2.   Development on a lot recorded prior to the effective date of this
chapter which meets the following conditions:
         a.   A development plan or subdivision plat is not required and the
total area covered by all grading, grading permits, and ground disturbance is
less than fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet; or
         b.   A development plan or subdivision plat is required and for which
an analysis submitted by the property owner and approved by the planning
official confirms that the net area of the lot is thirty-six thousand (36,000)
square feet or less excluding the following:
            1)   Pima County requirements for setbacks, open space,
bufferyards. The required bufferyards may be increased up to fifty percent (50
percent) at the applicant's discretion subject to approval by the planning
official. Plants added for the bufferyard increase will be from on-site native
plants and/or selected from
Table 18.72.040-1 Protected Native Plants List;
            2)   Public rights-of-way, dedications, and easements;
            3)   Set-asides to meet the requirements of other county, state,
and federal regulations, ordinances and statutes.
      3.   Development on a recorded lot which is thirty-six thousand (36,000)
square feet or less in size, approved prior to the effective date of this
chapter, and not requiring a development plan or subdivision plat.
   C.   Administrative exception. The requirements of this chapter may be
waived by the planning official under the following conditions as demonstrated
by the applicant's submittal of confirming documents in conformance with the
requirements of Section 18.72.S07 of the native plant preservation manual:
      1.   The applicant demonstrates that development on his site will not
disturb, damage, destroy, alter, or result in the removal or relocation of any
specimens in Section
18.72.040 that existed on the site prior to the effective date of this chapter
plus those specimens that have been introduced to the site since that date; or
      2.   The applicant demonstrates that the site on which his development is
proposed did not contain any specimens before the effective date of this
chapter and does not currently contain any specimens.
(Ord. 1998-39 § 1 (part), 1998)
18.72.060   General requirements.
   A.   The following general requirements apply to all development as required
in Section
18.72.050:
      1.   No person shall destroy, mutilate, remove from a site, or relocate
on a site any native plant, except in conformance with the requirements of this
chapter.
      2.   Grubbing, grading, or clearing permits shall not be issued, and no
person may grub, grade, or clear a site or any portion of a site having one or
more native plants existing prior to the effective date of this chapter, except
in conformance with an approved grading plan and after the preservation plan
approval requirements in this chapter have been met, and the required permits
have been issued.
      3.   No plans for a site with one or more native plants shall be approved
and no permits shall be issued by Pima County for any development prior to
submittal and approval of a preservation plan except as provided in Subsections
18.72.050 B and C.
      4.   A preservation plan and its implementation shall comply with this
chapter, the preservation manual, and the Arizona Native Plants Statute (A.R.S.
§ 3-901 et seq.)
(Ord. 1998-39 § 1 (part), 1998)
18.72.070   Professional qualifications.
   A.   Preservation plans shall be produced and stamped, sealed or certified
by a qualified practitioner with one or more of the following qualifications:
      1.   An arborist with International Society of Arboriculture
certification;
      2.   A landscape architect with Arizona state technical registration as a
landscape architect;
      3.   A biologist, horticulturist, or botanist with a minimum B.A. or B.S.
in a plant oriented natural resource field.
(Ord. 1998-39 § 1 (part), 1998)
18.72.080   Preservation plan submittal, review, and appeal.
   A.   Consultation. Prior to the submittal of a preservation plan, the
property owner is encouraged to consult with the planning division regarding
specific submittal requirements.
   B.   Submittal. For projects requiring a preservation plan, submittals shall
be made in conformance with the following requirements:
      1.   A preservation plan application shall be filed with the office of
the subdivision coordinator for processing concurrently with the filing of
grading plans and tentative plats or development plans for the same project.
      2.   All preservation plan applications shall include at a minimum all of
the following:
         a.   Two (2) hard paper copies of all preservation plan documents;
         b.   One (1) integrated electronic copy of all reports, text, charts,
graphs, tables, analyses, and calculations in an electronic format and media
acceptable to the planning division;
         c.   Number of copies as determined during preliminary consultation
with the planning division for all other plan submittals; and
         d.   The required preservation plan fee payable to the Pima County
treasurer.
      3.   Incomplete submittals that do not comply with the submittal and
preparation requirements of this chapter will not be reviewed. Incomplete
submittals will be returned to the property owner with comments from the
planning division explaining the area(s) of incompleteness.
   C.   Preservation plan review.
      1.   The planning division shall review the preservation plan for
compliance with the requirements of this chapter and other applicable codes,
regulations and special requirements.
      2.   Within ten (10) working days of a complete submittal, the planning
division shall complete its review of the preservation plan and then notify the
applicant in writing regarding any required revisions, corrections, or
resubmittals, except that the ten- (10) day review period will not begin until
the property owner has first submitted a grading plan and tentative plat or
development plan for the project for county review. Preservation plans are
reviewed by the planning division in the same manner and concurrent with other
reviews for project grading plans, tentative and final plats and development
plans. Comments regarding requirements for preservation plan corrections,
revisions or resubmittals are coordinated with the preparation of comments for
project grading plan, development plan, and tentative and final plat submittals
to include the incorporation of plat and development notes and covenants,
conditions, and restrictions (CC&Rs) to assure the continued preserved status
of set-aside areas and preserved-in-place and transplanted specimens in a
healthy and vigorous condition.
      3.   The applicant shall resubmit revised plans required by the planning
division for final compliance review. The planning division shall complete its
review of revised plans within five (5) working days of resubmittal and then
provide the applicant with a written decision.
      4.   Any change to the underlying grading plan, development plan,
tentative plat, or subdivision plat may require resubmittal of a new or revised
preservation plan as determined by the planning official.
   D.   Variances and appeals.
      1.   A request for a variance of the requirements of this chapter or an
appeal of an interpretation of this chapter by the development services
department may be filed by a petitioner to the board of adjustment and
processed as required by Section 18.93 of the Pima County zoning code.
         a.   The design review committee or a subcommittee established by the
design review committee shall review variance requests and appeals of the
requirements of this chapter and prepare an analysis and recommendation to the
board of adjustment. The analysis and recommendation shall be submitted along
with a staff report to the board of adjustment and presented by county staff at
the board of adjustment's public hearing for the appeal.
         b.   The design review committee's analysis and recommendation to the
board of adjustment shall consider the basis of the appeal and any extenuating
circumstances due to no fault on the part of the applicant and the design
review committee's recommendation will promote the purpose and findings of this
chapter.
(Ord. 1998-39 § 1 (part), 1998)
18.72.090   Native plant preservation plan methods.
   A.   Any of the following three methods, or any combination of the following
three methods may be used to prepare a preservation plan, except as required in
paragraph C. below:
      1.   Selective Plant Preservation Method.
         a.   Description. The selective plant preservation method is based on
the preservation-in place and salvage and transplanting-on-site of specimens
and the mitigation of specimens destroyed or removed from site.
         b.   Components. The preservation plan for the selective plant
preservation method shall be prepared as an integrated, single document and
shall include the following components. The requirements of each component are
described in the following Section
18.72.100:
            i.   An inventory of the native plants and safeguarded species on
the site;
            ii.   A site and plant evaluation of the viability and
transplantability of the inventoried native plants;
            iii.   A calculation of preservation and mitigation requirements;
            iv.   A native plant location/preliminary site plan which shows the
location of preserved-in-place specimens, salvaged and transplanted specimens,
replacement and supplemental plants, and specimen plants to be destroyed or
removed from site on a preliminary site plan for the subject site.
      2.   Plant Appraisal Method.
         a.   Description. The plant appraisal method is based on the (1)
preservation-in- place, (2) salvage and transplanting-on-site of specimens, and
(3) the mitigation of specimens destroyed or removed from the site with
specimens of the same size or appraised value.
         b.   Components. The native plant preservation plan for the plant
appraisal method shall be prepared as an integrated, single document and shall
include the following components. The requirements of each component are
described in the following Section
18.72.100:
            i.   An inventory of the native plants and safeguarded plants on
the site;
            ii.   A site and plant evaluation of the viability and
transplantability of the inventoried native plants;
            iii.   A calculation of preservation and mitigation requirements;
            iv.   An appraisal of specimens proposed to be destroyed or removed
from on-site;
            v.   A native plant location/preliminary site plan which shows the
location of preserved-in-place specimens, salvaged and transplanted specimens,
replacement and supplemental plants, and specimen plants to be destroyed or
removed from site on a preliminary site plan for the subject site.
      3.   Set-aside Method.
         a.   Description. The set-aside method is based on an evaluation of
the resource value of the specimens on-site, the designation of a minimum of
thirty percent of the site with the highest resource value as a set-aside area
as permanently protected natural open space, wherein development shall not
occur, and the preservation in place or salvaging and transplanting on-site of
safeguarded plants and specimen saguaros and ironwoods.
         b.   Components. The native plant preservation plan for the set-aside
method shall be prepared as an integrated, single document and shall include
the following components. The requirements of each component are described in
the following Section
18.72.100:
            i.   An inventory of all plants protected as safeguarded plants,
all saguaros and all ironwood with a caliper of four inches or greater;
            ii.   A site and plant evaluation of the viability and
transplantability of the inventoried safeguarded species, saguaro and ironwood;
            iii.   A calculation of preservation and mitigation requirements;
            iv.   A resource value report;
            v.   A native plant location/preliminary site plan which shows the
location of the thirty percent set-aside areas, and the preserved-in-place or
transplanted location of safeguarded plants and specimen saguaros and ironwoods
outside of the boundaries of the set-aside areas.
   B.   Off-site mitigation option.
      1.   An applicant can request to provide off-site mitigation to satisfy a
portion of the mitigation required by this chapter provided the applicant
submits:
         a.   A concept plan for the off-site mitigation;
         b.   A narrative that demonstrates that the off-site mitigation
provides more consistency with the purposes and findings of this ordinance than
the allowable on-site alternatives, and that full compliance with on-site
mitigation creates unsustainable and non-viable plant communities;
         c.   Description of the mechanism(s) that will provide perpetual
management of the off-site mitigation; and
         d.   Authorizations, as necessary.
      2.   In the case where off-site mitigation is to be accomplished by
participation in a conservation bank, submittal requirements shall also
include:
         a.   The location(s) of the conservation bank;
         b.   The number of bank credits that will be provided for mitigation
of each species; and
         c.   Demonstration that the number of bank credits is proportional to
the number of individuals requiring mitigation.
      3.   The planning director or designee is authorized to allow off-site
mitigation when it has been found that the request is in keeping with the
purpose and findings of this chapter. Off-site mitigation may be used only in
combination with one or more of the three mitigation methods listed above.
   C.   Regulated Habitat. All regulated riparian habitat areas as identified
on the county's riparian habitat maps shall be established as set-aside areas
in compliance with the set-aside requirements in this chapter with the
following exception. When it can be demonstrated that there is no "reasonable
practical alternative" to disturbing the riparian habitat, that part of the
riparian habitat so disturbed shall be excluded from the set-aside requirement.
Riparian habitat so disturbed shall be mitigated in conformance with riparian
regulations.
Table 18.72.090-1 
Preservation Requirements & Preservation Credits 
(ft = feet, C = caliper, D = diameter, H = height, PIP = preserved-in-place,
TOS = transplanted-on-site) 
Protected Safeguarded          Other           Other      Ironwood
Native    Species     Saguaros Cacti Ocotillos Succulents Trees    Other Trees
Plants                                         & Shrubs
                          Safeguarded             Other                 Other      Ironwood
Protected Native Plants   Species     Saguaros    Cacti      Ocotillos  Succulents Trees        Other Trees
                                                                        & Shrubs
Inventory of Viables      All         All         2+ ft H or 2+ ft H or 2+ ft H    4+ in. C     4+ in. C
                                                  D          D
Minimum PIP or TOS        1 100%      2 80%       50%        50%        50%        80%          50%
                                      3 Saguaro                                    3 ironwood   3 tree
                                      credits/                          2          credits/     credits/
                                      each > 10   2 cacti    2 ocotillo succulent  each 12-in.  each > 12-
                                      ft H        credits/   credits/   credits/   C ironwood   in. C tree
Preservation-in-place     n/a         saguaro PIP each > 4   each > 6   each > 4   PIP 2        PIP 2 tree
(PIP) credits                         2 saguaro   ft H same  ft H       ft H       ironwood     credits/
                                      credits/    species    ocotillo   succulent  credits/     each 6-12-
                                      each 6-10              PIP        PIP same   each 6-12-   in. C tree
                                      ft H                              species    in. C        PIP
                                      saguaro PIP                                  ironwood PIP
Plant Replacement Ratios & Plant Additions
             Each plant
             damaged,     n/a (plants 1, 2, 4     replace 2: replace 2: replace 2:
             destroyed,   are PIP or  replaces 3: 1          1          1          replace 3:1  replace 3:1
             or removed   TOS 1 )     1
             from site
Selective                             2
Plant                                 additional
Preservation Each plant   3 1         plants/     1          1          1
             transplanted additional  each = 6 ft additional additional additional 2 additional 2 additional
             on site      plant       H 1         plant      plant      plant      plants       plants
                                      additional
                                      plant/ each
                                      < 6 ft H
             Each plant               4 replace   replace 1: replace 1: replace 1: replace 1:1  replace 1:1
             destroyed or n/a         1:1 (same   1 (same    1 (same    1 (same    (same size)  (same size)
             removed                  size)       size       size)      size)
                                      2
Plant                                 additional
Appraisal    Each plant   3 1         plants/     1          1          1
Method       transplanted additional  each = 6 ft additional additional additional 2 additional 2 additional
             on site      plant       H // 1      plant      plant      plant      plants       plants
                                      additional
                                      plant/ each
                                      < 6 ft H
Outside Set Aside Area
             Each plant
             damaged,                 4
             destroyed,   n/a         replacement n/a        n/a        n/a        replace 3:1  n/a
             or removed               3:1
             from site
Set Aside                             1 2
Method                                additional
             Each plant   1           plants/
             transplanted additional  each = 6 ft n/a        n/a        n/a        2 additional n/a
             on site      plant       H 1                                          plants
                                      additional
                                      plant/ each
                                      < 6 ft H
Replacement Sizes
                                                                                   15-gallon    15-gallon
                                                                                   can size 6   can size 6
                                      5 2 ft H                                     for          for
                                      (from site)            2 ft H                supplemental supplemental
Selective Plant                       4 ft H                 (from                 trees (2)    trees (2)
Preservation Method & Set n/a         (from off-  5 2 ft H   site) 4 ft 5 gallon   15-gallon    15-gallon
Aside Method                          site or     or D       H (from               cans plus    cans plus
                                      from                   nursery)              (1) 24-in.   (1) 24-in.
                                      nursery)                                     box for 3:   box for 3:
                                                                                   1            1
                                                                                   replacement  replacement
                                                                                   trees        trees
Plant Appraisal Method    Same size or 2+ plants with total appraised value equal to plant being replaced
 
1  All crested saguaros 18 feet in height or greater or with arms six feet or
greater in height will remain in place.
2  All saguaros 18 feet in height or greater or with arms six feet or greater
in height will remain in place.
3  See Arizona native plant law.
4  Except that all crested saguaros shall be preserved in place or salvaged and
transplanted on site.
5  Except blue barrel cactus, pineapple cactus, needle-spined pineapple cactus,
desert night-blooming cereus, and thornber pincushion which have a minimum
replacement size of four inches in height or diameter.
6  Commercial nursery sizing.
(Ord. 2009-59 § 7, 2009; Ord. 1998-39 § 1 (part), 1998)
18.72.100   Components of native plant preservation plan methods.
   The plant preservation plan methods described in
18.72.090 shall include the following components:
   A.   Plant inventory: All methods require a plant inventory map and a plant
inventory list prepared in conformance with the requirements of Section
18.72.S03 of the preservation plan manual and showing the following plants:
      1.   All existing native plants in
Table 18.72.040-1 that meet the following standards:
         a.   All saguaros;
         b.   All trees with a caliper of four (4) inches or greater;
         c.   All succulents and shrubs two (2) feet or greater in height or
diameter;
         d.   Other cacti equal to two (2) feet in height or diameter or
greater except that blue barrel cactus, fish hook cactus, compass barrel
cactus, needle-spined pineapple cactus, desert night-blooming cereus, and
thornber pincushion equal to four (4) inches or greater in height or diameter
shall be inventoried; and
      2.   All existing plants listed as safeguarded plants.
      3.   Exceptions: Where the set-aside method is used, the following are
not required to be listed in the inventory:
         a.   Any trees other than specimen ironwood;
         b.   All cacti, succulents and shrubs listed in 1.c. and 1.d. of this
section.
   B.   Site and plant evaluation: All native plant preservation plan methods
require a comprehensive analysis and evaluation of the undisturbed site and its
native plants and safeguarded plants which shows the following:
      1.   The condition of each inventoried native plant, plant community, and
safeguarded species listed in the plant inventory based on the viability and
transplantability rating criteria and standards specified in Section 18.72.S04
of the preservation manual.
      2.   The criteria and standards used to determine which plants and plant
communities will be set-aside, preserved-in-place, salvaged and transplanted-
on-site, or destroyed or removed from the site.
   C.   Calculations: Preservation and mitigation requirements. Protected
native plants and safeguarded plants shall be preserved-in-place, transplanted
on-site, or mitigated as required by this paragraph and the following
paragraphs D through and including G and as demonstrated by
Table 18.72.090-1.
      1.   Safeguarded plants and "crested" saguaros: One-hundred percent
(100%) of safeguarded plants and "crested" saguaros shall be preserved-in-place
or salvaged and transplanted on-site, except that all "crested" saguaros
eighteen (18) feet in height or greater and "crested" saguaros with arms six
(6) feet or greater in height shall remain in place, and
      2.   For the selective plant preservation and plant appraisal methods,
the minimum requirements for the preservation-in-place, salvage and
transplanting-on-site, and mitigation of inventoried native plants and
safeguarded plants are:
         a.   All other saguaros and ironwoods: A minimum of eighty percent
(80%) of the inventoried saguaros and specimen ironwood trees shall be
preserved-in-place or salvaged and transplanted-on-site, except that all
saguaros eighteen (18) feet in height or greater and saguaros with arms six (6)
feet or greater in height shall be preserved-in-place or remain on-site.
         b.   Other native plants: a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of all
specimens, except safeguarded plants, shall be preserved-in-place or salvaged
and transplanted on-site.
         c.   Mitigation requirements for the remaining specimens rated medium
to high viability that are destroyed or removed off-site as shown on the
preservation plan shall be mitigated by replacement with plants of the same
genus and species in conformance with the replacement and size requirements of
the following subparagraphs E and G.
      3.   For the set aside method: Thirty percent (30%) of the site shall be
set-aside and the minimum requirements for preservation in place, salvage and
transplanting on-site of safeguarded plants, "crested" saguaros, other
saguaros, and ironwood trees outside set-aside areas shall be in conformance
with the requirements of subparagraphs 1 and 2.a above.
   D.   Calculations: Bonus credits. For the selective plant preservation and
the plant appraisal methods, a bonus credit shall be allowed as follows for
specimens, except safeguarded plants, that are preserved-in-place:
      1.   Each specimen saguaro greater than ten (10) feet in height and
fenced in conformance with 18.72.S05 E.8 in the preservation manual may be
credited as three saguaros.
      2.   Each specimen saguaro six (6) to ten (10) feet in height may be
credited as two (2) saguaros.
      3.   Each specimen ocotillo greater than six (6) feet in height may be
credited as two (2) ocotillos.
      4.   Other specimen cacti, succulents and shrubs greater than four (4)
feet in height may be credited as two (2) of the same species.
      5.   Each specimen tree, measuring greater than twelve (12) inches in
caliper and fenced in conformance with 18.72.S05 E.8 in the preservation
manual, may be credited as three (3) of the same species.
      6.   Each specimen tree, measuring six (6) to twelve (12) inches in
caliper, may be credited as two (2) of the same species.
   E.   Calculations: Minimum replacement requirements. Specimens destroyed or
removed from the site shall be mitigated by replacement plants of the same
genus and species according to the following replacement requirements and the
size requirements in the following paragraph G:
      1.   For the selective plant preservation method, the following minimum
replacement requirements apply:
         a.   Each specimen saguaro destroyed or removed from the site shall be
replaced on-site with three saguaros, three to one (3:1).
         b.   Other specimen cacti, yucca, ocotillo, succulents and shrubs
destroyed or removed from the site shall be replaced on-site with two plants
(2:1) of the same genus and species.
         c.   Each specimen tree destroyed or removed from the site shall be
replaced with three plants (3:1) with trees of the same genus and species.
      2.   For the plant appraisal method, each specimen plant destroyed or
removed from the site shall be replaced one for one (1:1) with plants of the
same genus and species.
      3.   For the set-aside method, all specimen saguaros and ironwoods
outside the set-aside area(s) that are destroyed, or removed from the site
shall be replaced in conformance with the plant replacement requirements for
the selective plant preservation method in subparagraph 1.a and 1.c above.
   F.   Calculations: Minimum supplemental requirements. Specimens salvaged and
transplanted on-site shall be supplemented with an additional plant or plants
of the same genus and species according to the following supplemental
requirements and the size requirements in the following paragraph G:
      1.   For the selective plant preservation method and the appraisal
method, the following minimum supplement requirements apply:
         a.   Each specimen saguaro, six (6) feet or greater in height salvaged
and transplanted on-site, shall be supplemented with two (2) additional saguaro
planted on-site; each specimen saguaro less than six (6) feet in height
salvaged and transplanted on-site shall be supplemented with one (1) additional
saguaro planted on-site.
         b.   Other specimen cactus, yucca and ocotillo and any safeguarded
plants of any size, salvaged and transplanted on-site shall be supplemented
with the planting on-site of one (1) additional plant of the same genus and
species. NOTE: See the Arizona native plant law for any provisions which
supersede or supplement these regulations as they apply to safeguarded plants.
         c.   Each specimen tree, except for safeguarded plants, transplanted
on-site shall be supplemented with two (2) additional trees of the same genus
and species.
      2.   For the set-aside method, all specimen saguaros outside set-aside
areas, except crested saguaros, and all specimen Ironwoods and all safeguarded
plants outside set-aside areas that are transplanted on-site shall be
supplemented in conformance with the plant supplement requirements for the
selective plant preservation method in paragraph 1 above.
   G.   Minimum replacement and supplemental sizes.
      1.   For the selective plant preservation method, the following minimum
standards apply for all specimens:
         a.   Saguaros: Two (2) feet in height from on-site or four (4) feet in
height from off-site or from a plant nursery.
         b.   Tree: Commercial nursery sizing for supplemental trees shall be
fifteen- (15) gallon can size. The size of three to one (3:1) replacement trees
shall be two (2) fifteen- (15) gallon cans and one (1) twenty-four- (24) inch
box.
         c.   Other native cacti and succulents. Two (2) feet in height or
diameter, except that blue barrel cactus, fish hook cactus, compass barrel
cactus, needle-spined pineapple cactus, desert night-blooming cereus, and
thornber pincushion shall have a minimum replacement size of four (4) inches in
height or diameter.
         d.   Ocotillo: Two (2) feet in height (from on-site) or four (4) feet
in height (from nursery).
         e.   Yucca and other native shrubs. Five- (5) gallon.
      2.   For the plant appraisal method, supplemental plant sizes shall be
the same as in paragraph 1 above. The size of a replacement plant shall be
equal to or greater than the caliper and no less that three quarters (¾) of the
height and spread of the specimen being replaced, or a destroyed or removed
specimen may be replaced with two (2) or more native plants with a minimum
fifteen- (15) gallon can size and which have a total appraised replacement
value no less than the appraised value of the plant being replaced.
      3.   For the set-aside method, replacement and supplemental size
requirements for specimen saguaros, except crested saguaros, and specimen
ironwood, outside set-aside areas shall be in conformance with the plant
replacement and supplement requirements for the selective plant preservation
method in subparagraph 1.a and 1.b above.
   H.   Native plant location/preliminary site plan. A native plant location/
preliminary site plan, prepared in conformance with the requirements of
18.72.S05 in the plant preservation manual shall promote the preservation and
enhancement of the site's native vegetation and undisturbed natural
environment. The plan shall minimize disturbance of native vegetation and
promote the preservation-in-place of significant specimens, plant communities,
animal habitats and set-aside areas. Compliance with the minimum requirements
of Sections
18.72.090 and
18.72.100 is required.
      1.   Site design and plant preservation shall support the following
objectives:
         a.   The preservation-in-place of tall saguaros and large trees, in
particular saguaros six (6) feet and greater in height and trees eight (8)
inches and greater in caliper.
         b.   The protection from removal, relocation, or destruction of the
understory vegetation of specimen plants and plant community(ies) to be
preserved-in-place.
         c.   The continuity and linkage of on-site resources that extend
beyond the site (i.e., natural open spaces, vegetative and animal habitat,
hiking, riding, and equestrian trails).
         d.   To minimize the fragmentation and destruction of plant
communities for the purpose of preserving wildlife and riparian habitat.
         e.   To limit the size of site development areas and building
envelopes in order to preserve the site's natural features and amenities.
         f.   To locate salvaged and transplanted specimens on the site within
common areas or landscape bufferyard areas as required by
Chapter 18.73 and within the front yards of residential lots for the purpose of
improving public and private streetscapes and to limit the net loss of native
plant diversity and volume, and wildlife habitat on the site.
         g.   To encourage the preservation of specimens in excess of the
specimens required to meet the minimum requirements of this chapter.
         h.   To encourage the harvesting of salvageable native plants in
excess of the specimens required by this chapter, an approved preservation
plan, other applicable regulations, and specimens not otherwise used by the
property owner, for projects and programs which benefit the public, such as
parks, schools, public streetscapes, community native plant banks, public works
projects, and the surrounding neighborhood consistent with the requirements of
Section
18.72.130.
      2.   The native plant location/preliminary site plan shall comply with
the following requirements for riparian habitat areas, washes and floodplains:
         a.   Riparian habitat established as set-aside areas shall not be
removed, altered, enhanced, or disturbed;
         b.   Riparian habitat outside set-aside areas and natural open space
that is disturbed shall be mitigated in conformance with riparian regulations;
         c.   Native plants that occur on plant lists in riparian regulations
may be salvaged and transplanted to disturbed riparian habitat in compliance
with riparian mitigation requirements;
         d.   Disturbed washes and disturbed floodplain areas (areas outside
set-aside and riparian habitat areas) may be enhanced by the salvage and
transplanting, or mitigation of native plants. Those portions of washes and
floodplain areas so disturbed and/or enhanced are categorized as functional
open space;
         e.   Those portions of washes and floodplains which are either
disturbed or enhanced or both by drainage improvements or those portions of
washes and floodplains with a significant increase or decrease in historic
hydrological characteristics of velocity or volume as a result of development,
disturbance, or enhancement either inside or outside of a wash or floodplain,
may be categorized as functional open space. Development, disturbance,
enhancement, or a significant increase in the historical hydrological
characteristics of a wash or floodplain shall prevent that portion of a wash so
affected from being categorized as natural open space or set-aside area.
   I.   Plant appraisal. For the plant appraisal method only, a plant appraisal
will be prepared in conformance with the following requirements:
      1.   Each specimen plant identified in the native plant preservation plan
to be removed from the site or destroyed must be appraised for its market value
by a certified plant arborist and replaced with native plants of the same
species and variety with a total market value equal to or greater than the
market value of the plant removed or destroyed. The appraisal shall be prepared
using market values and techniques published by the Council of Tree and
Landscape Appraisers. The appraisal shall be current within six (6) months
prior to submittal of a preservation plan and will be valid for a period of two
years from the date of preservation plan approval. The subsequent submittal of
a new or revised preservation plan may require the submittal of an updated
plant appraisal as determined by the planning official.
      2.   A revised appraisal value is required after the two- (2) year time
limit has expired, and each two- (2) year period thereafter until such time as
the approved preservation plan is implemented. Compliance with the plant
appraisal method requires the establishment of monetary assurances such as a
bond or letter of credit. The assurances shall have a monetary value equal to
the market values of all specimen plants to be removed from the site or
destroyed.
   J.   Resource value report. For the set-aside method only, a resource value
report shall be submitted together with the native plant location/preliminary
site plan. The boundaries of natural open space area(s) set-aside in the
resource value report shall be delineated as natural open spaces area(s) on all
site plans, development plans, tentative plats, subdivision plats and grading
plans for the subject site and will be described as undisturbed natural open
space area(s) in all covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC & As) for the
development. The resource value report shall include all of the following:
      1.   An analysis prepared for the entire site to determine the general
viability of native plants and plant communities on the site. The analysis
shall include an assessment and prioritization, on a graduated scale from most
significant to least significant, of the undisturbed natural desert areas based
on the resource value of the existing native plants. The resource value shall
be determined by factors such as health, size, density, and variety of native
plant species, the visual resource value of the undisturbed natural desert
areas, and the potential to maximize the preservation of contiguous areas of
undisturbed natural desert with native plants both on and off site. The highest
resource value shall be given to riparian habitat areas.
      2.   A minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the site or that portion of the
site for which the set-aside method is utilized, shall be shown on the attached
native plant location/preliminary site plan as an area set-aside as undisturbed
natural open space. The set-aside areas shall consist of the site areas with
the highest resource value as determined by the report.
      3.   An inventory and analysis of the viability and transplantability of
all plants protected as safeguarded plants, all saguaros, and all inventoried
ironwoods which are outside of the boundaries of the set-aside areas.
Calculations for preservation requirements and credits shall conform to the
requirements of this chapter.
      4.   Boundaries of all set-aside areas clearly delineated on an aerial
photograph of the site.
   K.   Supplementary information. The planning official may require additional
information to reasonably insure that the purpose of this chapter is fulfilled.
(Ord. 1998-39 § 1 (part), 1998)
18.72.110   Tagging, color-coding, plant protection and planting operations.
   A.   Identification numbering. All specimens shall be tagged with
identification numbers and color coding in conformance with 18.72.S06 color-
coding and tagging standards in the manual, except that specimens within a
designated and fenced natural open space or set-aside area need not be tagged.
   B.   Protection and identification of specimens. Specifications included in
the preservation plan and all transplanting and construction contracts for the
project shall include language requiring the protection of preserved-in-place
and transplanted specimens; and the identification, accounting and replacement
of damaged, dead, or dying preserved-in-place and transplanted specimens, all
in conformance with the requirements of this chapter and the preservation
manual.
   C.   Planting and transplanting. The planting of replacement and
supplemental plants and the salvage and transplanting of specimens shall be
done by bonded professionals qualified in the identification, planting,
salvage, transplanting, and maintenance of native plants.
   D.   Irrigation and maintenance. Preserved-in-place and transplanted
specimens and replacement and supplemental plants shall be irrigated and
maintained as required by Section 18.72.S05 and in conformance with established
irrigation and maintenance practices as required to promote the survival of
plants in a healthy condition.
   E.   Salvage permits. Permitted plants shall be salvaged and transplanted in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the preservation manual and
the Arizona Native Plants Statute (A.R.S. § 3-901 et seq.).
(Ord. 1998-39 § 1 (part), 1998)
18.72.120   On-site monitoring and replacement of dead, damaged, or dying
plants.
   A.   On-site monitoring of all aspects of preservation, salvaging and
transplanting, planting, and associated mitigation operations, including
harvesting, permit compliance, site clearing, grading, plant marking, color-
coding, and plant protection shall be provided by the property owner during
project construction.
   B.   On-site monitoring shall be performed by an independent monitor, not an
employee of the property owner, who is a qualified professional and
practitioner in native plant identification and protection with qualifications
equal to or exceeding those in
18.72.070. The monitor will be under contract with and at the expense of the
property owner.
   C.   The monitor shall be authorized by the property owner to require
contractors and developers to demonstrate and verify that all aspects of
preservation, salvage, mitigation, and plant protection activities are
performed in conformance with the approved preservation plan and this chapter
and the preservation manual.
   D.   Immediately after the monitor's initial site visit, the monitor shall
prepare a report on the status of specimens identified on the approved
preservation plan and specimens tagged as preserved-in-place or to be salvaged
and transplanted-on-site. The report shall include the general condition of
specimens, the identification of specimens under stress, damaged, dying, or
dead, and the appropriate techniques to relieve the stress and damage, and
recommendations for the replacement of specimens that are dead or dying.
   E.   The monitor shall conduct periodic on-site inspections and provide
periodic progress reports to the property owner and the planning division no
later than forty-eight (48) hours after the on-site inspection. The progress
report will outline the status of plant preservation plan work accomplished to
date, any problems encountered, and any noncompliance with the requirements of
the approved preservation plan and this chapter.
   F.   A preserved-in-place, transplanted, replacement, or supplemental plant
identified in the monitor's status report or the county's field inspection
report as dying or as having died during project development will be replaced
by the property owner within three (3) months of the report's completion. The
plant(s) will be replaced with a viable plant(s) of the same genus and species
in good condition, of uniform shape, and representative of the species and
equal or greater caliper as the replaced plant; or, replaced with two (2) or
more plants of the same species with a minimum fifteen- (15) gallon can size
and total appraised replacement value equal to or greater than the appraised
value of the replaced plant. The owner will take action within a shorter period
of time if required to improve the health of stressed plants and to prevent
plant loss. These requirements will apply to all supplemental and replacement
plants and to no less than ninety percent (90%) of all plants salvaged and
transplanted on-site.
   G.   The monitor shall conduct an assessment of the condition of the site's
specimens and replacement and supplemental plants one year after final
inspection has been performed on the site, and the monitor shall thereafter
certify as to whether or not the requirements of the approved preservation plan
and this chapter have been complied with.
(Ord. 1998-39 § 1 (part), 1998)
18.72.130   Harvesting process.
   The harvesting process in whole as described in this section is strongly
encouraged, but not required. If a property owner allows harvesting of plants
not identified for preservation in place or salvaging and transplanting on-
site, the following procedures shall apply:
   A.   The property owner shall, at the time of his first submittal to the
county of a preservation plan for the subject site, mail a notice regarding a
forty-eight- (48) hour harvesting process to the planning division, all
abutting property owners and those agencies identified in Section
18.72.100.H.1.h who have previously notified the planning division of their
interest in the harvesting process. The planning division shall provide the
property owner with a harvesting list of agencies and individuals who have
previously notified the planning division of their interest in the harvesting
process.
   B.   After preservation plan approval and at least five (5) calendar days
prior to the commencement of grubbing, site clearing, and grading operations,
the property owner shall mail a notice to the planning division and to
individuals and organizations on the harvesting list who have notified the
property owner of their interest in harvesting plants on the subject site. The
notice shall establish a forty-eight- (48) hour harvesting period during which
existing plants not shown on the approved preservation plan as preserved-in-
place, salvaged and transplanted-on-site, located in a set-aside area, or
otherwise reserved at the discretion of the developer may be harvested by
harvesters.
   C.   The harvesting of native plants shall be done by bonded professionals
qualified in the identification, salvage and transplanting of native plants and
whose harvesting services shall be provided for and paid by the harvesting
individual(s) or organization(s). The harvesting process shall be monitored by
the property owner's monitor to assure that harvesting of native plants is
limited to plants without an identification tag and located outside all set-
aside areas.
   D.   Permits required by the Arizona Native Plants Statute (A.R.S. § 3-901
et seq.) shall be secured by the harvesting individual or organization.
(Ord. 1998-39 § 1 (part), 1998)
18.72.140   Compliance, conflict, violations, penalties, assurances.
   A.   Compliance and conflict with county, state, and federal regulations.
      1.   This chapter does not replace, supersede, or in any way affect or
change requirements for compliance with the Federal Endangered Species Act and
the Arizona Native Plants Statute (A.R.S. § 3-901 et seq.). In the event of a
conflict between the requirements of this chapter and the requirements of the
Federal Endangered Species Act or the Arizona Native Plants Statute, the
requirement which provides the most protection for native plants will prevail.
      2.   Requirements for compliance with this chapter and other Pima County
regulations will be calculated and applied separately. Compliance with this
chapter may be considered for the purposes of compliance with other chapters,
if the primary purpose to preserve native plants and plant communities is not
jeopardized. In the event of a conflict between two (2) or more requirements in
this chapter, or conflicts between the requirements of this chapter and the
requirements of another chapter, the more restrictive requirement will prevail,
except the highest resource value for the establishment of set-aside areas
shall be given to previously designated riparian habitat areas.
      3.   Planning division staff, qualified in preservation plan review and
the identification of native plants and safeguarded species, may periodically
provide spot-inspections to confirm compliance with this chapter and approved
preservation plans.
   B.   Violations and penalties. In addition to the provisions of
Chapter 18.95 Compliance and Enforcement, violations of this chapter are
subject to the following enforcement, penalties, fines, and other remedies:
      1.   No person shall, individually or through acts of another person,
intentionally or negligently damage, destroy, or remove from the site any
native plant except as authorized by an approved native plant preservation
plan.
      2.   A fine for the damage, destruction, or removal from the site of each
native plant will be based on the following schedule:
         a.   For each viable saguaro. two hundred dollars ($200) per foot of
main trunk and two hundred dollars ($200) per foot of each arm with a maximum
not to exceed two thousand five hundred ($2,500) per saguaro;
         b.   For each specimen tree or shrub. three hundred dollars ($300) per
caliper inch measured twenty-four (24) inches above grade level for trees and
six (6) inches above grade for shrubs with a maximum not to exceed two thousand
five hundred dollars ($2,500) per tree or shrub.
      3.   A fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500) nor more than
two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) if native plants are damaged,
destroyed, or removed from the site prior to approval of a preservation plan.
   C.   Additional penalties. Any person who individually or through acts of
another person, intentionally or negligently damages, destroys, or removes from
the site any native plant, except as authorized by an approved preservation
plan, may be subject to one or more of the following in addition to any fines
imposed by paragraph B above as determined by the hearing officer pursuant to
Chapter 18.95 of this code:
      1.   Mitigation of specimens damaged, destroyed, or removed from the site
which may include:
         a.   One hundred percent (100%) replacement with plants of the same
genus and species and of equal or greater size as the specimens being replaced
and the replacement will be completed within ninety (90) days of the violation,
and
         b.   Any supplemental mitigation and site improvements determined to
be necessary to restore the natural habitat and plant communities which have
been damaged, destroyed, or removed from the site,
         c.   In the event replacements are not made as required by the
preceding subparagraph C.1.a and b, then payment to the county by the property
owner of an amount equal to the certified appraised replacement value of the
specimens damaged, destroyed or removed from the site and not subsequently
replaced as required by this paragraph. The certified appraised replacement
value will be based on the type, size, and original condition of the specimens
prior to the violation as shown in the plant inventory. The certified appraisal
will be provided by and at the property owner's expense.
      2.   Supplemental mitigation, maintenance and monitoring requirements for
native plants following the final inspection. This requirement shall be
performed for a period of time as determined by the hearing officer, but not to
exceed eight (8) years.
      3.   Suspension by the director of the development services department of
any permits issued by the county for development of the site. Any such
suspension shall remain in effect unless and until the violation is mitigated
in conformance with this chapter as approved by the planning official.
   D.   Suspension lifted. Where any permit issued by the county is suspended
until its expiration pursuant to paragraph C.3 above, no new permit shall be
issued for the site until all fines issued pursuant to paragraphs B.2 and B.3
above have been fully paid and all mitigation required by paragraph C.1 and C.2
above has been fully performed.
   E.   Maintenance agreement. Prior to the subsequent issuance of permits for
development of the site on which a violation occurs, the property owner shall
provide the county with proof, such as an agreement with a landscape
installation and maintenance service, that procedures are in place to ensure
replacement of damaged or destroyed plants and follow-up maintenance of those
plants replaced for a period determined by Pima County, but not to exceed eight
(8) years.
   F.   Other violations and penalties. Violations of the Arizona native plant
law are subject to the penalties and sanctions in the law.
   G.   Assurances. Implementation and completion of an approved preservation
plan and all associated mitigation standards and maintenance requirements, all
in conformance with this chapter and the requirements of the preservation
manual, shall be guaranteed by assurances acceptable to Pima County, as
specified by Pima County policy and regulations and consistent with Section
18.69.070. Assurances shall include the following provisions:
      1.   Assurances will be submitted prior to preservation plan approval and
will be released when final inspection by the professional on-site monitor
certifies compliance with and completion of the preservation plan as confirmed
by Pima County except as provided in the following subparagraph 2.
      2.   Maintenance and preservation assurances. The final approval of any
subdivision plat or development plan that includes an approved preservation
plan will require covenants or assurances which ensure the continued
preservation of set-aside areas and the continued maintenance and preservation
of specimens preserved-in-place or transplanted on-site.
(Ord. 1998-39 § 1 (part), 1998)
18.72.150   Amendments.
   A.   This chapter may be amended by the board of supervisors in conformance
with the provisions in Section
18.01.070.
(Ord. 1998-39 § 1 (part), 1998)
Chapter 18.73
LANDSCAPING, BUFFERING AND SCREENING STANDARDS*
18.73.010   Purpose and scope.
18.73.020   Definitions.
18.73.030   Performance standards.
18.73.040   Screening and bufferyard requirements.
18.73.050   Amenity landscaping requirements.
18.73.060   Landscape plan requirements.
18.73.070   Landscape plan review and appeal.
18.73.080   Maintenance provisions.
18.73.010   Purpose and scope.
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to provide landscaping requirements and
performance standards which:
      1.   Enhance and promote the image of the community's desert environment;
      2.   Conserve groundwater resources in conformance with the Arizona
Groundwater Code, Title 45, Chapter 2, by:
         a.   Specifying the use of arid landscape design principles and
standards,
         b.   Helping utilize stormwater, and control and reduce runoff,
         c.   Specifying the use of plant materials from approved lists,
         d.   Encouraging the use of effluent;
      3.   Protect the public health, safety and general welfare by:
         a.   Minimizing noise, air, water, dust and visual pollution,
         b.   Screening and buffering incompatible land uses,
         c.   Preserving property values and the character of neighborhoods,
         d.   Reducing the heat and glare absorbed and radiated by development,
         e.   Conserving energy resources,
         f.   Helping to control soil erosion,
         g.   Controlling the spread of invasive and noxious plants,
         h.   Increasing traffic safety, and
         i.   Protecting air quality by reducing dust emissions.
   B.   The intent of this chapter is to ameliorate adverse impacts between
potentially incompatible uses and zones by requiring a minimum level of
buffering and screening. This chapter does not determine the compatibility of
two different uses or zones, which is determined by the board of supervisors.
   C.   Scope.
      1.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all development,
unless excepted elsewhere in the Code, except development within the ML zone
and RVC zone adjacent to the ML zone, and conversions of apartment complexes to
condominiums with landscape plans that were approved with the apartment
development plan.
      2.   New development. The provisions of this chapter apply to all new
tentative plans and development plans submitted after October 1, 1985;
      3.   Expansion of existing uses. Approved plans and development existing
prior to October 1, 1985 shall comply with the regulations under which approval
was given, and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter if proposed
expansion will exceed twenty-five percent of the gross floor or lot area of the
existing development.
      4.   Landscape plan submittal. A landscape plan shall be submitted to the
planning division of the development services department for the following:
         a.   Any development plan or subdivision plat that requires ten or
more parking spaces, except for development within the ML zone and RVC zone
adjacent to the ML zone, development of single-family dwellings where all
parking is contained within structures and carports on individual, subdivided
lots, and development plans for apartment conversions to condominiums that have
landscape plan that were approved by the planning division and development
services department.
         b.   When screening, buffering or landscaping is required by the
chapter,
         c.   When screening, buffering or landscaping is required by the board
of supervisors as a condition of rezoning or other reason,
         d.   Reserved.
         e.   Any landscaping requiring review by the planning division
required to fulfill requirements of the General Commercial Standards (
Chapter 18.39), Golf Course Zone (
Chapter 18.59), Hillside Development Overlay Zone (
Chapter 18.61), Historic Overlay (
Chapter 18.63), Major Resort Zone (
Chapter 18.40), Sign Standards (
Chapter 18.79) or Grading Standards (
Chapter 18.81).
(Ord. 2015-7 § 5 (part), 2015; Ord. 2006-97 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 2003-72 § 4
(part), 2003; Ord. 1986-187 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-171 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.73.020   Definitions.
   A.   Certain terms used in this chapter shall be defined as follows:
      1.   Amenity landscaping. Any landscaping that is required to mitigate
for the negative environmental affects to a site caused by paving and
impervious structures;
      2.   Bufferyard. Landscaping elements, screening devices, and landforms
used for reduction of the potentially adverse impacts of adjoining, dissimilar
land uses as depicted in the Landscape Design Manual;
      3.   Effluent. Reclaimed wastewater;
      4.   Environmental zone design principle. The landscape management and
design principle of identifying planting areas throughout the site that have,
or will be designed to have, similar maintenance, irrigation and exposure
requirements. Zones may range from arid to wet. The plant palette for each zone
should clearly reflect the function and design objective of the zone.
Application of this principle promotes rational site planning and efficient,
attractive, cost-effective landscaping;
      5.   Gross parking area. The total square footage of the development site
minus the first floor square footage of all buildings and storage yards,
bufferyards and drainage structures;
      6.   Landscaping. The combination of landscape elements in a designed,
specific application that meets the purposes of this chapter. Landscape
elements may include vegetation, such as trees, cacti, shrubs and groundcovers
and other elements such as walls, earth berms, planters, and other
architectural or structural elements;
      7.   Mini-oasis design concept. The landscape design technique of
allocating a generous portion of a site's landscape water where it will return
maximum benefit in terms of cooling, aesthetic pleasure and exposure to people;
      8.   Plant size.
         a.   Gallons, in regard to plant size is the container size generally
accepted by trade professionals to denote or specify plant materials size;
         b.   Caliper shall refer to tree trunk size measured as follows:
            i.   For 15 gallon and 24 inch box containers, measure the trunk at
the widest point within the first four to six inches above ground.
            ii.   For 36 inch box and larger containers, measure the trunk at
the widest point six to twelve inches above ground.
            iii.   For multiple stem trees, measure the second largest stem
within the first six inches above the origination point, or six inches above
ground if all stems originate from the soil. The caliper for multiple stem
trees shall be determined by averaging no more than the diameter of three of
the largest stems.
            iv.   Trees with all branches above twelve inches from the ground
are classified as single stem trees.
      9.   Screening element. Any landscaping or structure used to conceal or
reduce the negative visual and audio impacts of certain land uses or activities
from streets or adjacent development. The height of a screening device is
measured from the highest finished grade abutting the element to be screened;
      10.   Walls or fences. Any structure intended for confinement, prevention
of intrusion, boundary identification or screening of an activity or land use.
      11.   Decorative masonry wall. Masonry wall that is stuccoed and painted,
has a textured, colored surface, or contains other elements that improve the
aesthetic appearance of gray slump block walls, as approved by the planning
director.
      12.   Natural Desert Bufferyard. A bufferyard that is composed of
undisturbed areas in which disturbance is prohibited except to enhance small
areas by planting the same plant material and density as undisturbed areas
endemic to the site area.
(Ord. 2006-97 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1985-171 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.73.030   Performance standards.
   A.   Scope. This section provides general standards for bufferyards,
landscape designs and landscape plans. Specific design references, standards
and plant lists in the form of a landscape design manual are hereby adopted to
ensure compliance with this chapter. The landscape design manual may be amended
by resolution of the board after a noticed public hearing. The planning
director may approve minor changes to the landscape design manual. Landscape
reference materials and plant lists are available at the planning and
development services department.
   B.   General Standards.
      1.   Landscape designs shall be in harmony with the environmental context
of the development site. Preservation of native, on-site vegetation shall be a
primary objective of site planning for development. Specimen plants shall be
given particular consideration for retention on site. Property owners shall
comply with the provisions of Arizona Revised Statutes, Section 3-904;
      2.   Wherever the undisturbed natural desert landscape cannot be
preserved, or has been disturbed through past land use and is no longer
representative of the native habitat, landscape design and construction shall
promote the use of transplanted, on-site desert plants, container plants,
seeded desert plants and inorganic groundcovers. This standard shall be
particularly emphasized on all landscaped areas abutting public rights-of-way,
scenic routes and landscaping having high public visibility;
      3.   The environmental zone design principle of appropriate plant
selection and placement, based on the function, water requirement and most
suitable environmental exposure of the plant materials, shall be used in all
proposals. The mini-oasis design provision may be permitted when proposed
water-intensive planting designs are found by the planning director to
substantially meet criteria found in the landscape design manual;
      4.   Turf applications over ten acres, except as required by the Pima
County department of natural resources, parks and Recreation, including parks
and recreational facilities, cemeteries and school grounds shall be irrigated
with reclaimed water, effluent, or CAP water. Golf course design and its use of
turf within Pima County is regulated by the Golf Course zone (
Chapter 18.59);
      5.   Plants shall be selected from the approved plant lists within the
Landscape Design Manual. Requests for changes in the plant lists may be made to
the planning director, who shall review the request and enter all approved
changes to the plant list addendum which shall be available from the planning
department;
      6.   Trees and shrubs.
         a.   Trees shall be at least five gallons in size, or of comparable
height if bare-rooted, at planting time,
         b.   Shrubs shall be at least one gallon in size at planting time,
         c.   Trees and shrubs shall be planted so that at maturity they do not
interfere with service lines, traffic sight lines and the property rights of
adjacent property owners, and
         d.   Trees planted near public sidewalks or curbs shall be provided
with suitable root diverters to minimize heaving of those improvements;
      7.   Groundcovers.
         a.   When inorganic groundcovers are used, they shall be in
combination with live plants and not exceed two-thirds of the total area of
applied groundcovers,
         b.   Turf use, except as required by Pima County Department of Natural
Resources, Parks and Recreation, shall be for functional use only, not to
exceed an area that is equal to fifteen percent of the required landscaped
area, and shall be located, when used, on the development site:
            1)   To mitigate glare and reduce heat near buildings and their
openings, windows and patios,
            2)   To enhance a mini-oasis,
            3)   To enhance a pedestrian entryway,
            4)   In an environmental zone compatible with the context of the
landscape and architectural design,
            5)   To conserve water and demonstrate this ethic to the public;
         c.   Unpaved areas in any plant bed, median or tree understory within
a planter shall be planted with shrubs, accents or vines, or covered with
appropriate organic and inorganic groundcovers;
      8.   Irrigation and water accent features:
         a.   All water use for landscape irrigation and enhancement shall
conform to the Arizona Groundwater Code (Title 45, Chapter 2) and the adopted
groundwater management plan for the Tucson active management area, except areas
located outside of the Tucson active management area, which must adhere to the
requirements of this chapter,
         b.   Each introduced planting shall be served by a water-conserving,
underground irrigation system that incorporates rain sensors and is capable of
seasonal adjustments, unless otherwise approved by the planning director.
Stormwater harvesting and drip irrigation are the preferred irrigation methods,
         c.   Required landscape areas shall use a separate reclaimed ready
irrigation system to promote the use of effluent to irrigate landscaped and
turf areas. A note describing effluent use feasibility shall be included on
landscape plans indicating briefly: cost-effectiveness, potential sources and
availability,
         d.   Landscape designs shall be integrated with improvement plans for
the site and shall make maximum use of site stormwater runoff for irrigation
purposes, and
         e.   Water design features that use groundwater or CAP water, such as
ponds and fountains, shall not exceed more than fifty square feet in size
unless approved by the design review committee with a suitable justification to
demonstrate why the water design feature requirements cannot be met within
fifty square feet.
      9.   Natural features:
         a.   Earth berms shall be designed to transition to existing grades,
shall not exceed a slope of 2:1, and shall be adequately covered with plant
material, groundcovers or rip-rap to control erosion,
         b.   Natural drainageways and existing, natural vegetation may be used
for screening and amenity landscape credit if approved by the planning
director, provided such uses are consistent with the county floodplain
management ordinance;
      10.   Streetscape sculpture and furniture: Streetscape bufferyards wider
than ten feet may be reduced by ten percent of their required width, for each
one hundred linear foot section that includes an, approved public sculpture or
furniture piece installed and maintained within the bufferyard. Public
sculpture and furniture shall be approved by the design review committee
(reference
Chapter 18.99), subject to standards contained in the landscape design manual;
      11.   Safety design standards:
         a.   Walls, fences, signs, landscaping and other potential
obstructions to view in excess of two feet in height shall be placed in
accordance with the requirements of Section
18.77.020;
      12.   Public right-of-way standards:
         a.   Landscaping in publicly owned or controlled areas shall be
consistent with the purpose and requirements of this chapter, design
requirements as specified in the county development standards code, the
department of transporation's subdivision street standards, the scenic routes
ordinance and the Pima County landscape design manual;
         b.   A right-of-way use permit and maintenance agreement must be
obtained from the Pima County Real Property Division prior to installation of
any landscaping within the public right-of-way.
      13.   Plant materials spacing: Plants may be grouped, clustered or
unevenly spaced to prevent the creation of an unnatural appearance in the
landscape, provided that screening and mitigation of site development from
streets and adjoining lots is provided and the design complies with the
Landscape Manual.
   C.   Stormwater Harvesting Option.
      1.   Stormwater harvesting in bufferyards. When stormwater harvesting
systems meet requirements in Section
18.07.030(S)(2) and cover at least three-quarters of the required bufferyard
area:
         a.   The height of walls required in the Landscape Design Manual for
Bufferyards A through D only may be reduced to three and one-half feet; and
         b.   The density of canopy trees required in the Landscape Design
Manual for all bufferyards may be reduced by fifty percent.
(Ord. 2015-7 § 5 (part), 2015; Ord. 2006-97 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1985-171 § 1
(part), 1985)
18.73.040   Screening and bufferyard requirements.
   A.   Scope:
      1.   Land use zones permitted by this code are ranked according to their
land use intensity and restrictiveness (reference Section
18.05.010B). Ranking is based on the type and degree of nuisance or negative
impact the more intensive use is likely to impose on less intensive, adjacent
land uses. Bufferyards shall be provided between uses to minimize the negative
effects of their dissimilarity.
   B.   Bufferyards:
      1.   Purpose: Both the amount of land and the type and amount of planting
specified for each bufferyard requirement are designed to ameliorate nuisances
between adjacent land uses or between a land use and public street or road, yet
to be designed to promote appropriate linkages to compatible land uses and
public streets or roads. Appropriate linkages include, but are not limited to
design that promotes pedestrian and bicycle path connectivity including safe
routes.
   C.   Location of bufferyards:
      1.   Bufferyards shall be located on the outer perimeter of a lot or
parcel, extending to the lot or parcel boundary line.
      2.   Portions of required bufferyards shall not be located on an existing
or dedicated public or private street right-of-way. However, portions of
bufferyards in excess of the bufferyard requirement as determined by
Table 18.73-1 and the bufferyard standards illustrated in the Landscape Design
Manual may be located on an existing or dedicated public or private street or
right-of-way in accordance with the department of transportation's adopted
subdivision street standards, board of supervisors Policy F 54.1 Planting in
Pima County Right-of-Way, as amended, which includes review and approval of a
right-of-way use permit or licensing through the Pima County Department of
Transportation Real Property Division.
   D.   Determination of bufferyard requirements:
      1.   To determine the type of bufferyard required between the project
site and adjacent parcels, or between the project site and an adjacent street,
the following procedure shall be followed:
         a.   Identify the land use zone category of the proposed use on
Table 18.73-1, "Bufferyard Requirements," codified in this chapter, and located
in the landscape design manual,
         b.   Identify the land use zone category of the existing land use
zones adjacent to the proposed use on
Table 18.73-1,
         c.   Identify any adjacent street as private, public, major route,
and/or scenic route.
         d.   Determine the bufferyard required on each boundary (or segment
thereof) of the subject parcel by referring the indicated letter designation
from
Table 18.73-1 to the bufferyard standards illustrated in the landscape design
manual.
      2.   Bufferyard specifications detailed and illustrated in the manual
constitute the bufferyard required between the two adjacent land uses. Any of
the options contained in the letter designated bufferyard shall satisfy the
requirement of buffering between the adjacent land uses. The width of the
bufferyard can vary, or meander, provided that the average bufferyard width is
not less than the required bufferyard width when measured along any single
lineal bufferyard. If a developer is providing pedestrian or bicycle
connectivity through a bufferyard to an adjacent site, street or right-of-way,
the required wall height within the bufferyard can be lowered to forty-two
inches.
      3.   Responsibility for bufferyard:
         a.   When a use is the first to develop on two adjacent vacant
parcels, this first use shall provide the required buffer,
         b.   The second use to develop shall, at the time it develops, provide
any additional plant material and land necessary to provide any additional
bufferyard required between those two uses.
      4.   Existing plant material, structures and land located on the
preexisting (first developed) land use which meets the requirements of this
chapter may be counted as contributing to the total bufferyard between it and
the second (adjacent) land use to develop.
   E.   Use of bufferyards:
      1.   A bufferyard may be used for passive recreation; it may contain
sculpture, furniture and pedestrian, bike or equestrian trails, provided that:
         a.   No plant material is eliminated,
         b.   The total width of the bufferyard is maintained, and
         c.   All other regulations of this chapter are met.
      2.   In no event shall the following uses be permitted in bufferyards:
         a.   Playfields,
         b.   Stables,
         c.   Swimming pools,
         d.   Racquetball and tennis courts.
   F.   Bufferyard options:
      1.   Where the bufferyard originally required between a land use and
vacant land turns out to be greater than that bufferyard subsequently required
between the first use and the subsequently developed use, the following
applies:
         a.   The subsequent establishment of compatible adjacent land uses, as
indicated in
Table 18.73-1, may eliminate the requirement for a bufferyard. If the
requirement is reduced, but not eliminated, the existing use may expand into
the excess buffer area, provided that the resulting total bufferyard between
the two uses meets the revised bufferyard requirements;
      2.   Property owners may enter into agreements, subject to the approval
of the county, with abutting landowners to use adjoining land to provide some
or all of a required bufferyard. The total buffer shall equal the requirements
of this chapter. Nonconforming uses and plats shall not be created, expanded or
allowed by this option, nor shall designated, platted open space be
compromised. Agreements must run with the land, be approved by the planning
department, and be recorded with the county recorder.
      3.   Contractual reduction of a bufferyard abutting vacant land. When
development requiring a development plan or subdivision plat is proposed
adjacent to vacant land and the owner of that vacant land enters into a
contractual relationship with the owner of the land that is to be developed
first, a reduced buffer may be provided by the first use, provided that: the
contract contains a recorded agreement whereby that vacant landowner shall
assume all responsibility for any additional buffer, if needed by the
subsequent development of a more or less intense use on the vacant property.
      4.   A bufferyard is not required in either of the following cases,
provided, however, a six-foot-high decorative masonry wall is constructed in
lieu of the bufferyard, and the wall requirement is noted on the approved
subdivision plat and landscape plan:
         a.   Where a proposed residential development has the same or less
density or where the individual lot size along the abutting lots is equal to,
or less than the adjacent residential property;
         b.   Where a bufferyard is required along the side or rear yard of an
individual residential lot abutting an internal street.
(Ord. 2009-98 § 2 (part), 2009; Ord. 2006-97 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 2005-35 §
4, 2005; Ord. 1996-59 § 4, 1996; Ord. 1994-147 § 8, 1994; Ord. 1994-133 § 1,
1994; Ord. 1990-1 § 1 (part), 1990; Ord. 1987-92 § 1 (part), 1987; Ord. 1985-
171 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.73.050   Amenity landscaping requirements.
   A.   Scope. Amenity landscaping shall be provided for certain specific
plans, development plans and land uses in addition to the screening
requirements of Section
18.73.040 of this chapter. For example, amenity landscaping can be required as
a condition of rezoning, as a requirement of cluster option approval or other
action of the design review committee ( campus park industrial, rural village
center, major resort, scenic routes, etc.), or for Hillside Development zone
revegetation compliance, or by approval or other action of the historical
commission for a historic district zone or a historic landmark zone. Buffer
areas provided to satisfy screening requirements may be used to reduce site
gross area in calculating the amenity landscaping for these land uses. Where
amenity landscaping is required or used, but is not determined by parking area
calculations, the area, type, density and height of the amenity landscaping
shall be approved by the specific review body assigned the review function
(e.g. design review committee; subdivision and development review committee;
Pima County plans review subcommittee and historic landscape committee of the
historic commission).
   B.   Parking Area Amenity Landscape Requirements.
      1.   Scope. Any development that requires ten or more parking spaces
(except for development within the ML zone and RVC zone adjacent to the ML zone
and development of single-family dwellings where all parking is contained
within structures or carports on individual, subdivided lots);
      2.   Standard. An area equal to at least ten percent of the gross parking
area shall be devoted to amenity landscaping. Required buffer areas may be
subtracted from the gross parcel area in order to determine the gross parking
area for purposes of landscaping calculations only;
      3.   Amenity options. The ten percent requirement may be satisfied with
the use of combinations of the following elements:
         a.   Pedestrian median walkways within parking lots,
         b.   Twenty-five percent of the area of standard nondecorative
concrete sidewalks on site,
         c.   One hundred percent of the area of decorative sidewalks (embossed
concrete, exposed aggregate, tile, brick, etc.) on site,
         d.   Landscaped traffic islands, planters or medians within parking
areas not required by
Chapter 18.75,
         e.   Interior project landscaping; such as building foundation
planting, planters, mini-oases, landscaped entryways and assembly areas,
sculpture gardens, fountains, demonstration gardens,
         f.   Courts, ramadas and covered walkways,
         g.   Vegetated roofs, limited to plants selected from the approved
plant lists within the Landscape Design Manual available at the development
services department, pursuant to Section
18.73.030(A).
      4.   For additional requirements, refer to
Chapter 18.75, Off-Street Parking and Loading Standards.
   C.   Stormwater Harvesting Option.
      1.   Amenity landscaping reduction for stormwater harvesting. The ten
percent amenity landscaping requirement may be reduced by half when the
following stormwater harvesting elements are installed:
         a.   All pedestrian walkways and sidewalks shall use accepted porous/
pervious pavement, pavers or bricks, or similar water-permeable surface; and
         b.   All landscaped traffic islands shall meet stormwater harvesting
requirements for landscape planters in Section
18.75.040(F).
(Ord. 2025-4, 2025: Ord. 2015-7 § 5 (part), 2015; Ord. 2013-42, § 5, 2013; Ord.
2006-97 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 2003-72 § 4 (part), 2003; Ord. 1985-171 § 1
(part), 1985)
18.73.060   Landscape plan requirements.
   A.   Submittal and approval of a landscape plan shall be required prior to
approval of a development plan and final plats except for development within
the ML zone and RVC zone adjacent to the ML zone.
   B.   Landscape plans shall comply with all requirements listed in the
Subdivision and Development Review Committee approved checklist.
(Ord. 2006-97 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 2003-72 § 4 (part), 2003; Ord. 1985-171 §
1 (part), 1985)
18.73.070   Landscape plan review and appeal.
   A.   Submittal.
      1.   Prior to the submittal of a landscape plan, the petitioner should
consult with the department of planning and development services concerning
specific submittal requirements.
      2.   Landscape plans for subdivision plats and development plans shall be
submitted to the office of the subdivision coordinator for further processing.
All other landscape plans shall be submitted to the planning division. A
minimum of two copies are required.
      3.   Within thirty working days of plan submittal, the planning division
shall notify the petitioner in writing as to any further requirements or
amendments necessary for final approval.
      4.   The petitioner shall resubmit any revised plans for final compliance
review.
      5.   Review fees shall be as determined by the Board of Supervisors.
   B.   Landscape Plan Review.
      1.   The planning division of the development services department shall
review the landscape plan for compliance with all code and special
requirements.
      2.   The petitioner shall resubmit any revised plans for final compliance
review. A written decision will be provided the petitioner within thirty
working days of resubmittal.
      3.   Any change to the underlying development plan or subdivision plat
may require resubmittal of a new or revised landscape plan as determined by the
planning director.
   C.   All landscaping shall be completed before the certificate of occupancy
can be released, if the landscaping is required for a development plan, or
before subdivision assurances can be released, if the landscaping is for a
subdivision plat. If a project is developed in phases, landscaping and
screening requirements shall be completed in sequence with phased development.
The planning director may authorize or require the use of assurances in
accordance with Section
18.69.070 for phased development, delayed construction projects or to
accommodate petitioners requesting to postpone installation of bufferyards
along property lines that abut vacant, undeveloped property.
   D.   Appeals. Appeals to the decisions or requirements of the planning
division of the development services department may be directed, in writing by
the petitioner or other affected individuals, to the design review committee.
The appeal must be made within fifteen working days of the date of the
departmental decision.
(Ord. 2006-97 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1985-171 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.73.080   Maintenance provisions.
   A.   Maintenance of approved landscaping shall consist of regular watering,
pruning, fertilizing, clearing of debris and weeds, the removal and replacement
of dead plants and the repair and replacement of irrigation systems and
architectural features.
   B.   Maintenance Assurances. The final approval of any subdivision plat or
development plan that includes an approved final landscaping plan shall require
covenants or assurances which:
      1.   Ensure the continued maintenance of required landscaping, buffering
and associated irrigation systems; and
      2.   Assign the responsibility of maintenance to the property owner or
agent, a homeowners' association or other liable entity as approved by the
planning director.
   C.   Compliance. Planning division personnel, qualified in landscape
architectural review will periodically spot-inspect landscape installations for
compliance with this chapter and approved landscape plans.
(Ord. 2006-97 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1985-171 § 1 (part), 1985)
Table 18.73-1: BUFFERYARD REQUIREMENTS (Minimum Bufferyard Required) 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4449.png]
1 - Proposed Mobile Home Park or Subdivision
2 - Proposed Nonresidential Use
a - Adjacent Residential Use/Zone
   Notes:
- The letter designations in this table refer to the bufferyard requirements
and standards found within the Landscape Design Manual.
- See Section
18.73.040F for bufferyard options.
(Ord. 1996-59 § 5, 1996)
Chapter 18.75
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS
18.75.010   Purpose.
18.75.020   Definitions.
18.75.030   Off-street parking requirements.
18.75.040   Development standards.
18.75.050   Modification or waiver of requirements.
18.75.060   Off-street loading requirements.
18.75.070   Exceptions.
18.75.010   Purpose.
   A.   This chapter provides standards for the development of parking and
loading facilities, in order to:
      1.   Enhance public safety;
      2.   Minimize traffic congestion;
      3.   Provide for the parking of vehicles at appropriate locations, other
than on streets;
      4.   Permit safe passage of pedestrians to and from parked vehicles and
their destinations; and
      5.   Expedite the safe passage of moving traffic.
   B.   In addition, the criteria of this chapter are intended to promote the
enhancement of:
      1.   Medians, parking areas and property line edges for pedestrian safety
and convenience;
      2.   Streetscape plantings in order to provide shade, screening, sound
attenuation and other environmental benefits; and
      3.   The community identity and the appearance of county roadways and
development areas.
(Ord. 1985-112 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.75.020   Definitions.
   A.   Certain terms in this chapter shall be defined, for purposes of this
chapter only, as follows:
      1.   Bicycle rack: A device for the secured temporary storage of one or
more bicycles, which permits convenient locking of the bicycle frame and both
front and rear wheels.
      2.   Gross parking area: The total square footage of the development
within property lines, minus the total square footage first floor area within
any buildings and storage yards.
      3.   High-intensity parking area:
         a.   A parking area with average vehicular turnover of less than two
hours;
         b.   Examples include fast food restaurant and grocery store parking
lots.
      4.   Low-intensity parking area:
         a.   A parking area with average vehicle turnover of more than four
hours;
         b.   Examples include employee parking lots and airport long-term
parking lots.
      5.   Manual: Where used shall mean Subdivision and Development Street
Standards Manual:
      6.   Medium-intensity parking area: A parking area with average usage for
time periods of two to four hours.
      7.   Reserved.
      8.   Parking area: Any public or private land area designed and used for
off-street parking.
      9.   Parking area, private:
         a.   A parking area for the private use of the owners or occupants of
the lot on which the parking area is located; this does not include parking on
sidewalks or streets;
         b.   This includes "reserved" designations.
      10.   Parking area, public: A parking area available to the public, with
or without compensation, or used to accommodate clients, customers, employees,
guests or visitors.
      11.   Parking bay: The parking module consisting of one or two rows of
parking spaces and the aisle from which vehicles enter and leave the spaces.
      12.   Parking lot: An improved off-street ground level area, usually
surfaced and improved, for the temporary storage of vehicles.
      13.   Parking space: A space for the parking of a vehicle within a public
or private parking area.
      14.   Parking structure: A building designed for temporary storage of
motor vehicles.
      15.   Turnover: The number of different vehicles that park in a given
space during an average day.
(Ord. 2005-35 § 5 (part), 2005; Ord. 1985-112 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82
(part), 1985)
18.75.030   Off-street parking requirements.
   A.   General Provisions.
      1.   For uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements are based on a
listed use which is similar in type and intensity. Such determination shall be
made by the subdivision and development review committee.
      2.   Where a fractional space is computed, the requirement will be based
on the nearest whole number.
      3.   Where the number of employee parking spaces is unknown at the time
of application, the applicant shall provide the number of required employee
spaces based on typical employee floor area needs for similar uses.
   B.   Minimum Dimensions for Parking Space Types.
      1.   Standard car space: Nine feet by twenty feet equals one hundred
eighty square feet.
      2.   Handicapped space: Twelve feet by twenty feet equals two hundred
forty square feet.
      3.   Motorcycle space: Six feet by nine feet equals fifty-four square
feet.
      4.   Bicycle space: Three feet by eight feet equals twenty-four feet.
   C.   Parking Area Requirements.
   The parking area requirements for any given land use shall be based on the
type of land use and lot intensity factor, as provided for in
Table 18.75-1.
   D.   Handicapped Parking.
      1.   Handicapped spaces shall be functionally located as near as possible
to the main entrances of the establishments served, with a barrier-free path,
and shall be posted with permanent signs in accordance with the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices (Federal Highway Administration).
      2.   All parking lots shall require one handicapped space plus one per
fifty spaces located as close as practical to the building entrance and with a
barrier-free path.
   E.   Bicycle Parking.
      1.   Bicycle parking shall be located to promote security for parked
bicycles and convenient use. Locations adjacent to pedestrian walks, in view of
building occupants, and located away from motor vehicle driveways provide best
security.
      2.   All parking lots shall require two bicycle rack spaces plus one per
fifteen parking spaces.
   F.   Site Access. Proper siting of parking areas and access points in
relationship to streets and nearby land uses shall be required.
   G.   Revision of Approved Plans. All approved development plans or
subdivision plats, even for developed projects, may be revised to conform to
changes in the number of parking spaces required (refer to
Table 18.75-1, Parking Spaces Required).
   H.   Review. The subdivision and development review committee shall be
responsible for the review of off-street parking proposals and may allow
modification of specific requirements in certain site instances consistent with
the purpose of this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-93 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2005-35 § 5 (part), 2005; Ord. 1985-153 § 1
(part), 1985; Ord. 1985-112 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
Table 18.75-1 
PARKING SPACES REQUIRED 
              Employee or      Visitor or   Parking   Loading
 Type of Uses Resident Parking User Parking Lot       Bay
                                            Intensity Intensity
                          Employee or    Visitor or      Parking   Loading
     Type of Uses         Resident       User Parking    Lot       Bay
                          Parking                        Intensity Intensity
1.  Residential: 
                          One for each 1
                          bedroom or
                          studio
     Dwelling units,      dwelling unit,
     including houses,    1.5 for each 2 One for each
a.   mobile homes, mobile bedroom unit,  four dwelling   Low       Low, if used
     home parks, and      2.0 for each 3 units
     manufactured housing bedroom unit,
                          2.5 for each 4
                          or more
                          bedroom unit
     Group Quarters:
     Rooming houses,                     One for each 8
b.   residence halls,     One per        bedrooms or     Low       Low, if used
     dormitories,         bedroom or bed beds
     membership lodging,
     religious quarters
     Group care           One for each
c.   retirement quarters; two persons    One for each 4  Low       Low
     convalescent homes,  employed       beds
     in-patient hospitals
                          One for each
d.   Motels and hotels    two persons    One per unit    High      Medium
                          employed
                          One for each   One per guest
e.   Resorts              two persons    room            Low       medium
                          employed
2.  Manufacture: 
     Including processing Two for each   One for each
     and assembly         three          1,000 sq. ft.   Low       Medium
                          employees      floor area
3.  Wholesale and business services: 
                          One for each
     Storage warehouse,   two employees  One for each
     mail order house     plus one for   2,000 sq. ft.   Low       High
                          each company   of gross area
                          vehicle
     Laundry and dry
     cleaning plants,
     auto and truck
     rentals, medical and One for each   One for each
     dental labs, lumber  two employees  1,000 sq. ft.
     yards (excluding     plus one for   of gross floor  Medium    Medium
     hardwares), building each company   area
     supplies, machine    vehicle
     shops, welding
     shops, plumbing
     shops, ice sales
4.  Offices: 
                          one for each   One for each
     Medical and dental   employee or    200 sq. ft. of  High      Low
     offices              physician      gross floor
                                         area
     Insurance, real
     estate, general
     offices,             One for each   One for each
     accountants,         two persons    300 sq. ft. of  Medium    Low
     architects, utility  employed       gross floor
     companies,                          area
     charitable
     organizations
     General and home
     offices and                         One for each
     charitable           One for each   400 sq. ft. of
     organizations not    two persons    gross floor     Low       Low
     providing face-to-   employed       area
     face customer
     services
5.  Commercial, retail: 
                          Included in    Five for each
     Groceries, drugs,    visitor or     1,000 sq. ft.   High      Medium
     sundries, liquor     user parking   of gross floor
                                         area
                          Included in    One for each
     Department stores    visitor or     200 sq. ft. of  Medium    Medium
                          user parking   gross floor
                                         area
     General retail, such
     as book stores, dry
     goods, hardware,
     secondhand sales,
     stationery,                         3.5 for each
     varieties and        Included in    1,000 sq. ft.
     notions, hobby       visitor or     of gross floor  Medium    Low
     stores, clothes,     user parking   area
     sporting goods,
     toys, jewelry, and
     pet shops, auto
     parts and other
     general merchandise
     TV and radio repair;
     appliance repair,    Included in    One for each
     tailors and          visitor or     300 sq. ft. of  Medium    Low
     cleaners, art        user parking   gross floor
     galleries and                       area
     studios
     Furniture and        Included in    One for each
     appliances, photo    visitor or     400 sq. ft. of  Medium    Medium
     studios              user parking   gross floor
                                         area
                          Included in    3.5 spaces for
     Home improvement     visitor or     each 1,000 sq.  High      Medium
     superstores          user parking   ft. of gross
                                         floor area
     Discount             Included in    5.0 spaces for
     superstores/clubs    visitor or     each 1,000 sq.  High      Medium
     (freestanding)       user parking   ft. of gross
                                         floor area
                                         (a) 4.0 for
                                         each 1,000 sq.
                                         ft. of gross
     Shopping centers (a)                floor area; (b)
     under 400,000 sq.    Included in    4.25 for each
     ft.; (b) 400,000 to  visitor or     1,000 sq. ft.   High      Medium
     600,000 sq. ft.; (c) user parking   of gross floor
     over 600,000 sq. ft.                area; (c) 4.5
                                         for each 1,000
                                         sq. ft. of
                                         gross floor
                                         area
                                         Three for each
                                         teller's window
                          Included in    plus one for
     Banks                visitor or     each service    High      Low
                          user parking   desk; or if no
                                         teller windows,
                                         two for each
                                         service desk
6.  Commercial eating and drinking: 
                          Included in    10 spaces for
     Cafes, restaurants,  visitor or     each 1,000 sq.  High      Medium
     cafeterias, bars     user parking   ft. of gross
                                         floor area
     Drive-ins, food      Included in    15 spaces for
     bars, juice stands   visitor or     each 1,000 sq.  High      Low
     and other outside    user parking   ft. of gross
     establishments                      floor area
7.  Commercial, automotive: 
     Service station      One for each   Two for each
     (fuel dispensing)    company        service bay     Medium    Low
                          vehicle
                          One for each   Two per service
     Auto repair          two persons    island          High      Low
                          employed
                          One for each
                          company        One for each
                          vehicle, one   100 sq. ft.     Low       Low
                          for each two   auto service
                          persons        area
                          employed
                                         One for each
                                         500 sq. ft. of
                          One for each   showroom area
     Auto agencies—new/ two persons    plus one for    Medium    Low
     used                 employed       each 10
                                         vehicles
                                         displayed (or
                                         stored)
                          One for each
                          two persons    One for each 10
     Auto and truck       employed, one  vehicles stored
     rental               for each       on premises
                          company
                          vehicle
                                         One for each 10
     RV, mobile home and  One for each   vehicles
     motorcycle sales and two persons    displayed (or
     repair               employed       stored) plus 2
                                         for each repair
                                         bay
8.  Commercial outdoor uses: 
                                         One for each
                          One for each   1,000 sq. ft.
                          two persons    of gross use
     Wrecking yards, junk employed, one  area for the
     yards                for each       first 10,000    Medium    Low
                          company        sq. ft., one
                          vehicle        for each 3,000
                                         sq. ft. of
                                         gross area
                                         Exterior
                                         thereafter
                                         One for each
                                         400 sq. ft. of
                                         floor area and
                          One for each   one for each
                          two persons    1,000 sq. ft.
                          employed One   of exterior
     Equipment rental     for each       area for the    Medium    Low
                          company        first 10,000
                          vehicle        sq. ft. and one
                                         for each 3,000
                                         sq. ft. of
                                         exterior area
                                         thereafter
                                         one for each
                                         1,000 sq. ft.
                          One for each   of gross use
     Public utility       two persons    area for the
     yards, substations,  employed, one  first 10,000    Medium    Low
     trucking yards       for each       sq. ft., one
                          company        for each 3,000
                          vehicle        sq. ft. of
                                         gross exterior
                                         area thereafter
                          One for each
     Distribution         person
     stations, delivery   employed, One
     yards                for each
                          company
                          vehicle
9.  Public assembly: Entertainment, sports, religious, recreation centers, and
     athletic fields: 
                                         One for each 4
                                         seats in the
                                         main
                                         auditorium; or
     Seated activities    One for each 4 one for each 50
     (including churches) employees      sq. ft. of      High      Low
                                         floor area
                                         usable for
                                         seating if
                                         seating is not
                                         fixed
     Cultural and active                 One for each
     indoor sport or      One for each 4 150 sq. ft. of  High      Low
     dance activities     employees      gross floor
     (nonseated)                         area
                                         Parking or
                                         "waiting" space
     Drive-in theaters    One for each   equal to 30% of Low       Low
                          two employees  the vehicular
                                         capacity of the
                                         theater
                                         One for each 75
     Fairgrounds/                        sq. ft. of
     amusement parks/     One for each 4 exhibit and     Medium    Low
     carnival or          employees      amusement area,
     transient show                      whether
                                         enclosed or not
     Miniature golf       One for each 2 three per hole  Medium    Low
                          employees
     Golf driving ranges  One for each 2 One per         Medium    Low
                          employees      practice tee
                                         Ten per hole
                          One for each 2 plus additional
     Golf courses         employees      for gallery     Medium
                                         designed
                                         courses
                                         One per court
     Tennis and racquet   One for each 2 plus additional Medium    Low
     ball                 employees      parking for
                                         associated uses
                          One for each 2 One per 400 sq.
     Skating rinks        employees      ft. of gross    Medium    Low
                                         floor area
     Bowling alleys       One for each 2 Four per lane   Medium    Low
                          employees
                                         One for each
                                         300 sq. ft. of
     Swimming pools       One for each 2 deck area plus  Medium    Low
                          employees      one for each
                                         100 sq. ft. of
                                         pool area
                          One for each 2 One for each
     Swap meets           employees or   100 sq. ft. of  High      Low
                          retail space   use area
10. Educational: 
     Colleges, junior     One for each 2 One for each 2  High      Low
     colleges             employees      students
     Sr. high school      Two for each 3 One for each 4  High      Low
                          employees      students
     Elementary and       Two for each 3 One for each 4
     junior high school   employees      auditorium      Medium    Low
                                         seats
     Nursery and          Two for each 3 One for each 8  Medium    Low
     preschool            employees      students
11. Miscellaneous: 
                          One for each
     Funeral and          company        One for each 4
     crematory services   vehicle, one   seats in all    Medium    Medium
                          for each 2     assembly rooms
                          employees
                                         One for each 3
     Air passenger        One for each 2 departing
     terminals            persons        passengers      Medium    Low
                          employed       based on each
                                         travel day
                                         One for each 10
                          One for each 2 departing
     Bus and railroad     persons        passenger cars  Medium    Low
     terminals            employed       based on
                                         average travel
                                         day
     Beauty and barber    One for each 2 2 spaces per
     shops                persons        chair           Medium    Low
                          employed
12. Public: 
                          One for each 2
                          persons        One for each
     Government agencies  employed, one  400 sq. ft. of  Medium    Low
                          for each       gross floor
                          company        area
                          vehicle
                          One for each 2
                          persons        One for each
     Post office          employed; one  100 sq. ft. of  High      High
                          for each       customer
                          company        service area
                          vehicle
                          One for each 2 One for each 4
     Libraries            persons        seats including High      Low
                          employed       assembly and
                                         reading rooms
 
18.75.040   Development standards.
   A.   Scope. This section provides general criteria and requirements for the
development of off-street parking areas. Specific design standards are provided
to ensure sound engineering and aesthetic design for the development of off-
street parking.
   B.   Site Improvement Standards.
      1.   Slope and Grading. The finished slope and grade of off-street
parking and loading facilities shall conform with county standards inclusive of
the requirements of
Chapter 18.81 (Grading) and the Manual.
      2.   Drainage. In addition to county drainage requirements, stormwater
shall be considered a resource and be designed to benefit landscaped areas on
the development site. Erosion control measures shall be designed and
implemented to control drainage flow from hard-surfaced areas onto abutting
soil surfaces.
      3.   Landscaping. In accordance with the requirements of
Chapter 18.73 (Landscaping Standards):
         a.   A minimum of ten percent of the gross parking area shall be
devoted to amenity landscaping (refer to
Chapter 18.73, Landscaping Standards);
         b.   Landscaping planters no less than four feet wide shall be placed
at the ends of parking rows to define driveways with at least one canopy tree
per parking aisle and appropriate ground cover.
         c.   Signage, landscaping and screening materials shall not obstruct
sight distances or vehicle turning movements.
         d.   When single parking rows occur, canopy trees shall be placed
every four un-shaded parking stalls. When double aisles of parking occur,
canopy trees shall be placed every eight un-shaded parking stalls.
         e.   When the placement of trees in the required location among single
or double row parking stalls is made impracticable by the location of a
building, access area, drainage area or similar site constraint, the required
parking area trees in the problem area may be reduced to one tree for every ten
spaces in a four-foot wide median planter the length of the parking spaces. The
remainder of the required trees may be placed within the bufferyard, stormwater
harvesting area, retention/detention area or other landscaped area of the site.
         f.   Parking canopy structures may be used for all parking stalls. All
parking canopy structures must be constructed with a heat reflective roofing
material. Where used, photo voltaic cells or other solar technology may
substitute for the heat reflective roofing material.
      4.   Screening. Screening (refer to
Chapter 18.73, Landscaping Standards) shall buffer parking areas from the
following general land uses:
         a.   Residential Areas. Parking facilities adjacent to property zoned,
planned or used for residential purposes shall be separated from such property
by a minimum five-foot wide landscaped buffer, which shall consist of either a
minimum six-foot high decorative masonry wall or fence, permanently maintained
vegetation, earth berms, or a combination of these elements. An opaque screen
is required to provide noise, light, and access barriers between the dissimilar
uses. If a wall or fence is used, at least fifty percent of the required
vegetation shall be maintained on the external side of the wall or fence to
provide visual relief when viewed from the residential side. Refer to
Chapter 18.73 (Landscaping Standards) for specific requirements.
         b.   Streets. Parking facilities containing ten or more spaces, any of
which abut a public right-of-way, shall be separated from the street right-of-
way by a minimum five-foot wide landscaped buffer, as listed above, consisting
of a minimum three and one-half foot high wall, earth berms, plant material or
combination thereof. Refer to
Chapter 18.73, Landscaping Standards, for specific requirements. The objective
of this screening is visual relief; a fifty percent visual screen is
acceptable. Landscaping within public rights-of-way requires a use permit and
license agreement from the department of transportation and flood control
district prior to installation.
         c.   Screening areas for off-street parking may use the landscape
bufferyard stormwater harvesting option found in Section
18.73.030(C).
      5.   Any lights used to illuminate parking spaces and drives shall be in
accordance with the county outdoor lighting code (Title 15).
      6.   Emergency and Service Vehicle Access. All parking areas shall be
designed to permit free access by emergency and service vehicles commonly in
use by public and private emergency and service operators.
      7.   Shading. Required landscape planters, and canopy trees in
particular, should be designed and installed with an emphasis on maximizing
shading of paved surfaces. Linear planters should be installed as near as
possible to north-south orientation to maximize shade.
   C.   Entrance Drives.
      1.   Drives are to be located and designed in conformance with the
requirements of the Manual and the following provisions to permit adequate
ingress and egress:
         a.   Curbs, walls, berms, landscaping, or other barriers shall be
provided to prevent ingress or egress at any point other than at designated
entrance or exit drives.
         b.   Signage shall be allowed at entrance or exit drives in accordance
with
Chapter 18.79 (Sign Standards).
         c.   Parking areas shall not be designed to require or encourage
vehicles to back into a street, pedestrian access way, or alley in order to
leave the lot or maneuver out of a parking space.
   D.   Parking Lot Design.
      1.   Dimensions of Parking and Access Areas. In accordance with Section
18.75.030, and the Manual.
      2.   Passenger Drop-off Points. Drop-off points, separated from street
traffic and readily accessible without hazardous maneuvering, shall be provided
in conjunction with the uses described in the manual.
      3.   Car Pools. Off-street parking provided for commercial office and
industrial facilities requiring eighty or more spaces shall provide at least
ten percent of the total parking area as designated for use by car pools, and
be clearly signed and managed to that end.
      4.   Emergency and Service Vehicle Access. All parking lots shall provide
unrestricted access by emergency and service vehicles in conformance with the
Manual.
   E.   Parking Lot Improvements Standards.
      1.   Pavement Marking. Parking spaces in paved parking areas shall be
permanently marked with striping in accordance with the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices.
      2.   Barriers.
         a.   Parking areas and spaces shall be provided with bumper barriers,
wheel stops or wheel stop curbing, designed in conformance with the manual to
prevent parked vehicles from extending beyond the property lines, damaging
walls or buildings, or overhanging sidewalk areas. Wheel stops or wheel stop
curbing shall be located three feet from the front of the parking space.
         b.   Landscape planters shall be provided with a protective barrier
(wheel stops, bollards, non-continuous curbing, or similar hardscaping) to
prevent vehicles from damaging landscaping.
      3.   Paving. All open parking areas shall be paved with a durable
asphalt, concrete, stone, tile or brick surface, in conformance with the manual
and consistent with pavement design principles and engineered according to soil
conditions and wheel loads.
   F.   Stormwater Harvesting Option.
      1.   Stormwater harvesting in off-street parking. Landscape planters for
stormwater harvesting in off-street parking areas shall meet requirements in
Section
18.07.030(S)(2), and shall also have:
         a.   At least the same number, area and dimensions, and density of
canopy trees and other vegetation as landscape planters required in Section
18.75.040(B)(3);
         b.   Surface gradually depressed a minimum of six inches below the
surrounding paved grade;
         c.   Protected edges, headers or other means slopes to prevent
undermining and erosion by in-flowing stormwater; and
         d.   Curbing with inlets, scuppers, notches or cuts, depressed
curbing, wheel stops, bollards, or similar non-continuous protective barrier to
prevent vehicles from damaging landscaping and allow the flow of stormwater
into planters.
      2.   When at least three-quarters of site's required parking area
landscape planters and screening areas meet stormwater harvesting requirements
in Section
18.75.040(F)(1):
         a.   The length of walls required for screening in Section
18.75.040(B)(4) may be reduced by half, provided walls are spaced
intermittently and strategically placed to provide needed screening.
(Ord. 2015-7 § 6, 2015; Ord. 2011-2 § 18, 2011; Ord. 2008-93 § 2, 2008; Ord.
2005-35 § 5 (part), 2005; Ord. 2003-32 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 2001-165 § 1
(part), 2001; Ord. 1986-187 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-112 § 1 (part), 1985;
Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.75.050   Modification or waiver of requirements.
   A.   Administrative Modifications. Requirements for off-street parking may
be modified provided that the modifications are noted on tentative and final
subdivision plats or development plans in the following cases:
      1.   Motorcycle Parking. Motorcycle spaces may be provided in place of
required car spaces in parking lots of thirty or more spaces, at a maximum of
one motorcycle space for every thirty required car spaces.
      2.   Shared On-Site Parking. If more than one separate use or business is
located on a site, the combined number of parking spaces required may be
reduced by one percent for each separate use or business, up to a maximum of
twenty percent for such combined uses or businesses.
      3.   Tandem Parking. Required parking spaces within a parking area or
garage shall be individually accessible, except that vehicles may be parked in
tandem in the following instances:
         a.   In a public parking area that provides attendants who park
vehicles and who are present at all times the area is open for use;
         b.   In a garage or carport serving a duplex dwelling, multiple
dwelling or mobile home park or subdivision, provided that both spaces are for
the same dwelling unit, that required aisle widths are maintained and the
tandem parking is not more than two cars in depth; or
         c.   For all-day restricted employee parking located on the same site
as a commercial or office establishment, provided that required aisle widths
are maintained and no more than twenty percent of the required spaces are so
utilized for tandem parking.
   B.   Subdivision and Development Review Committee Modifications. The
subdivision and development review committee may grant the following
modifications of off-street parking requirements but in no case may the
cumulative parking reduction options exceed thirty percent of the entire
parking area:
      1.   Quantifiable standards of this chapter may be modified up to a
maximum of ten percent, when it is demonstrated that an unusual site or use
condition exits and when such adjustment will not result in danger to persons
or property or in increased traffic.
      2.   Shared Peak-Hour Parking. The number of parking spaces required for
two or more contiguous uses may be reduced up to a maximum of twenty percent of
the total spaces required provided all of the following standards are met:
         a.   The contiguous uses have distinct and differing peak-hour usage,
as determined by the subdivision and development review committee;
         b.   All parking spaces in the shared parking area are located within
one thousand two hundred feet of an entrance to each contiguous use;
         c.   An agreement, to run with the land, is recorded between the
separate owners for the shared parking; and
         d.   There is physical and legal access from the shared parking area
to each of the contiguous uses.
      3.   Reserved.
      4.   Reserved.
      5.   Landscaping Increase. The number of parking spaces may be reduced
for every two hundred square feet of landscaped bufferyard or amenity
landscaping increased above the amount required by
Chapter 18.73 up to a maximum of thirty percent of the total spaces required.
   C.   Individual Parking Reduction Plan. An individual parking reduction plan
may reduce the total spaces required. There is no limit to the number of
required spaces that may be reduced provided the following standards are met:
      1.   The plan shall be prepared by a traffic engineer or similar
transportation professional and approved by the county's subdivision and
development review committee;
      2.   The plan includes a road impact study for the development;
      3.   The plan includes a traffic generation study and land use profile of
the development;
      4.   The plan shows that the reduced parking will ensure sufficient
parking for the proposed uses;
      5.   The plan does not impede safe passage of moving traffic and does not
increase traffic congestion;
      6.   A covenant runs with the subdivision plat or development plan noting
adherence to the range of uses covered by the reduction plan;
      7.   A future revision to the covenant restricting uses may require
submittal of a revised plan or an increase in parking spaces; and
      8.   Covered parking shall not be applied toward the total building
square footage allowed.
(Ord. 2008-93 § 3, 2008; Ord. 2005-35 § 5 (part), 2005; Ord. 2003-32 § 1
(part), 2003; Ord. 2001-165 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 1985-112 § 1 (part), 1985;
Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.75.060   Off-street loading requirements.
   A.   Scope. This section provides general criteria and requirements for the
development of off-street loading areas. Refer to
Table 18.75-3.
   B.   Applicability. The following criteria shall be used in determining the
need for and number of loading spaces:
      1.   Intensity of the use; and
      2.   Development floor area.
   C.   Siting. Loading spaces shall be located:
      1.   Not more than one hundred feet from the facility they are designed
to serve;
      2.   No closer than thirty feet to any property used or zoned, or
officially planned by Pima County, for residential purposes.
   D.   Minimum dimensions (exclusive of aisles and maneuvering area):
      1.   Length: Forty-five feet;
      2.   Width: Twelve feet;
      3.   Overhead clearance: Fourteen feet.
TABLE 18.75-3 
OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES REQUIRED 
Combined square feet of floor area Loading space intensity number of spaces
and outdoor storage and use areas  required
                                   High Medium Low
Combined square feet of floor area Loading space intensity number of spaces
and outdoor storage and use areas  required
                                   High Medium Low
Less than 10,000                   1    1      0
10,000—29,999                    2    1      1
30,000—59,999                    3    2      1
60,000—99,999                    4    3      2
100,000—149,999                  5    4      3
Each additional 50,000             1    ½     ¼
 
   E.   Access. Each loading space shall be accessible from a street or from an
aisle or drive connecting with a street. Such access may be combined with
access to a parking lot if designed in a manner that will not disrupt normal
traffic flow within the parking lot.
   F.   Maneuvering. No vehicles shall be permitted to maneuver in a public
right-of-way, including public walkway easements.
   G.   Marking. Each loading space shall be striped or permanently designated
by other suitable methods and permanently posted with a sign restricting its
use to loading. Signage is to be based on the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices (Federal Highway Administration). Bumper rails are to be provided where
needed for safety or protection of property.
   H.   Paving. All loading areas shall be surfaced with a durable asphalt,
concrete, stone, tile or brick surface, in conformance with the Manual and
consistent with pavement design principles and engineered according to soil
conditions and wheel loads.
   I.   Screening. In addition to provisions of
Chapter 18.73, Landscaping Standards, loading areas shall be screened from
adjoining properties and public thoroughfares with a minimum five-foot wide
landscaped area and a six-foot high opaque screen, consisting of either a
decorative wall, earth berms, vegetation or a combination of such elements
(refer to
Chapter 18.73, Landscaping).
   J.   Multiple Service. Loading spaces may be designed to serve two or more
establishments located on the same or adjacent site, except that the total
combined number of spaces provided shall not be less than fifty percent of the
combined total required for all such combined users. Each user shall have
access to loading zones, at grade, without having to cross or maneuver on
public streets, alleys, or walkways.
   K.   Restrictions. Loading spaces shall not be used for repair work, vehicle
storage or to satisfy area requirements for off-street parking.
   L.   Modification of Requirements for Unusual Sites. The subdivision review
committee may reduce the number or location of required loading spaces where
they determine an unusual situation exists.
(Ord. 2005-35 § 5 (part), 2005; Ord. 1985-112 § 1 (part), 1985; Ord. 1985-82
(part), 1985)
18.75.070   Exceptions.
   The requirements of this chapter do not apply to the ML zone or the RVC zone
adjacent to the ML zone.
(Ord. 2003-72 § 5, 2003)
Chapter 18.77
ROADWAY FRONTAGE STANDARDS
18.77.010   Purpose.
18.77.020   General requirements and exceptions.
18.77.030   Setback lines for streets.
18.77.040   Scenic routes.
18.77.010   Purpose.
   Reserved.
18.77.020   General requirements and exceptions.
   A.   Structures in Front Yards on Corner Lots. On any corner lot, no fence,
structure, sign or planting shall be erected or maintained within twenty feet
of the property corner so as to interfere with traffic visibility across the
corner.
   B.   Reserved.
(Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
18.77.030   Setback lines for streets.
   A.   Purpose. To more properly establish adequate future street widths and
setback lines on certain streets in the unincorporated areas of Pima County and
in order to provide adequate light, air, and parking facilities and to expedite
traffic within the districts.
   B.   Setback Lines in General.
      1.   All buildings or structures or any part of such buildings or
structures, except signs (as defined in Section
18.79.020, Sign Standards), shall have setback requirements of half the
required right-of-way width for all Major Streets and Routes as designated on
the Major Streets and Scenic Routes Plan, as it may be amended and
supplemented.
      2.   Permits for signs will be issued by the zoning inspector only when
accompanied by an agreement signed by the property owner stating that the sign
would be relocated at no expense to Pima County if additional right-of-way is
required or when adjoining roadway improvements would necessitate such
relocation.
      3.   Setback Exception for Walls, Fences and Private Swimming Pools.
         a.   Walls and fences shall be permitted within required yards and
setback areas as specified in Section
18.07.050(B), Exception for Walls and Fences, and
Chapter 18.73, Landscaping, Screening and Buffering Standards;
         b.   Private swimming pools are permitted within required setback
areas as specified in Section
18.07.030(D)(1) (Land Use Regulations — Swimming Pools — Private).
      4.   If a front, side or rear yard requirement or street setback line as
provided in this code is more than the setback required by this subsection, the
greater requirement shall prevail.
      5.   The setback shall not apply to any residential lot of record prior
to the enactment of this subsection as adopted on August 6, 1952, if the
setback line reduces the depth of the buildable area to less than forty feet or
the width to less than sixty feet.
      6.   This subsection shall not be construed as a waiver of yard
requirements within the zone if they are greater than the above limits.
      7.   In any business or industrial zone, a marquee, canopy, or awning or
other such structure suspended from a building, for the purpose of giving the
appearance of shelter or shade, may project ten feet into the required setback;
provided, that such structure shall be no less than ten feet above the grade
where the structure is located.
   C.   Setback Requirements for Specified Streets.
      1.   No permit for any building or structure or any part thereof shall be
issued by the zoning inspector, and no building or structure or any part
thereof shall be hereafter erected or structurally altered so that any part
thereof would be or extend streetward at a less distance to the centerline of
the following streets than as follows: (see
Table 18.77.030)
      2.   On La Canada Drive from River Road to Lambert Lane the one-hundred-
five-foot building setback from the centerline of La Canada Drive shall not be
varied without the unanimous approval of the board of supervisors and shall not
be subject to any other variance provision of this code.
Table 18.77.030
 
a.  Street:            b. Terminals:               c. Distance from Approved
                                                      Centerline:
1) Oracle Rd/ Tucson-    From Rudasil Road to        150 feet
    Florence Highway      Pinal-Pima County line
                          From the city limits to
2) Old Spanish Trail     southeast corner of Sec.    100 feet
                          30, T14S, R16E
 
(Ord. 2020-41, § 4, 2020; Ord. 2016-2, § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 1996-58 § 1,
1996; Ord. 1995-42 § 5 (part), 1995; Ord. 1994-112 § 1 (part), 1994; Ord. 1985-
82 (part), 1985)
18.77.040   Scenic routes.
   A.   Purpose. The intent of this section is to preserve and enhance the
visual resources of the natural and built environment from and along scenic
routes in order to:
      1.   Protect property values and the character of neighborhoods;
      2.   Protect and enhance the unique character of a community, including
vegetation, architecture and geology;
      3.   Protect and enhance the economic value of tourism; and
      4.   Protect natural resources.
   B.   Definitions. Certain terms used in this section shall be defined as
follows:
      1.   "Highly reflective" means a light reflecting value (LRV) greater
than eighty percent (reference: Munsell Book of Color).
      2.   "Monument type freestanding identification sign" means a sign in
which the architectural structure supporting the background panel of the sign
is at least fifty percent as wide as the background panel.
      3.   "View corridor" means the view from the scenic route at four feet
above existing grade at the future right-of-way line along the parcel is not
obstructed by buildings or structures. The view corridor will permit an
unobstructed view from at least one point into and through a portion of a
development site towards the scenic resource(s).
      4.   "Viewshed analysis" means describe, map, and provide photos of the
predevelopment viewsheds from representative locations on the scenic route (at
approximately four feet above existing grade) looking at and through the
development site. From the same perspectives, illustrate the post-development
viewsheds.
   C.   The roadways and roadway segments designated as Scenic Routes on the
Major Streets and Scenic Routes Plan are subject to the requirements of this
section.
   D.   Applicability. This section applies to all new development requiring a
building permit, including expansions of existing development, on any land
within two hundred feet of a designated Scenic Route as designated on the Major
Streets and Scenic Routes Plan. The two-hundred-foot area of applicability is
measured as follows:
      1.   Where a Scenic Route is designated as a "Major Route" on the Major
Streets and Scenic Routes Plan, this section applies to all land within two
hundred feet of the future right-of-way line of the designated Scenic Route.
      2.   Where a Scenic Route is not designated as a "Major Route" on the
Major Streets and Scenic Routes Plan, this section applies to all land within
two hundred feet of the existing right-of-way line of the designated Scenic
Route.
   E.   Development Standards.
      1.   Building heights:
         a.   The height of residential buildings shall not exceed twenty-four
feet.
         b.   The height of commercial, office or industrial buildings may
exceed twenty-four feet if:
            1)   The maximum height permitted in the zone is not exceeded, and
            2)   A view corridor(s) with a combined width of at least twenty
percent of the street frontage of the development site is provided. A viewshed
analysis of the development site shall be submitted with the development plan
or subdivision plat.
      2.   Setback:
         a.   All buildings or structures or any part of such buildings or
structures shall have setback requirements of half of the required future
right-of-way width according to the Major Streets and Scenic Routes Plan, as it
may be amended and supplemented.
         b.   Setback exception for signs, walls, fences and private swimming
pools:
            1)   Setback requirements for signs shall be as specified in
Section
18.79.030 (Sign Standards);
            2)   Walls and fences shall be permitted within required setback
areas as specified in Section
18.07.050(B) (Exception for Walls and Fences) and
Chapter 18.73 (Landscaping, Screening and Buffering Standards);
            3)   Private swimming pools shall be permitted within required
setback areas as specified in Section
18.07.030(D)(1) (Land Use Regulations — Swimming Pools — Private).
      3.   Landscaping Standards. The scenic route setback area shall be
landscaped in compliance with
Chapter 18.73 (Landscaping, Buffering and Screening Standards). Existing
natural vegetation in the scenic route setback area shall be preserved and
maintained, where possible. Emphasis will be placed on satisfying the
landscaping requirements by retaining and augmenting the existing, natural,
vegetative communities.
      4.   Building and Wall Surfaces.
         a.   Highly reflective finishes, colors or materials are prohibited on
building and wall surfaces which are visible from a designated scenic route.
         b.   Building and wall surfaces which are visible from a designated
scenic route shall have colors which are compatible with surrounding natural
landscape (desert/earth tones). Allowable colors include: brown — including
rusts, sepias, sands, tans and buffs, olive and grey.
      5.   Utilities.
         a.   All new utility lines along scenic routes shall be underground
unless the line is a 46KV or greater transmission line. New utility poles are
not permitted unless a waiver has been approved under Section
18.07.030(H)(7) or the poles are needed for a 46KV or greater transmission
line.
         b.   Utility facilities constructed or installed pursuant to a
certificate of environmental compatibility issued prior to the adoption of this
section under the authority of A.R.S. Title 40, Chapter 2, Article 6.2, are
exempt from the provisions of this section.
         c.   Where possible, existing poles shall be used to provide the
required transition to underground service to new developments adjacent to
scenic routes. However, a new pole set in line with the existing overhead
system, when necessary to serve approved new developments, is not deemed to be
a new utility. Upgrades and reinforcements of existing overhead transmission
utilities are allowed to the extent that the total number of cables is not
increased.
         d.   Location of underground utility lines shall be planned and joint-
trenched where possible to minimize the disturbance of vegetation.
         e.   Exceptions:
            1)   Section
18.77.040(E)(5)(a) does not apply to individual residential lots not part of a
subdivision plat.
            2)   The planning official may grant an exemption from Section
18.77.040(E)(5)(a) upon a finding that it would impose an unreasonable economic
hardship or that the site lacks scenic quality. The petitioner may appeal the
planning official's decision to the board of supervisors.
      6.   Signs. Refer to
Chapter 18.79 (Sign Standards) for provisions for signs along scenic routes.
   F.   Designation.
      1.   Public Notice and Hearing Requirements.
         a.   Public notice of the hearing before the planning and zoning
commission and the board of supervisors shall be given as required in Section
18.01.070.
         b.   No designated scenic routes shall be amended without written
notice to the owner(s) of the lot(s) adjacent to the recommended route.
      2.   Criteria for Scenic Route Designation.
         a.   The determination of scenic route status shall be based on
exceptional scenic quality that helps define the community's character. The
scenic resources may be unique and significant views of mountains, vegetation,
architecture, site design, or geologic formations.
         b.   Refer to the Major Streets and scenic routes Plan for reference
to roads designated as scenic routes.
(Ord. 2018-15 § 2, 2018; Ord. 2016-2, § 1 (part), 2016; Ord. 1996-58 § 2, 1996;
Ord. 1995-42 § 5 (part), 1995; Ord. 1985-82 (part), 1985)
Chapter 18.78
GATEWAY OVERLAY ZONE
18.78.010   Purpose.
18.78.020   Applicability.
18.78.030   Development Standards.
18.78.040   Site Planning Review.
18.78.050   Rezonings and Comprehensive Plan Amendments.
18.78.060   Designated Gateway Overlay Zones.
18.78.010   Purpose.
   A.   Protect and enhance the scenic quality of entry points into
metropolitan Tucson and nearby public preserves;
   B.   Reduce the visual impact of development on scenic vistas and entry
points by providing design guidelines and by requiring more intensive
restoration of graded areas;
   C.   Provide an appropriate visual transition between natural preserves and
more highly urbanized areas through the implementation of screening or siting
of developmental elements;
   D.   Protect and enhance the southwest character of Pima County;
   E.   Encourage well designed buildings and sites;
   F.   Communicate to land use development applicants the goals of the Gateway
Overlay Zone and the role the Design Review Committee takes in implementing the
gateway standards and guidelines;
   G.   Provide for safe interaction between motorized vehicles, non-motorized
vehicles and pedestrians;
   H.   Encourage pedestrian scale developments that take advantage of the
visual values of on-site architectural and landscape aesthetics and off-site
scenic qualities; and
   I.   Maintain and encourage economic growth and health.
(Ord. 2006-30 § 2 (part), 2006; Ord. 2001-162 § 2 (part), 2001)
18.78.020   Applicability.
   A.   This chapter applies to the following unless otherwise stated in
18.78.030:
      1.   New residential development requiring a development plan, new non-
residential development, or substantial expansion of an existing development
subject to
Chapter 18.71, on any land within a GZ-1 (Urban Gateway Overlay Zone) and GZ-2
(Public Preserve Gateway Overlay Zone). Substantial expansion occurs whenever a
new development plan is required. When a new substantial expansion occurs and a
new development plan is required, the standards of this chapter will apply
except that:
         a.   The bufferyard requirements contained in this chapter shall be
complied with whenever space on the property allows, and exempted only when it
is demonstrated to the design review committee that it is not possible to meet
these standards;
         b.   If the individual proposing the expansion does not control the
area of the approved plans and development, the provisions of this chapter
shall not apply to the approved plans and development if the individual
proposing the expansion provides the following:
            (1)   A written statement that the individual proposing the
expansion has requested in writing that any owner or owners of the area of the
approved plans, or development, comply with the provisions of this chapter and
that such owners have rejected the request;
            (2)   A copy of the written request and any of the written
responses.
         c.   Lack of control over the area of the approved plans and
development may be demonstrated by non-ownership, or existence of a lease,
rental agreement or other agreement that prevents, or significantly inhibits
alteration of the property in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   New signs and replacement of existing signs.
      3.   A rezoning request or a comprehensive plan amendment request, on any
land within a GZ-2 (Public Preserve Gateway Overlay Zone).
      4.   New residential subdivisions. Applicable development standards for
new residential subdivisions are limited to bufferyard standards in
18.78.030(C)(2)(c) and architectural color standards in
18.78.030(F)(2)(b).
   B.   If there is a conflict between this Chapter and
Chapters 18.61 (Hillside Development Overlay Zone);
18.67 (Buffer Overlay Zone);
18.73 (Landscaping, Buffering and Screening Standards);
18.75 (Off-Street Parking and Loading Standards);
18.79 (Sign Standards) or Section
18.77.040 (Scenic Routes), the most restrictive applies unless otherwise
indicated in this chapter.
(Ord. 2006-30 § 2 (part), 2006; Ord. 2001-162 § 2 (part), 2001)
18.78.030   Development Standards.
   A.   Scope. This section provides general standards for parking and
circulation, landscaping, site design, signs, and architectural design.
Development must be consistent with the Gateway Development Guidelines Manual.
   B.   Parking and Circulation.
      1.   Design Objective. Provide functional, efficient, parking facilities
and circulation corridors that are visually attractive and unobtrusive from
off-site. Use landscape and other design features to interrupt large expanses
of paving in large parking lots to create smaller areas of connected parking
facilities.
      2.   Standards.
         a.   Parking facilities shall be designed in compliance with
Chapter 18.75.
         b.   Pedestrian facilities are required adjacent to or within the
arterial or collector rights of way and shall be designed in accordance with
County Subdivision and Development Street Standards Manual.
         c.   Internal pedestrian facilities shall be designed according to the
following:
            (1)   Pedestrian facilities adjacent to buildings shall be
connected to pedestrian facilities within parking lots.
            (2)   Internal and adjacent off-site pedestrian facilities shall be
interconnected.
         d.   Parking lots for non-residential and multiple dwelling uses shall
be screened by a minimum three-foot-high decorative masonry wall placed at the
inside boundary of any required bufferyard. Minor variations may be allowed.
This wall shall satisfy any
Chapter 18.72 bufferyard structure requirement.
   C.   Landscaping Standards.
      1.   Objective.
         a.   To provide for physical, and visual buffers and transition
between different land uses.
         b.   To break up large expanses of paving within large parking lots by
creating small scale areas of connected parking facilities.
         c.   To create an aesthetically attractive site design.
      2.   Standards.
         a.   Gateway Overlay Zone setback areas shall be landscaped in
accordance with
Chapter 18.73 (Landscaping, Buffering and Screening Standards) unless otherwise
indicated in this chapter.
         b.   Emphasis shall be placed on retaining and enhancing any existing
indigenous vegetation. Introduced landscape plants must be chosen from the
Buffer Overlay list of plants contained in the Landscape Design Manual.
         c.   Bufferyards.
            (1)   In no case shall bufferyards along arterials and collectors
be less than 20 feet in width.
            (2)   Bufferyards shall be in common areas for residential
subdivisions.
            (3)   Slopes in bufferyards may not exceed a ratio of four-to-one
horizontal to vertical distance, except in natural bufferyards.
            (4)   Splash pads and other limited areas of stormwater drainage
structures may be allowed with the approval of the planning official and the
county engineer, unless a natural bufferyard option specified by the Pima
County Landscape Design Manual is utilized.
            (5)   Non-hard surface trails required by Pima County Natural
Resources Department may be located within bufferyards, provided that the width
of the trail does not exceed eight feet.
         d.   Internal Site Landscaping.
            (1)   All disturbed areas not used for buildings, parking, access,
approved trails, or stormwater drainage structures shall be landscaped with a
minimum of 1 tree, 4 shrubs, and 10 accent plants per every 200 square feet and
shall be curbed or otherwise protected when adjacent to vehicular use areas,
unless otherwise required.
            (2)   A landscaped area with an average width of five feet shall be
provided along the frontages of buildings visible from off-site. The area shall
be located between main building entries and parking areas. The landscaped area
shall contain a minimum of 8 shrubs, and 10 accent plants for every 40 linear
feet and may be used to meet amenity landscape requirements.
   D.   Site Design.
      1.   Objective.
         a.   Improve the quality of commercial, industrial, multi-family, and
single-family development design through comprehensive site design that
provides internal and external connectivity.
         b.   Connect the building and pedestrian pathways to the street and
adjacent sites by coordinating its placement with properties that conform to
these design standards and guidelines.
         c.   Encourage creativity and design through the use of guidelines.
      2.   Standards.
         a.   Parcels larger than five acres and under one ownership shall be
planned as one development.
         b.   Non-residential development and parcels larger than five acres
shall be designed to promote internal circulation for pedestrians.
         c.   Linkages shall be provided to adjacent preserves, parks, and
trails where connections may be made.
         d.   Outdoor lighting shall conform to
Chapter 15.12 of the Pima County Code.
         e.   All drainage structures shall be landscaped as required or
recommended by the storm water drainage manual, and shall be shown on the
landscape plan submitted with development plans and plats.
         f.   Utilities shall be underground. Utility plans shall be
coordinated and consistent with development and landscape plans. Proposed
utility easements may not be located within required bufferyards except to
cross the bufferyard perpendicularly.
         g.   Sidewalks are required along all arterial and collector routes
and shall be a minimum of four-feet-wide. If a sidewalk is located within the
required bufferyard, a minimum six-foot-wide planting area containing 1 tree
spaced at a minimum of 40 feet on center shall be located between the sidewalk
and the right-of-way. This strip may be used to meet bufferyard width
requirements, provided that all other requirements are met.
         h.   No parking area may be larger than 48,000 square feet on sites
larger than five acres containing more than one building pad without
separation, by a building pad or building's associated landscaping, from other
parking areas by a minimum five-feet-wide curbed landscape strip containing a
minimum of 1 tree, 4 shrubs, and 10 accent plants for every 40 linear feet. The
landscape strip may contain site-lighting fixtures. The landscaped strip may
contain pedestrian walkways to connect interior pedestrian circulation paths
constructed perpendicular to the length of the landscape strip.
         i.   Parking lots adjacent to property lines closest to the nearest
public preserve shall be screened using a minimum 20-foot-wide landscape
buffer, planted at the density of a type D bufferyard as required by the
Landscape Design Manual, except where the Design Review Committee determines
that the additional bufferyard will not provide visual screening of the
development.
   E.   Signs.
      1.   Objective.
         a.   Provide for an effective form of communication while minimizing
visual impacts on and off-site.
         b.   Ensure that the signage is clear, and compatible with the
character of the Gateway Overlay Zone.
         c.   Enhance the potential economic value and encourage quality
development within the community.
      2.   Standards.
         a.   All signs shall be designed to be architecturally compatible with
the development complex as approved by the Design Review Committee.
         b.   Illumination. Illumination of signs may be accomplished only by
one of the following methods:
            (1)   Halo Illumination
            (2)   Internal illumination to the extent that only the sign
characters and logos emit light.
         c.   Illumination time restriction.
            (1)   An illuminated wall sign shall be turned off no later than
one hour after the closing of a business.
            (2)   An illuminated sign in the interior of a business, which is
visible from the outside, cannot be illuminated when the business is closed.
         d.   Prohibited lighting. The following types of light sources are
prohibited as means to illuminate or attract attention to any sign:
            (1)   Blinking, flashing, rotating and animated light sources.
            (2)   Search lights.
   F.   Architectural Design.
      1.   Objective. To improve the quality of development in the Gateway
Overlay Zone through instituting design standards and guidelines for new
construction and alterations. The design guidelines and standards are intended
to reflect the historic, natural, southwestern, or rural character of Pima
County.
      2.   Standards for non-residential developments.
         a.   Building Façades. All façades, except as noted, shall have visual
elements designed to break up large scales and shall prevent a uniform
appearance by:
            (1)   Incorporating wall plane projections or recesses with a depth
of at least 3 percent of the length of the façade. Such features shall include
at least 20 percent of the length of the façade.
            (2)   Limiting uninterrupted length of any façade to a maximum of
100 horizontal feet.
            (3)   Designing ground floor façades longer than 100 feet facing
public streets with arcades, entry areas, awnings or other features along no
less than 60 percent of the façade.
            (4)   Including no less than 3 of the following items in a pattern
that repeats at intervals of no less than 30 feet:
               (a)   Color change;
               (b)   Texture change;
               (c)   Material module change;
               (d)   Expression of architectural or structural bay through a
change in plane no less than 12 inches in width, such as an off-set, reveal, or
projecting rib.
         b.   Architectural Colors.
            (1)   All exposed exterior walls and roofs of buildings, retaining
walls, and accessory structures that are visible from a designated Gateway
Overlay Zone shall be consistent with the natural colors of the surrounding
area and shall blend in with the natural setting. Corporate colors are
prohibited if they are not compatible with existing natural colors as outlined
in Section
18.78.030(F)(2)(b)(2)
            (2)   Allowable colors include, but are not limited to, blues,
greens, yellows, browns, rusts, sepias, sands, tans, buffs, olive and grey as
they occur in nature at the site.
            (3)   Applicant shall demonstrate that colors complement and blend
with surrounding development landscape colors.
            (4)   Colors shall complement and blend with surrounding vistas.
            (5)   Colors shall not exceed a light-reflective value (LRV) of 48
percent.
            (6)   These colors do not apply to a roof screened by a parapet
wall extending at least three feet above the building or to building
accessories with minor accent colors that are part of the architectural design
such as decorative tiles, fixtures, striping, awnings, or decorative entryways.
         c.   Building Height.
            (1)   Commercial and multi-family building heights may not exceed
34 feet anywhere along the roofline and may not exceed an average height of 28
feet.
            (2)   Average building height shall be determined by measuring from
finished grade five feet from the building to the highest point on the building
at intervals of five feet around the building perimeter and then averaging the
results.
(Ord. 2006-30 § 2 (part), 2006; Ord. 2001-162 § 2 (part), 2001)
18.78.040   Site Planning Review.
   A.   Objective. To provide the Design Review Committee a process for
reviewing projects subject to compliance with this chapter. For the purpose of
this chapter, site planning means the arrangement of landscaping, open spaces,
buildings, circulation elements and other features to support the goals of the
development.
   B.   Standards. The Design Review Committee shall comprehensively review, at
a regularly scheduled meeting, all proposed development subject to this
chapter, except for single-family residences not within subdivisions, and shall
approve, approve with conditions, deny, or continue the review to a later
hearing to allow design revisions based on committee recommendations. The
review shall include proposed site planning, architectural building design and
colors, landscaping, parking lot design, and freestanding signs for compliance
of the proposed development with the purpose, standards, and guidelines of this
chapter and any design related conditions of rezoning.
      1.   Development proposals subject to committee review shall be submitted
to Pima County for review and recommendation by planning staff, subject to the
schedule and submittal requirements established by the Development Services
Department to ensure a timely, efficient, and complete review by the committee.
      2.   The committee shall not approve any proposed development subject to
its review without finding that it complies with the purpose, standards and the
guidelines of this chapter.
      3.   Development proposals conditionally approved by the committee shall
be submitted, by the applicant, to planning staff for determination of final
compliance with the committee's decision within 30 days of the date of the
hearing.
   C.   The decision of the Design Review Committee may be appealed to the
board of adjustment. Appeals shall be submitted within 60 days of the date of
the hearing, appeals received after that date shall not be considered.
   D.   Any change in site design that involves any committee approved color,
architectural design, or more than ten percent of any area requirement must be
approved by the committee subject to the review requirements of this chapter.
All other changes may be approved by the planning official provided that
proposed changes comply with the purpose, standards, and guidelines of this
section.
   E.   Committee approval shall expire two years from the date of approval
hearing. Approval may be extended for up to an additional two (2) years at the
discretion of the planning official if the circumstances and basis, for the
Design Review Committee's decision, have not significantly changed since the
date of approval.
(Ord. 2006-30 § 2 (part), 2006; Ord. 2001-162 § 2 (part), 2001)
18.78.050   Rezonings and Comprehensive Plan Amendments.
   A rezoning or comprehensive plan amendment request within GZ-2 (gateway
overlay zone - public preserve) to allow more intensive uses shall be reviewed
by the board of supervisors and the planning and zoning commission to ascertain
if the proposed change serves a community need that outweighs the need to keep
the land use intensity category or zoning district at the existing intensity.
(Ord. 2001-162 § 2 (part), 2001)
18.78.060   Designated Gateway Overlay Zones.
   The designation and determination of a gateway shall be initiated by the
board of supervisors based on exceptional scenic quality that helps define the
community character. The scenic resources may be, but are not limited to,
unique and significant views of mountains, vegetation, architecture, site
design, or geologic formations.
(Ord. 2001-162 § 2 (part), 2001)
Chapter 18.79
SIGN STANDARDS*
18.79.010   Purpose.
18.79.020   General.
18.79.030   Definitions and sign types.
18.79.040   Prohibited signs.
18.79.050   Exempt signs.
18.79.060   Nonconforming signs.
18.79.070   General regulations.
18.79.080   Regulations by sign type.
18.79.090   Regulations by temporary sign type.
18.79.100   Dark sky protection option and master sign program.
18.79.010   Purpose.
   A.   It is the purpose of this chapter to authorize the use of signs that:
      1.   Promote traffic and pedestrian safety and minimize risk of personal
injury and property damage from unregulated and improper sign placement and
construction;
      2.   Encourage legibility of sign information along street frontages,
reduce visual clutter, and encourage the clearest possible visual perception of
existing uses and existing signs;
      3.   Provide equitable opportunities for free speech, identification and
essential communication, enable wayfinding, retain businesses and promote
economic development;
      4.   Protect astronomical observation by protecting dark skies and
minimizing light intrusion onto adjacent property;
      5.   Encourage an aesthetic appearance compatible with the surrounding
human and natural environment along street frontages, improving the quality of
the visual appearance of the community, and the clear visibility of the natural
environment;
      6.   Promote signs that are appropriate to the type of activity to which
they pertain, are well-designed, are of appropriate scale, and are
appropriately integrated into the built and natural environment; and,
      7.   Promote the preservation of landmark signs by restoration and/or
adaptive reuse.
   B.   Whenever a conflict arises in the enforcement of this chapter or more
than one interpretation is possible, the purposes stated in Section
18.79.010(A) shall serve as guidelines in resolving the conflict or
interpretation.
(Ord. 2025-4, 2025: Ord. 2020-41, § 5 (part), 2020)
18.79.020   General.
   A.   A sign shall comply with the Pima County building codes (Title 15).
   B.   A permit is required for all signs unless otherwise stated.
   C.   No sign shall be installed, placed, or maintained within unincorporated
Pima County except in conformance with this chapter or as allowed by a state or
federal law preemption of this chapter.
   D.   If provisions of this chapter are in conflict with any other provision
of the code, the more restrictive requirement shall apply.
   E.   No sign shall cause a safety hazard for pedestrians or vehicles.
   F.   No content restrictions.
      1.   Any sign allowed under this chapter may contain, in lieu of any
other copy, any otherwise lawful message that complies with applicable
dimension, lighting, design, spacing, and approval requirements of this
chapter.
      2.   This chapter is intended to regulate signs in a manner that does not
favor commercial speech over non-commercial speech and does not regulate non-
commercial speech by message content.
      3.   Any regulation that distinguishes between on-site and off-site signs
applies only to commercial messages, and allows any non-commercial message.
(Ord. 2020-41, § 5 (part), 2020)
18.79.030   Definitions and sign types.
   A.   Definitions "A".
      1.   Abandoned sign: A sign which advertises, identifies or gives notice
of a use which is no longer in operation or an activity which has already
occurred. A permanent, on-site sign which applies to a temporarily- suspended
use shall not be deemed to be abandoned unless the suspension exceeds one year.
      2.   A-frame sign: A portable sign typically constructed of wood or
plastic that folds out to form the shape of an "A".
   B.   Definitions "B".
      1.   Banner: A temporary sign constructed of a flexible material hung or
attached to a building, wall or fence on which copy or graphics may be
displayed.
      2.   Billboard: An off-site sign displaying advertising sign copy that is
pasted, painted or fastened in a manner to permit its periodic replacement and
that does not pertain to the sign location.
      3.   Building entryway sign: An on-site sign at the entry or access point
of a multi-tenant, non-residential building or development.
      4.   Building frontage: The measurement between two straight lines
projecting from the outermost edges of a building or tenant space wall that are
perpendicular to a straight line running along the ground level of the front of
the measured wall.
   C.   Definitions "C".
      1.   Canopy sign: A sign mounted on a canopy which is a permanent
fixture, often made of metal or glass, that is attached to a structure.
      2.   Change of sign copy: A replacement or modification of the message or
design of an existing sign face without modifying the size, shape, framework or
structure of the sign. It allows the changing of messages by means of non-
electronic sign copy.
      3.   Concealed sign: A permanent or temporary on-site sign that is within
the boundaries of a premises, obscured from and not legible from adjacent
public right-of-way. Examples: indoor signs and signs located within an outdoor
courtyard. Does not include a billboard.
      4.   Correlated color temperature (CCT): A measurement of how yellow or
white/blue emitted light is, as measured in kelvins. A low CCT is the amber end
of the light spectrum. High CCT outdoor lighting causes light scattering,
diminishing dark skies.
   D.   Definitions "D".
      1.   Danger sign. A sign that is necessary to warn of danger.   
      2.   Development complex: A site, having common vehicular access points,
which is subject to the development plan requirements of Development Plan
Standards (Chapter 18.71), including waiver.
      3.   Drive-through lane sign: An on-site sign of a drive-through or
drive-in use.
   E.   Definitions "E".
      1.   Electronic message sign: A sign that permits the movement or
changing of messages by means of electronically controlled sign copy.
   F.   Definitions "F".
      1.   Flag: A piece of cloth or similar material on a pole or rope used as
a marker, symbol or emblem of a country or institution or as a decoration
during an event.
      2.   Freestanding sign: An on-site sign erected or mounted on a self-
supporting, permanent base detached from supporting elements of a building.
Does not include a billboard sign.
      3.   Freestanding interstate style sign: A sign not supported by another
structure and located along an interstate such as Interstate 10 (I-10) and
Interstate 19 (I-19).
   G.   Definitions "G".
      1.   Governmental sign: A sign constructed, placed, or maintained by a
government agency or a sign that a government agency requires to be
constructed, placed, or maintained.
   H.   Definitions "H". Reserved.
   I.   Definitions "I".
      1.   Illuminated sign: A sign that uses any artificial light either
projecting through its surface or reflecting off its surface.   
         a.   Conventional internally illuminated sign: A sign made visible in
darkness by a source of light, concealed or contained within the sign that
shines through a translucent surface.
         b.   Externally illuminated sign: A sign with illumination derived
entirely from an external, artificial source.
         c.   Indirectly illuminated sign: A sign with a light source that is
not seen directly.
      2.   Inflatable or air activated signs: Structures which are inflated or
activated by air and used for advertising purposes.
   J.   Definitions "J". Reserved.
   K.   Definitions "K". Reserved.
   L.   Definitions "L".
      1.   Landscape area: The square footage of a ground cover surrounding a
sign creating an aesthetic effect by the use of plant material and inorganic
material including but not limited to grass, trees, shrubs, planters, brick,
stone, natural forms, water forms, aggregate and other landscape features, but
not including the use of concrete, asphalt or outdoor carpeting.
      2.   Landscaping ratio: The relationship between the landscape area
surrounding a sign and the sign area.
   M.   Definitions "M".
      1.   Maximum luminous intensity: The maximum allowed of the measure of
the amount of light that a point source radiates in a given direction. It is
measured in candles or nits with one nit equivalent to one candela per square
meter.
      2.   Minor sign: A small, on-site and close to the ground sign.
      3.   Moving sign: A sign that flashes or blinks light, changes physical
position or conveys the illusion of movement by mechanical means, illumination
or air movement.
   N.   Definitions "N".
      1.    Neon sign: An electric sign lighted by long luminous gas-discharge
tubes that contain rarefied neon or other gases, and that are bent to form
letters, shapes, and other sign adornment.
      2.   Nonconforming sign: A sign, constructed with a valid permit,
existing on April 1, 1986, which does not comply with this chapter.
      3.   Non-residential area: Areas with business and industrial zoning, and
areas with residential or rural zoning with an approved development plan or
conditional use permit. An approved subdivision plat in its entirety as a site,
not as individual lots, may be considered non-residential.
   O.   Definitions "O".
      1.   Off-site sign: A sign that is not an on-site sign.
      2.   On-site sign: A sign directing attention to a use, activity,
facility, product or service existing at the property on which the sign is
placed.
   P.   Definitions "P".
      1.   Political sign: A temporary sign relating to a political candidate,
political party or issue in a public election, as allowed by Arizona Revised
Statutes.
      2.   Portable sign: A freestanding, moveable sign not permanently affixed
to any building, structure, or embedded into ground. Examples include A-frame
signs and T-frame signs.
   Q.   Definitions "Q". Reserved.
   R.   Definitions "R".
      1.   Residential area: Areas with residential or rural zoning with no
approved development plan or conditional use permit.
      2.   Roofline: The top edge of the roof or the top of the parapet,
whichever forms the top line of the building silhouette.
      3.   Roof sign: A sign that projects above the roofline of a building to
which it is attached.
   S.   Definitions "S".
      1.   Sign: A name, identification, description, display or illustration
affixed to or painted or represented directly or indirectly on a building or
other outdoor surface that directs attention to or is designed or intended to
direct attention to the sign face or to an object, product, place, activity,
person, institution, organization, or use.
      2.   Sign area allotment: The allowed amount of sign copy area.
      3.   Sign copy: Any word, letter, logo, number, design, figure or other
symbolic representation incorporated into a sign.
      4.   Street frontage: Measured as the length of a lot or development
fronting on a public or private street.
      5.   Suspended sign: A sign hanging from an awning, from a canopy, a
covered walkway, porch, roof overhang, or a sign projecting from a building.
   T.   Definitions "T".
      1.   Temporary sign: A portable sign, a sign not permanently embedded in
the ground, or a sign not permanently affixed to a building or permanent sign
structure.
      2.   Tenant space: The area or portion of a building leased by an
individual or entity; may include the property owner.
      3.   T-frame sign: A portable sign that stands creating the shape of two,
joined "T"s.
   U.   Definitions "U". Reserved.
   V.   Definitions "V". Reserved.
   W.   Definitions "W".
      1.   Wall sign: A permanent sign fastened, attached, or connected to, or
supported in whole or in part by a building or structure.
      2.   Window sign: A sign affixed to the interior or exterior of a window,
or placed immediately behind a window, and visible from outside of the
building.
(Ord. 2020-41, § 5 (part), 2020)
18.79.040   Prohibited signs.
   No person shall erect, alter, maintain, or relocate any sign specified in
this section unless regulated elsewhere:
   A.    Prohibited sign types.
      1.    Abandoned signs.
      2.    Cloth or paper signs attached to the exterior surface of a window
or a building except a private, temporary sign in a residential area or as
allowed as a banner.
      3.   Electronic message signs.
      4.    Flashing, blinking, reflective, inflatable, air-activated, or
animated signs, including signs with an intermittent or varying color or
intensity of artificial illumination, whether deliberate or as a consequence of
a defect in the sign or illumination source.
      5.   Moving signs.
      6.    Off-site signs, except those expressly allowed by this chapter.
      7.    Ribbons, streamers, balloons, or pin flags.
      8.    Roof signs projecting above the top of the wall parapet, or
roofline, or mounted on a roof.
      9.    Searchlights.
      10.    Sound: Signs emitting sound, except as expressly allowed by drive-
through lane signs.
      11.    Statues used for advertising.
   B.    Signs that obstruct the free and clear vision of motor vehicle
operators or signs placed in any location where by reason of position, shape,
or color may interfere with, or be confused with, any authorized traffic sign,
signal, or device. A sign that because of its intensity of light constitutes a
nuisance or hazard to vehicular traffic, pedestrians, or adjacent properties.
(Ord. 2020-41, § 5 (part), 2020)
18.79.050   Exempt signs.
   The following signs are exempt from the application, permit and fee
regulations of this chapter, although the applicable development standards
apply and an electrical or building permit may be required:
   A.    Concealed signs.
   B.   Danger signs: No greater height or size than is required to give the
public adequate warning.
   C.   Flags: Ten or fewer flags with poles no greater than twenty feet in
height.
   D.   Governmental signs.
   E.   House numbers, nameplates and addresses as required by Address
Standards (
Chapter 18.83).
   F.   Memorial signs, tablets or cornerstones, grave markers, headstones,
statues, and historical markers or cornerstones, not exceeding eight square
feet in area.
   G.   Political signs as allowed by Arizona Revised Statutes.
   H.   Portable "A" and "T"- frame signs.
   I.    Signs on a single-family, residential property of a cumulative sign
area of six square feet, not exceeding six feet in height unless attached to a
wall or structure, and not illuminated.
   J.   Signs attached to a service station pump or signs integrated into the
design of an automated bank teller machine.
   K.   Vehicle signs that are incidental to vehicle use. Exception: A vehicle
that is regularly located for the primary purpose of displaying the sign.
   L.    Window signs that comply with the requirements of Sections
18.79.080(I) or
18.79.090(F).
(Ord. 2020-41, § 5 (part), 2020)
18.79.060   Nonconforming signs.
   A.   This chapter shall not apply to a sign, constructed with a valid
permit, existing on April 1, 1986, which does not comply with this chapter,
except as provided below.
   B.   Change of Use: A nonconforming sign shall comply with this chapter
before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy which creates a change of
use.
   C.   Damaged or Destroyed Sign: A nonconforming sign damaged to the extent
of requiring a new building permit shall be replaced with a conforming sign.
   D.   Relocation: A nonconforming sign shall not be relocated without
compliance with this chapter.
   E.   Alteration: A nonconforming sign shall not be altered to the extent of
requiring a new building permit without being brought into compliance with all
the regulations of this chapter.
      1.   Exception: A freestanding sign remaining in the same location may be
altered, subject to the following conditions:
         a.   Maximum sign area may be the greatest of:
            1)   That permitted in the zone;
            2)   Sixty-four square feet in commercial or industrial zones only;
or
            3)   Fifty percent of the area of the nonconforming sign;
         b.   Maximum sign height may be the greatest of:
            1)   That permitted in the zone;
            2)   The height of the roof line of the tallest main building on
the site;
         c.   Setback. Ten feet from the front property line;
         d.   All structural components and braces (such as pipes, angle iron,
cables, internal or back framing) shall be concealed with a pole cover or
architectural embellishment.
   F.   Landmark Sign. A sign erected prior to the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter shall be given the status of a landmark sign
and shall be exempt from the regulations of this chapter, including an
exemption from the total sign allotment, provided thehistorical commission
finds it has significant cultural or historical character as a landmark.
   G.   Two-for-one Replacement of Billboard Support Structure. A billboard
with a wooden support structure may be replaced with a metal support structure
for a billboard of the same sign area provided it meets the following
requirements:
      1.   Illumination: None;
      2.   Maximum height: 24 feet; and
      3.   A second existing billboard with a wooden support structure is
removed within 30 days of the issuance of a permit for the replacement support
structure.
(Ord. 2025-4, 2025: Ord. 2020-41, § 5 (part), 2020)
18.79.070   General regulations
   A.   Each single-family, residential property is allowed an on-site,
cumulative sign area of six square feet, not exceeding six feet in height
unless attached to a wall or structure, with no limit on the number of signs.
Illumination of signage is prohibited.
   B.   Measurement:
      1.   Sign area measurement:
         a.   Background panel: A sign placed on a background panel is measured
as the area contained within the outside dimensions of the background panel.
         b.   Individual letters or symbols: A sign with individual letters or
symbols placed separately on a building wall, awning or other structure without
a background panel, is measured as the sum of the smallest rectangular shape
needed to enclose each letter or symbol;
         c.   Illuminated panel: A sign in an illuminated panel is measured as
the entire illuminated surface area;
         d.   Multiple components: A sign displayed in more than one component
e.g., a service station identification and price sign, is measured as the area
enclosed by the smallest rectangle encompassing all the components.
      2.   Sign height is measured as the vertical distance from the average
finished grade beneath the sign to the topmost feature of the sign; except that
if the sign location has an average finished grade lower than the adjoining
grade of the road, the sign height is measured from the top of the curb (or
crown of the road nearest the property if no curb exists) to the topmost
feature of the sign.
   C.   Multiple components: A sign which is subject to more than one
classification shall meet the requirements for the classification to which each
portion is subject.
   D.   Illumination.
      1.   Signs may be illuminated, except where expressly prohibited in this
chapter.
      2.   A sign shall comply with the standards of the Outdoor Lighting Code
(
Chapter 15.12).
      3.   A light source of a sign shall not be visible from:
         a.   Above except as allowed in the Outdoor Lighting Code (
Chapter 15.12), and,
         b.   An adjacent property or street.
   E.   Permitting.
      1.   The sign-property owner or the sign-property owner's representative
may apply for a sign permit. A sign-property owner's representative shall
provide an authorization letter from the owner of the property on which the
sign is to be installed.
      2.   Except as expressly allowed in subparagraph 3 below, a sign permit
is required prior to constructing, installing, placing, altering, or relocating
any sign.
      3.   A sign permit is not required for any of the following:
         a.   Change of sign copy;
         b.   An exempt sign as defined in this chapter;
         c.   A sign allowed by a state or federal law preemption of this
chapter; or,
         d.   Sign maintenance that does not change the design of the sign.
      4.   Permit fees. In accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the
Board of Supervisors.
      5.   Application.
         a.   The sign portion of a permit application shall be submitted for
all signs requiring a permit.
         b.   The sign portion of a permit application must be accompanied by
all items required by the application checklist.
      6.   Permit suspension or revocation. In addition to enforcement pursuant
to
Chapter 18.95 (COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT), the zoning inspector may suspend or
revoke a sign permit issued as a result of the applicant's material omission or
misstatement of fact. The planning official shall give notice of any suspension
or revocation to the applicant and to the sign-property owner.
   F.   Address identification. A sign shall conform to the requirements of
Chapter 18.83 (ADDRESSING STANDARDS) and the Official Address Guide for Pima
County, Arizona.
(Ord. 2020-41, § 5 (part), 2020)
18.79.080   Regulations by permanent sign type.
   A.   Billboard. A billboard is allowed in the CB-2, CI-1, CI-2, and CI-
3 zones subject to:
      1.   General:      
         a.   Minimum clearance: Ten feet.
         b.   Maximum faces per sign: Two.
         c.   No illumination.
         d.   Maximum number: None.
         e.   Landscaping ratio: None.
         f.   No on-site business identification sign shall be a part of or
attached to a billboard.
         g.   No sign face area or object shall extend beyond the surface or
rectangular perimeter of the billboard face.
         h.   All visible portions of the supporting structure shall be an
earthtone shade of brown or green.
      2.   CB-2 and CI-1:
         a.   Maximum area: 75 square feet;
         b.   Maximum height: 16 feet;
         c.   Setbacks: 20 feet from any property line.
         d.   Location: Not within 660 feet of another billboard.
      3.   CI-2 and CI-3:
         a.   Maximum area: 300 square feet;
         b.   Maximum height: 24 feet;
         c.   Maximum faces: Two;
         d.   Setbacks: 20 feet from any property line, except a 30-foot front
setback is required for a billboard with an area of more than 75-square feet;
and
         e.   Location: A billboard with an area of 75 square feet or less
shall not be within 660 feet of another billboard and a billboard with an area
more than 75 square feet shall not be within 1,320 feet of another billboard.
      4.   A billboard shall not be located:
         a.   Within 200 feet of a residential zone or 100 feet of a building
erected prior to the issuance of the billboard permit.
         b.   On a designated scenic route, excepting:
            i.   Interstate 10.
            ii.   Interstate 19.
            iii.   Those portions of State Highway 85 and 86 between the Tohono
O'dham Reservation, the Pinal County line and the boundary of the Organ Pipe
National Monument.
         c.   On a lot or parcel with a building or structure. A billboard
constructed after November 19, 1985, shall be removed prior to the issuance of
a certificate of occupancy for a building on the same lot or parcel.
         d.   A billboard within 300 feet of a county road constructed after
January 1, 1984, or within a CB-2 zone shall require a sign use permit issued
by the board of supervisors. The permit shall be: issued after a public hearing
for which all owners of property within 600 feet of the proposed billboard have
been notified by mail, subject to the requirements of Section
18.79.080(A)(1)(f)-(A)(1)(h), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4)(a)-(c); and, in
conformance with the purpose statement in Section
18.79.080(A)(4)(d)(i) of this chapter.
            i.   It is the purpose of this subsection to establish a framework
of comprehensive sign standards for Pima County that reflect the community
decision to preserve and enhance the natural, scenic desert environment of Pima
County and to promote the health, safety and welfare of the community. It is
the intent of this subsection to authorize the use of signs that:
               a)   Encourage an aesthetic appearance compatible with the
surrounding human and natural environment along street frontages;
               b)   Encourage the clear visibility of the mountain and desert
environment and improve the quality of the visual appearance of the community;
               c)   Promote signs that are appropriate to the type of activity
to which they pertain;
               d)   Encourage legibility of sign information along street
frontages;
               e)   Protect astronomical observation and minimize light
intrusion onto adjacent property; and
               f)   Reduce visual clutter and glare in order to promote traffic
and pedestrian safety and encourage the clearest possible visual perception of
existing adjacent businesses and existing signs.
            ii.   The application fee for a public hearing before the board of
supervisors concerning a CB-2 zone billboard sign use permit shall be in
accordance with the development services fee schedule.
   B.   Building Entryway. A building entryway sign is allowed subject to a
maximum sign area of 40 square feet, a maximum height of 8 feet, a minimum
setback of 40 feet, and the sign face shall not be oriented to the street.
   C.   Canopy. A canopy sign is allowed subject to a maximum sign area of 60
square feet for the entire canopy.
   D.   Freestanding. A freestanding sign is allowed subject to:
      1.   Location: On-site; non-residential areas only.
         Interstate style:
         a.   Within 250 feet from the edge of the interstate right-of-way and
within 1,000 feet parallel to the interstate (this area is measured toward the
exit or entrance ramp from a point where the centerline of a ramp meets with
the edge of the right-of-way of a contiguous road which is part of the
interstate interchange);
         b.   Not within 300 feet of another freestanding sign.
      2.   Maximum number of signs per site: One sign, with the exception of a
development complex having a street frontage of at least 500 feet is allowed
one sign per vehicular access point.
         Interstate style: One per site including any style of freestanding
sign.
      3.   Maximum area per sign:
         a.   Nonresidential uses in the ML, SR, SR-2, SH, CR-1, CR-2, CR-3,
CR-4, CR-5, CMH-1, CMH-2 zones: 32 square feet;
         b.   For all other zones, a site with:
            i.   Less than 300 feet of street frontage: 50 square feet;
            ii.   From 300 - 549 feet of street frontage: 64 square feet;
            iii.   Greater than 549 feet of street frontage: 90 square feet;
            iv.   Development complexes with 500 feet or greater of street
frontage: 50 square feet per vehicular access point.
         c.   Hospital: 100 square feet each.
         d.   Interstate style: 150 square feet.
      4.   Maximum height per sign:
         a.   Nonresidential uses in the ML, SR, SR-2, SH, CR-1, CR-2, CR-3,
CR-4, CR-5, CMH-1, CMH-2 zones: 6 feet;
         b.   For all other zones: 10 feet;
         c.   Hospital: 15 feet.
         d.   Interstate style: 25 feet above the interstate grade.
      5.   A 25 percent increase in the area and height of an internally or
externally illuminated sign is allowed if the illumination measures of the Dark
Sky Protection Option in Section 18.79.100(A)(4) are met.
      6.   Landscaping ratio per sign: 4:1.
      7.   Minimum setbacks:
         a.   Front:
            i.   Zero feet from property line if sign height is less than or
equal to 10 feet.
            ii.   10 feet from property line if sign height is greater than 10
feet.
         b.   Side: 10 feet from property line.
      8.   May include a change of sign copy component.
      9.   May include additional drive-through lane signs subject to:
         a.   Maximum number of signs: Two; one additional for more than one
drive-through lane;
         b.   Maximum area per sign: 36 square feet;
         c.   Maximum height per sign: 7 feet;
         d.   Sound emitted shall not be audible from any nearby residential
property.
         e.   Sign faces shall be oriented only to the drive-through lanes and
located a maximum of 6 feet from the edge of the lanes.
      10.   Interstate style freestanding sign faces shall be perpendicular to
or substantially oriented to the through travel lanes of the interstate.
      11.   Freestanding signs located along scenic routes shall be monument
style as defined in Section
18.77.040(B)(2).
   E.   Minor. A minor sign is allowed subject to a maximum sign area of 6
square feet, a maximum height of 4 feet, and a minimum setback of 25 feet.
   F.   Subdivision entryway. A subdivision entryway sign is allowed subject to
a maximum sign area of 40 square feet, a maximum height of 8 feet, and limited
to one per entryway with a maximum of two per subdivision.
   G.   Suspended. A suspended sign is allowed subject to:
      1.   Location: On-site; non-residential areas only; near the tenant
space.
      2.   Maximum number of signs: One per tenant space.
      3.   Maximum area: Calculated as part of the wall sign area allotment
(reference
18.79.080(H)).
      4.   Maximum height: Building height.
      5.   Minimum clearance: Eight feet.
      6.   If a projecting sign, maximum projection allowed: Five feet.
   H.   Wall. A wall sign is allowed subject to:
      1.   Location: On-site; non-residential areas only; located on tenant
space with the multi-tenant building maximum sign area exception of Section
18.79.080(H)(4)(b).
      2.   Maximum number of signs per tenant or building: Five.
      3.   Maximum sign area per site for nonresidential uses in the ML, SR,
SR-2, SH CR-1, CR-2, CR-3, CR-4, CR-5, CMH-1, CMH-2 ones: 30 square feet.
      4.   For all other zones, maximum sign area per building:
         a.   Single tenant building:
            i.   30 square feet or 1.5 square feet of area for every lineal
foot of each building frontage for two building frontages plus .5 square feet
for every lineal foot of building frontage for a third building frontage,
whichever is greater, but no more than 200 square feet for building frontages
less than or equal to 500 feet;
            ii.   For building frontages greater than 500 feet: no more than
300 square feet, on two building frontages. 150 square feet is permitted on a
third building frontage.
         b.   Multi-tenant building: Thirty square feet or 1.5 square feet for
each linear foot of building frontage up to 200 square feet per tenant for a
maximum of two building frontages.    Exception: If sign is not located on
tenant space, maximum sign area is 30 square feet each.
      5.   Maximum height: First and top stories of a multi-story building; no
projection above the roofline. Allowed on parapet walls that are structurally
integrated into the original building design; not extensions added to an
existing building.
      6.    A 25 percent increase in the area and height of a sign is allowed
if the illumination measures of the Dark Sky Protection Option in Section
18.79.100(A) are met.
      7.   May include a change of sign copy component.
      8.   May include drive-through lane signs subject to:
         a.   Maximum area: 36 square feet;
         b.   Sound emitted must not be audible from any residential property.
   I.   Window. A window sign is allowed subject to:
      1.   Location: On-site; non-residential areas only;
      2.   Maximum area per sign: No more than 30 percent of the window on
which the sign is displayed. Sign copy on a permanent window sign with letters
or symbols no more than three inches high shall not be counted as part of the
sign area allotment;
      3.   Maximum height: First and second floor building windows only;
      4.   Maximum number of illuminated signs: One per frontage and two total
per site. If illuminated, window signs shall only be internally illuminated.
(Ord. 2020-41, § 5 (part), 2020)
18.79.090   Regulations by temporary sign type.
   A.   General requirements. Temporary sign types shall not:
      1.   Interfere with the free movement of pedestrians and vehicles.
      2.   Be placed upon any other sign assembly, utility pole, authorized
traffic control device, utility box, boulder, tree, planter, or similar
structure.
      3.   Be placed in a manner that allows displacement during adverse
weather conditions and results in a safety hazard to the public.
      4.   Include amplified sound, animation, motion or attachments such as
balloons, flags, streamers, pinwheels, or ribbons.
      5.   Be illuminated other than by ambient light present on the property
or by existing illumination intended for other uses.
      6.   Be off-site, except as expressly allowed by this chapter.
      7.   Advertise off-site commercial activities, except as expressly
allowed by this chapter.
   B.   Temporary signs must be clearly labeled with the name and telephone
number of the sign owner.
   C.   Banner sign. A temporary banner sign is allowed subject to:
      1.   Location: On-site; shall be rigidly affixed at all four corners;
      2.   Maximum number per site: One per street frontage within site;
      3.   Maximum area: 60 square feet;
      4.   Maximum height: Below the roofline for building-mounted banners;
      5.   The maximum, cumulative display time for a banner sign attached to
an existing building is 90 days per calendar year with the 90 days to be
divided into no more than two time periods.
   D.   Political signs: Reference Arizona Revised Statutes.
   E.   Portable "A" and "T" - frame signs:
      1.   Location: On-site; non-residential areas only; within 30 feet of the
building entrance; a minimum four-foot horizontal clearance on sidewalks. Shall
not be permitted in parking areas, including islands and spurs, and shall have
a minimal clearance of three feet from the perimeter of parking areas;
      2.   Maximum number per site: One sign per tenant;
      3.   Maximum area: 6 square feet;
      4.   Maximum height: 3.5 feet;
      5.   Displayed typically on a daily basis. Shall be removed during the
time between close of business to the next opening of business.
   F.   Window sign. A temporary window sign is allowed subject to:
      1.   Location: On-site; first and second floor windows; not permitted on
the exterior side of windows;
      2.   Maximum area: 25 percent of window.
(Ord. 2020-41, § 5 (part), 2020)
18.79.100   Dark sky protection option and master sign program.
   A.   Dark sky protection option.
      1.   Purpose: To allow increased sign area and height and promote the use
of illumination measures to protect dark skies.
      2.   Application: Applies to conventional internally-illuminated signs
and externally-illuminated signs. Does not apply to billboard signs.
      3.   Incentives: A 25 percent increase in the area and height of a sign
is allowed subject to meeting the requirements of this section. Submittals are
reviewed by and subject to approval, approval with conditions, or denial by the
planning official.
      4.   Illumination measures. In addition to meeting the Outdoor Lighting
Code, a sign shall meet the following:
         a.   An illuminated sign shall be turned off by 9 PM;
         b.   Only the sign copy shall be illuminated;
         c.   A maximum correlated color temperature (CCT) of 3000K for the
illumination source;
         d.   A maximum luminous intensity of 100 nits (candela per square
meter).
         e.   Externally illuminated signs:
            i.   Full shielding of luminaires;
            ii.   Top-down illumination only;
            iii.   Light trespass onto any other property prohibited;
            iv.   Sign surface contains all of the light;
         f.   Conventional internally illuminated signs: Light text on dark
backgrounds only, where "dark" does not include white, off-white, light gray,
cream or yellow colors.
   B.   Master sign program.
      1.   Purpose:
         a.   To allow flexibility in the standard provisions of this chapter
to respond to a special need, event, or activity in exchange for better design
while still meeting the general intent of the chapter;
         b.   To promote:
            i.   A unifying, consistent and aesthetic design theme in the form
of architectural style, shapes, textures, colors and materials used on a scale
from an individual lot to a development complex;
            ii.   A well-organized visual environment with signs located and
spaced or grouped together to reduce a disorganized appearance and improve the
appearance of affected street frontage;
            iii.   Proportionality in sign area and height to integrate with
the buildings, architecture, and landscape of the site;
            iv.   The use of high quality materials.
         c.   To protect Dark Skies through the use of illumination measures
(Section
18.79.100(A)(4));
         d.   To maintain sign legibility and promote traffic and pedestrian
safety;
         e.   To avoid obstructing significant scenic views from the right-of-
way.
      2.   Application. The Master Sign Program may apply to:
         a.   On-site signs;
         b.   Off-site signs equal or less than 32 square feet in sign area
including any signs in the right-of-way.
   The program does not apply to billboards, off-site signs that exceed 32
square feet in sign area, or sign types not otherwise allowed by the chapter.
The program applies to Tier 1 and Tier 2 requests according to Section
18.79.100(B)(3) below. One application per site or project shall be submitted.
      3.   Review.
         a.   The Planning Official may review and decide, according to the
purpose statements of Sections
18.79.010 and
18.79.100(B), Tier 1 requests which include:
            i.   Allowing off-site signs equal or less than 32 square feet in
sign area;
            ii.   Increasing the number of signs on a site by 10 percent or
less;
            iii.   Increasing the maximum sign area per site by 10 percent or
less;
            iv.   Allowing a variation of 10 percent or less in the location of
signs on a site; or,
            v.   Allowing a variation of 10 percent in the time period that
signs may be displayed on a site.
   The planning official may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
request based on this section. The applicant may appeal the decision by the
planning official to the Board of Supervisors.
         b.   The Design Review Committee may review and decide, according to
the purpose statements of Sections
18.79.010 and
18.79.100(B), Tier 2 requests which include:
            i.   Increasing the number of signs on a site by a maximum of 25
percent;
            ii.   Increasing the sign area per site by a maximum of 25 percent;
            iii.   Allowing a variation in the location of signs by a maximum
of 25 percent;
            iv.   Allowing a variation in the time period signs may be
displayed on a site to a maximum of 25 percent, and,
            v.   Increasing the maximum height of a sign per site by a maximum
of 25 percent.
   The Design Review Committee may approve, approve with conditions, or deny
the request based on this section. The applicant may appeal the decision by the
Design Review Committee to the Board of Supervisors.
      4.   The applicant shall submit a complete master sign program request
according to departmental requirements and fees.
      5.   If a sign is proposed for location within the right-of-way, review
and approval by the Pima County Department of Transportation shall be required.
      6.   Written permission by the property owner for any sign on private
property shall be required.
      7.   Each sign must be clearly labeled with the permit number and the
name and contact information of the sign permit applicant.
(Ord. 2020-41, § 5 (part), 2020)
Chapter 18.81
GRADING STANDARDS
18.81.010   Purpose and interpretation.
18.81.020   Applicability and exemptions.
18.81.030   Definitions.
18.81.040   General grading performance standards.
18.81.050   Submittals and procedures: Type 1 (grading sketch).
18.81.060   Submittals and procedures: Type 2 (grading plan).
18.81.070   Inspections and performance defaults.
18.81.080   Enforcement and penalties.
18.81.090   Administrative modification.
18.81.100   Waivers and interpretation review.
18.81.110   Illustrations.
18.81.010   Purpose and interpretation.
   A.   Purpose:
      1.   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety,
general welfare, and aesthetics by regulating grading (including initial
clearing, brushing or grubbing, and subsequent excavating or filling) on
private and public land, including county-owned land, within the unincorporated
area of Pima County.
      2.   It establishes grading standards designed to:
         a.   Regulate the development of potentially hazardous terrain;
         b.   Conserve the general visual character of grading sites and
settings;
         c.   Enhance the value of new development; and
         d.   Conserve the value of existing, affected properties.
      3.   The guidelines and standards of this chapter and the grading design
manual have been prepared in the context of Pima County's specific desert
environment. They are intended to complement the applicable provisions of
Chapter 18.61 (Hillside Development Overlay Zone) and the Floodplain Management
Ordinance, and not to authorize any grading activity prohibited by this chapter
or any county ordinance.
   B.   Interpretation:
      1.   This section shall be used as a guide whenever a conflict arises in
the interpretation or enforcement of this chapter. The design, implementation
and mitigation of grading regulated by this chapter (refer to Section
18.81.020) shall be reviewed prior to the issuance of any grading permit, to
ensure compliance with the guidelines of this section and the specific
standards and requirements of this chapter.
      2.   The design and implementation of all grading shall:
         a.   Minimize scars and other adverse visual impacts resulting from
cut and fill;
         b.   Blend with the natural contours of the land;
         c.   Conserve the natural scenic beauty and vegetation of the site;
         d.   Be for purposes other than enabling buildings to penetrate the
building height contour line; and
         e.   Restrict the areas and volumes to the minimum necessary to
implement the planned development.
      3.   In all grading projects, measures shall be taken to:
         a.   Ensure that graded hillside, slopes or other areas subject to
erosion are stabilized;
         b.   Reduce the erosion effects of stormwater discharge, preserve the
flood-carrying capacity of natural or constructed waterways by limiting soil
loss, and protect drainageways from siltation;
         c.   Minimize dust pollution and surface water drainage from graded
areas during grading and development; and
         d.   Ensure that development activity is designed and implemented to
minimize adverse impacts and include appropriate restorative measures.
(Ord. 1986-187 § 1 (part), 1986)
18.81.020   Applicability and exemptions.
   A.   Scope:
      1.   All development projects shall require a Type 1 or Type 2 grading
permit, except as exempted in subsection D of this section. In general, small
private grading operations do not require a grading permit; major grading for
custom home development requires a Type 1 permit, and general grading for
larger development projects requires a Type 2 permit.
      2.   County development project shall abide by the requirements of
Section
18.41.040, general grading performance standards, of this chapter. The board of
supervisors may grant a special exception at a public hearing to a requirement
of said section for a county development project.
   B.   Type 1 (grading sketch) permit applicability: A Type 1 grading permit
is required for:
      1.   Single dwelling residential development on a single lot with a
development envelope of fourteen thousand square feet or greater.
      2.   Nonresidential development which does not require a subdivision plat
or development plan.
      3.   Stockpiling of between one hundred cubic yards and fifty thousand
cubic yards of material.
      4.   Grading which requires a permanent cut or fill slope greater than
five feet in height and steeper than a 3:1 slope, or grading on slopes of
fifteen percent or greater.
   C.   Type 2 (grading plan) permit applicability: A Type 2 grading permit is
required for:
      1.   Residential development which requires a subdivision plat or
development plan.
      2.   Nonresidential development which requires a subdivision plat or
development plan.
      3.   Stockpiling of more than fifty thousand cubic yards of material.
   D.   Exemptions: The following activities are exempted from this chapter:
      1.   Residential development on a single lot, with a development envelope
of less than fourteen thousand square feet;
      2.   The subsequent expansion, by less than twenty-five percent and not
violating the spirit of this chapter, of an exempted or approved graded area;
      3.   The clearing, brushing or grubbing of an area of less than fourteen
thousand square feet or for activities exempted in this subsection;
      4.   Stockpiling of less than one hundred cubic yards of material;
      5.   Resurfacing or maintenance of an existing paved surface;
      6.   New pavement of less than three thousand square feet;
      7.   Individual sewage disposal system with a county health department
permit;
      8.   Excavation below finished grade for a basement, foundation, wall, or
swimming pool authorized by a building permit or zoning construction permit
(refer to Section
18.01.030(E), General Provisions);
      9.   Cemetery graves;
      10.   Refuse disposal site controlled by other regulations;
      11.   Exploratory excavation under the direction of a soil engineer or
engineering geologist, provided all excavation is properly backfilled;
      12.   Archaeological exploration conducted under state permit by a
qualified archaeologist;
      13.   Removal of selected individual plants for storage and replanting;
      14.   Underground utility installations under a paved roadway surface or
a continuously-maintained unpaved roadway surface;
      15.   Grading for the maintenance of an existing private access road or
driveway, provided that if either existed prior to adoption of, or was
established in conformance with, this chapter. Proof of such may be required by
the county engineer;
      16.   Grading for an appurtenant access or utility easement;
      17.   Land uses under statutory exemption (refer to Section
18.01.030(C), General Provisions).
(Ord. 2011-2 § 20 (part), 2011; Ord. 1990-61 § 1 (part), 1990; Ord. 1986-187 §
1 (part), 1986)
18.81.030   Definitions.
   A.   General usage: The definition and usage of terms in this chapter are as
contained within this code, except that the definition and usage of terms
describing drainage are as contained within the county Floodplain Management
Ordinance.
   B.   Definitions: For purposes of this chapter only, the following words and
terms shall mean:
      1.   Access road: A road within one mile of the grading side, designated
on the approved grading plan, and used, during grading, for the transport of
grading equipment, hauling of fill and other equivalent vehicular traffic to
and from the grading site.
      2.   Approval: Written notice by the county engineer approving the
design, progress or completion of work.
      3.   Approved plan: The most current grading sketch or grading plan which
bears the authorized signature of approval of the county engineer.
      4.   Approved testing agency: A facility which is equipped to perform and
certify the tests required by this chapter and whose testing operations are
controlled and monitored by a civil engineer.
      5.   Borrow: Earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in
grading a site.
      6.   Brushing: The selective removal of vegetation.
      7.   Building height contour line: A contour elevation line set at the
existing grade elevation, plus the maximum building height permitted by site
rezoning conditions or this code and fifty percent of the additional height
added by permitted fill. Refer to Illustration 18.81-1 (Section
18.81.110).
      8.   Clearing: The substantial removal of vegetation.
      9.   Envelope, building:
         a.   A dwelling unit and all attached roofed structures, including
carports or patio ramadas;
         b.   For nonresidential development, the building envelope shall be
the main building and all attached roofed structures.
      10.   Envelope, development: The sum of the areas of the permit holder's
land to be graded, including the building envelope, accessory buildings, and
areas of related parking, driveways, swimming pools, walls and other accessory
structures, but excluding individual sewage disposal systems.
      11.   Erosion: The wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the
movement of wind, water or ice.
      12.   Excavation: The artificial (i.e., mechanical, manual, blasting or
other such) means for removal of earth material.
      13.   Final inspection: Field inspection conducted by the county engineer
prior to project acceptance or release of assurances (if required).
      14.   Grade: The vertical location of the ground surface.
      15.   Grade, existing: The actual, current ground surface as of the date
of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
      16.   Grade, finished: The final grade conforming to the approved grading
sketch or plan.
      17.   Grade, rough: The stage at which grading substantially conforms
with the approved grading sketch or plan.
      18.   Grading: The clearing, brushing, grubbing, excavating, or filling
of a site.
      19.   Grading permit: An official document issued by the county engineer
authorizing the grading activity specified by the grading permit conditions.
      20.   Grading permit conditions: The specifications and requirements of
the approved grading sketch or grading plan, grading statement, soils report or
other documents necessary for grading permit approval.
      21.   Grubbing: The removal of trees and other large plants by their
roots.
      22.   Inspector: A person authorized by the county engineer or building
official to perform inspection on grading work.
      23.   Retaining wall: A wall designed to withstand lateral and
hydrostatic pressures and built to keep earth from sliding, and which is two
feet or greater in height from the lowest point of earth at the foundation to
the top of the wall.
      24.   Revegetation: Placement of living plant material on sites or cut
and fill slopes where the natural vegetation has been removed.
      25.   Site: Any lot or parcel of land, or contiguous combination of lots
and parcels under the same ownership or unified control, where grading is to be
performed.
      26.   Slope: An inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is
expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance (refer to
Illustration 18.81-2, Section
18.81.110).
      27.   Soil: Naturally occurring deposits overlying bedrock.
      28.   Stabilization: Treatment with mitigation measures in accordance
with the grading design manual, and approved by the county engineer that
contribute to the erosion or siltation resistance, or the structural strength,
of a graded area.
      29.   Stockpile: The storage of uncompacted earth material.
(Ord. 1998-50 § 2, 1998; Ord. 1990-61 § 1 (part), 1990; Ord. 1986-187 § 1
(part), 1986)
18.81.040   General grading performance standards.
   A.   Scope:
      1.   The performance standards of this section are general grading
performance requirements. A companion grading design manual elaborates minimum
performance standards referenced by this section and includes nonregulatory
guidelines for superior grading performance.
      2.   The grading design manual shall be adopted and amended in accordance
with Section
18.01.070 (General Provisions).* The commission may hold the preliminary and
public hearings concurrently. The technical review committee (refer to Section
18.99.040, Review Committees) shall provide a recommendation prior to
commission public hearing.
   B.   Site revegetation and stabilization: All graded areas except those to
be used for agriculture or livestock purposes, not revegetated, stabilized or
constructed on upon expiration of the grading permit shall be revegetated or
stabilized within sixty days of permit expiration in accordance with the
grading design manual, and furthermore, in cases where the purpose of the
grading permit is not met, shall be designed to restore the native vegetative
community.
   C.   Slopes: All exposed cut or fill slopes shall be revegetated or
stabilized in accordance with the grading design manual and the approved
grading sketch or plan.
   D.   Terracing: Terracing to control surface drainage and debris on cut or
fill slopes may be required in accordance with the grading design manual. The
width of a terrace shall be a minimum of six feet.
   E.   Fill: Fill shall be compacted and soil tested in accordance with the
grading design manual.
   F.   Setbacks: The following setbacks shall be increased by the county
engineer if considered necessary for safety or stability, or to prevent
possible damage from water, soil or debris:
      1.   Top of Cut Slope: The top of cut slopes shall be made not nearer to
a site boundary line than one fifty of the vertical height of cut, with a
minimum of two feet and a maximum of ten feet. The setback may need to be
increased for any required interceptor drains.
      2.   Toe of Fill Slope: The toe of fill slope shall be made not nearer to
the site boundary line than one-half the height of the slope, with a minimum of
two feet and a maximum of twenty feet.
      3.   Buildings: Buildings shall be set back from the toe and top of
slopes in accordance with the county building codes (Title 15), Illustration
18.81-3 in Section
18.81.110 or the approved soils report. This shall not reduce the required
building setback from property line.
      4.   Rights-of-way: The required setback of a slope toe adjacent to a
public right-of-way may be reduced with the approval of the county engineer, if
there will be no adverse effect and:
         a.   Easements are not required; or
         b.   Retaining walls are used.
   G.   Building height: The finished grade and building pads shall be
established so that the maximum building height shall not exceed the building
height contour line (refer to Illustration 18.81-1, Section
18.81.110).
   H.   Drainage control systems:
      1.   Permanent systems:
         a.   Erosion control shall be constructed and maintained to prevent
erosion of slopes, and cleared, brushed, grubbed or graded areas, in accordance
with the grading design manual.
         b.   Where cut slopes are not subject to erosion due to the erosion-
resistant character of the native materials, erosion control may be omitted
upon approval by the county engineer.
         c.   Erosion control devices to prevent erosion or sediment deposition
on off-site property may be required in accordance with the grading design
manual.
         d.   The shoulders of a paved public or private roadway shall be
protected against erosion wherever curbing or constructed spillways are not
provided, in accordance with the Grading Design Manual.
         e.   Surface drainage:
            1)   Cut and fill slopes shall be provided with approved surface
drainage for stability and erosion protection of affected properties in
accordance with the Grading Design Manual;
            2)   Surface drainage interceptors shall be provided at the top of
cut and fill slopes where there is surface runoff and erosion potential in
accordance with the Grading Design Manual;
            3)   Drainage slopes to protect foundations shall be provided in
accordance with the Grading Design Manual.
         f.   Subsurface drainage: Subsurface drainage for stability and
protection of affected properties from ground water seepage may be required in
accordance with the Grading Design Manual.
      2.   Interim systems: Interim drainage control systems shall be provided
in accordance with the Grading Design Manual.
   I.   Import and export of earth material:
      1.   Loading of earth material shall occur only within the time limits of
subsection J of this section, and dust palliatives shall be applied in
accordance with the Grading Design Manual.
      2.   The transportation of earth material on public rights-of-way shall
be in a manner that minimizes blowing soil and other hazards.
   J.   Hours of grading:
      1.   Grading equipment operation within one-half mile of a structure
occupied by humans shall not be conducted between sunset and seven a.m.
      2.   Normal equipment maintenance involving lights, motors or generators,
and occurring within six hundred feet of a structure occupied by humans, shall
not be conducted between nine p.m. and seven a.m.
      3.   The county engineer may allow grading equipment operation or
maintenance during other hours if such operations are not detrimental to the
health, safety or welfare of the inhabitants of the structure.
      4.   Permitted hours of operation or maintenance may be shortened by
written notice, if the county engineer finds a substantial adverse effect on
the health, safety or welfare of the surrounding community.
   K.   Restriction of vehicles:
      1.   No vehicles shall be driven over "natural open space areas," as
designated on the approved grading sketch or grading plan.
      2.   Points-of-entry to the site during grading shall be only as
designated on the approved grading sketch or grading plan.
      3.   For Type 2 permits, access roads to the site during grading shall be
only as designated on the approved grading plan.
   L.   Additional requirements:
      1.   During grading, and until revegetation or stabilization has taken
place, dust shall be minimized through application of approved dust controls in
accordance with the Grading Design Manual.
      2.   Public rights-of-way, sidewalks and other improvements shall be
maintained during grading in a neat and clean condition, free of loose soil,
construction debris and trash.
      3.   Debris, fill or equipment shall not be stored within a public right-
of-way without the written approval of the county engineer.
      4.   Cut or fill material in excess of that allowed by the grading permit
shall be disposed of in accordance with the Grading Design Manual.
(Ord. 1990-61 § 1 (part), 1990; Ord. 1986-187 § 1 (part), 1986)
* Editor's note: Section 2 of Ordinance No. 1990-61 states as follows: "The
Grading Design Manual, which is attached to and incorporated in this ordinance
as Exhibit A, and which contains technical requirements for grading, is hereby
adopted and shall have all of the force and authority of an ordinance. The
Grading Design Manual shall not be published as a part of the Pima County
Zoning Code, but shall be published as a separate booklet."
18.81.050   Submittals and procedures: Type 1 (grading sketch).
   A.   Scope: A Type 1 application for a grading permit requires a completed
grading permit application, grading sketch and grading statement. A survey
sealed by a registered land surveyor is not required.
   B.   Grading sketch requirements:
      1.   The existing and proposed finished grade of the area to be graded,
based on spot elevations or two-foot contour interval maps;
      2.   The extent of graded areas, shaded and labeled "graded area," and,
where structures are to be constructed:
         a.   The existing grade at the primary building corners and proposed
finished floor elevations; and
         b.   The proposed building heights, shown to conform to the building
height contour line requirements;
      3.   The location of proposed mitigative measures, such as revegetation
or retaining walls;
      4.   The exterior boundaries of the site;
      5.   Access roads and points-of-entry to the grading site.
   C.   Grading statement: A written grading statement shall be submitted with
an application for a grading permit. The statement shall include, where
applicable:
      1.   A description of stabilization, erosion and drainage control
measures;
      2.   The off-site disposal location and estimated quantity of earth
material and vegetation to be removed from the site during grading;
      3.   Estimated starting and completion dates;
      4.   A description of the dust control method to be used during grading
and until revegetation or stabilization has been completed.
   D.   Documents preparation:
      1.   Documents shall be prepared in accordance with the Grading Design
Manual; and
      2.   Information shall conform with rezoning conditions (when applicable
and shall be consistent with the rezoning site analysis (refer to Section
18.91.030(F), Rezoning Procedures) and other applicable regulations.
   E.   Application:
      1.   The grading permit application, grading sketch and other required
materials shall be submitted for review to the central permits division of the
county planning and development services department.
      2.   When desired, a letter of intent to exercise the inspection
certification option (refer to Section
18.81.070B) shall be submitted with the application.
      3.   The grading permit application shall be completed and signed by the
owner or authorized representative.
      4.   Fees are payable to the county treasurer in accordance with the fees
schedule adopted by county ordinance.
   F.   Application review:
      1.   The grading sketch and statement shall be reviewed for consistency
with applicable regulations and standards, and, if approved, a grading permit
shall be issued within five working days of application.
      2.   If determined inadequate, the application shall be returned within
five working days and the owner may resubmit, without additional fees, an
amended grading sketch or statement.
      3.   The county engineer shall require that plans and specifications be
modified to make them consistent with this code or other applicable
regulations. A grading permit may be issued with additional conditions.
   G.   Grading permit issuance and expiration:
      1.   Issuance: Grading permits are issued by the county engineer. A copy
of the grading permit and approved grading sketch shall be kept in an easily
accessible location on the site.
      2.   Expiration: A grading permit shall be null and void if the
authorized work has not been completed within one year of permit issuance.
   H.   Grading permit extension and reapplication:
      1.   Extensions: Upon written request by the permit holder, the county
engineer may approve a single one-hundred-eighty-day time extension of a
grading permit.
      2.   Reapplication: Reapplication for a grading permit may be made in
accordance with this chapter. Assurances of additional conditions may be
imposed by the county engineer on a permit, as a consequence of reapplication.
   I.   Changes to grading permit:
      1.   Hazardous conditions: If drainage problems, flood hazards or other
hazards occur that were not considered at the time the permit was issued, the
county engineer shall require that any substantial engineering modifications be
submitted in a report and that the grading design be modified.
      2.   Nonhazardous conditions: If unanticipated nonhazardous conditions
are encountered during grading and are beyond the scope of the grading permit,
the permit holder may submit the necessary engineering modifications in a
report to be reviewed and approved by the county engineer.
(Ord. 1990-61 § 1 (part), 1990; Ord. 1986-187 § 1 (part), 1986)
18.81.060   Submittals and procedures: Type 2 (grading plan).
   A.   Scope: A Type 2 application for a grading permit requires a completed
grading permit application, grading plan, grading statement and soils report.
Where applicable and not otherwise submitted, drainage improvement plans shall
be required also.
   B.   Grading plans requirements:
      1.   The existing and proposed finished grade contours, or sufficient
spot elevations (except as amended in subdivision 2 of this subsection) of the
area to be graded, at a minimum of two-foot contour intervals for slopes up to
fifteen percent. Slopes over fifteen percent shall be shown in accordance with
Chapter 18.61 (Hillside Development Overlay Zone).
      2.   The extent of graded areas, shaded and labeled "graded area," and,
where structures are to be constructed:
         a.   Spot elevations may be shown for the finished grade within the
building envelope;
         b.   All building pads, showing the existing grade at the primary
building corners and proposed finished floor elevations; and
         c.   The proposed building heights, shown to conform to the building
height contour line requirements.
      3.   The general topography for one hundred feet, or as specified by the
county engineer, outward from sites greater than five acres; the county
engineer may determine that such information is necessary for smaller sites.
      4.   A description of the mitigation methods, specifying elevations,
dimensions, quantities and locations, to be used during grading and until
revegetation or stabilization has been completed.
      5.   The exterior boundaries of the site, the basis of bearing and a
benchmark to establish the vertical datum.
      6.   The extent and manner of preserving, relocating, clearing and
disposing of vegetation.
      7.   The final ground cover, revegetation (if any), erosion control and
proposed methods for cut or fill stabilization, based upon the soils report
(refer to subsection C of this section).
      8.   Access roads, haul routes and points-of-entry to the grading site.
      9.   Where drainage improvement plans have not been submitted separately
or where interim drainage conditions exist because of project phasing, plans
for:
         a.   Drainage or other protective devices to be constructed as part of
the grading;
         b.   The drainage area and estimated runoff of the area served by
drains.
      10.   A general description of potential paleontological, archaeological
or historical resources, and proposed mitigation measures from a qualified
archaeologist or archaeological institute.
      11.   The off-site disposal location and estimated quantity of earth
material to be removed from the site during grading.
      12.   Estimated starting and completion dates for each grading phase.
      13.   For superior project design and grading performance, it is
encouraged that the project designer prepare for project design use an existing
site inventory, identifying and quantifying vegetation, soils, on- and off-site
viewshed constraints, slope analysis and drainage.
   C.   Grading Statement: Refer to Section
18.81.050C.
   D.   Soils report:
      1.   The report shall contain all geotechnical engineering information
and recommendations applicable to the project, in accordance with the Grading
Design Manual, and shall be sealed by the soils engineer prior to submittal.
      2.   The civil engineer or qualified registrant responsible for preparing
the grading plan shall incorporate all report recommendations into the plan and
statement.
      3.   Approved report recommendations shall become conditions of the
grading permit.
      4.   The civil engineer or soils engineer of the developer shall be
required to provide written certification to the building official that the
foundation sub-base requirements have been met.
   E.   Documents preparation:
      1.   Documents shall be prepared in accordance with the Grading Design
Manual.
      2.   Information shall conform with rezoning conditions (when applicable)
and shall be consistent with the rezoning site analysis (refer to Section
18.91.030F, Rezoning Procedures) and other applicable regulations.
      3.   Grading plan preparation: The plan shall be prepared by, or under
the direction of, a civil engineer or qualified registrant (who may consult
with, or submit information in conjunction with, a landscape architect or other
qualified person with expert knowledge of the subject).
   F.   Application:
      1.   The grading permit application, grading plan and other required
materials shall be submitted to the county department of transportation for
distribution to the applicable county review agencies.
      2.   When desired, a letter of intent to exercise the inspection
certification option (refer to Section
18.81.070B) shall be submitted with the application.
      3.   The grading permit application shall be completed and signed by the
owner or authorized representative.
      4.   Fees are payable to the county treasurer in accordance with the fees
schedule adopted by county ordinance.
      5.   At the discretion of the county engineer, grading assurances may be
required in the form of a performance bond or other security acceptable to the
county engineer. The assurances shall be applied only to:
         a.   Eliminate potential hazardous conditions; or
         b.   Mitigate the effects of dust, drainage, erosion, visual scars or
hazardous conditions, in accordance with the Grading Design Manual;
   G.   Application review:
      1.   Grading plans and related submittals shall be reviewed concurrent
with the tentative plat or development plan review process for the project;
      2.   Plans and reports shall be reviewed for consistency with applicable
regulations and standards, and the approved rezoning site analysis (if
required). If determined inadequate, they shall be returned within five working
days.
      3.   Written review comments shall be provided to the applicant within
twenty working days for the first submittal, and within five working days of
each resubmittal, until approved and permits issued.
      4.   Prior to approval of the grading plan, the county engineer shall
inspect the site to determine that the submittals are current and reflect
existing conditions.
   H.   Preliminary grading:
      1.   Preliminary grading approval: A preliminary grading permit for
clearing, brushing, grubbing, preliminary excavation or filling may be issued
in special circumstances at the discretion of the county engineer, provided:
         a.   The county engineer finds that the proposed grading is consistent
with this chapter and code;
         b.   The county engineer finds that the proposed grading will not have
an adverse effect on the existing site and surrounding area;
         c.   Preliminary grading shall occur in accordance with an approved
preliminary grading plan, and shall occur no less than twenty feet from the
boundaries of the future development envelope, exclusive of approved points-of-
entry; and
         d.   Preliminary grading assurances have been provided in accordance
with subdivision 2 of this subsection.
      2.   Preliminary grading assurances:
         a.   When approval has been granted for preliminary grading, grading
assurances shall be posted in an amount not to exceed the approved preliminary
grading cost estimate made by a civil engineer;
         b.   The assurances shall be applied only to:
            1)   Eliminate potential hazardous conditions; or
            2)   Mitigate the effects of dust, drainage, erosion, visual scars
or hazardous conditions, in accordance with the Grading Design Manual;
         c.   The assurances shall be released by the county when the
preliminary grading has been inspected and received the written approval of the
county engineer. Final approval of a grading permit shall not require the
release of the assurances in the event of preliminary grading noncompliance.
   I.   Grading permit issuance and expiration:
      1.   Issuance: Grading permits shall be issued by the county engineer no
earlier than at the time of written staff approval of the tentative subdivision
plat or development plan. A copy of the grading permit and approved grading
plan shall be kept in an easily accessible location on the site.
      2.   Expiration: A grading permit shall be null and void if the
authorized work has not been completed within one year of permit issuance.
   J.   Grading permit extension and reapplication:
      1.   Extensions: Upon written request by the permit holder, the county
engineer may approve a single one-hundred-eighty-day time extension of a
grading permit.
      2.   Reapplication: Reapplication for a grading permit may be made in
accordance with this chapter. Assurances or additional conditions may be
imposed by the county engineer on a permit, as a consequence of reapplication.
   K.   Changes to grading permit:
      1.   Hazardous Conditions: If drainage problems, flood hazards or other
hazards occur that were not considered at the time the permit was issued, the
county engineer shall require that any substantial engineering modifications be
submitted in a report and that the grading design be modified.
      2.   Nonhazardous conditions: If unanticipated nonhazardous conditions
are encountered during grading and are beyond the scope of the grading permit,
the permit holder may submit the necessary engineering modifications in a
report to be reviewed and approved by the county engineer.
(Ord. 1990-61 § 1 (part), 1990; Ord. 1986-187 § 1 (part), 1986)
18.81.070   Inspections and performance defaults.
   A.   General inspections:
      1.   All grading which requires a permit shall be inspected by the county
engineer in accordance with the grading permit:
         a.   The inspection schedule shall be prepared in accordance with the
Grading Design Manual. Fees shall be based on the inspection schedule and
payable to the county treasurer in accordance with the fees schedule adopted by
county ordinance.
         b.   The permit holder shall provide notification twenty-four hours
prior to an inspection request, or as specified on the grading permit;
         c.   The county shall provide an inspector within two working days of
the requested time.
      2.   If the county engineer finds site conditions are not as stated in
the approved grading permit conditions, the county engineer may order work
authorized by the grading permit to stop until a revised grading sketch or plan
has been approved.
      3.   Whenever grading work requiring county inspection is concealed by
additional work without first having been inspected, the county engineer may
require, by written notice, that such work be:
         a.   Exposed, for inspection by the county; or
         b.   Certified by the project civil engineer as being in conformance
with applicable regulations.
   B.   Inspection certification option:
      1.   The owner may retain a civil engineer to:
         a.   Perform the required grading construction inspections; and
         b.   Certify, upon notification of completion, that grading has been
performed in conformance with approved plans and permit conditions.
      2.   The owner shall submit a letter of intent to invoke the
certification option, which shall include a written agreement of certification
responsibility from a civil engineer, with the grading permit application.
      3.   Inspection fees are waived, with the exception of the final grading
inspection fee.
      4.   The civil engineer shall maintain project logs and records
consistent with accepted engineering practice for a minimum of three years
after project completion.
      5.   The county engineer may periodically inspect the grading to
determine that adequate control is being exercised by the civil engineer.
      6.   The county engineer shall conduct a final inspection and the owner
shall be liable for any corrective action deemed necessary.
   C.   Final inspection of rough grade:
      1.   All rough grading shall be completed in accordance with the grading
permit prior to final rough grade inspection by the county engineer.
      2.   The final inspection shall be conducted by the county engineer prior
to issuance of a certificate of substantial grading conformance or release of
grading assurances (if required). The permit holder shall provide a minimum of
twenty-four hours' notice to the county engineer when any phase of rough
grading is ready for final inspection.
      3.   The county engineer may approve completed rough grading prior to
completion of related work in cases of extreme hardship or where grading has
been designed to be completed in phases, provided that no hazards exist and a
performance bond has been posted to ensure completion of remaining grading work
of that phase.
      4.   The soil report and certification of sub-base requirements shall be
submitted to the building official prior to any foundation inspections.
   D.   Final grading inspection:
      1.   All required grading work shall be completed in accordance with the
grading permit prior to final grading inspection by the county engineer and
issuance of a certificate of final grading approval.
      2.   Where the conditions of a grading permit include the establishment
of vegetation or other final site grading work that extends beyond the
expiration of the grading permit, the county engineer shall make a post-grading
inspection within six months of permit expiration or as required by the grading
permit.
   E.   Maintenance of revegetation: The maintenance of revegetated graded
areas shall be in accordance with Section
18.73.080 (Landscaping, Buffering and Screening Standards).
(Ord. 1990-61 § 1 (part), 1990; Ord. 1986-187 § 1 (part), 1986)
18.81.080   Enforcement and penalties.
   A.   Grading permit enforcement:
      1.   The enforcement of this chapter and conditions of the grading permit
shall be in accordance with this section and
Chapter 18.95 (Compliance and Enforcement).
      2.   When the county engineer determines a substantial noncompliance with
the conditions of the grading permit, the county engineer shall issue a stop-
work order and hold in abeyance, by written notice, the county review of other
submittals related to the development project and the issuance of county
permits for any aspect of the development project until remedial actions have
received the written approval of the county engineer.
   B.   Stop-work orders:
      1.   Whenever the county engineer determines that grading does not comply
with this chapter or the grading permit conditions, or that the soil or
conditions are not as stated on the permit, the county engineer may order the
work stopped by written notice served on any person engaged in doing or causing
such work to be done.
      2.   Any such person shall immediately stop such work until authorized by
the county engineer to proceed with the work.
   C.   Penalties:
      1.   Failure to obtain grading permit: Unless exempted by this chapter
(refer to Section
18.81.020(D)), failure to obtain a grading permit prior to commencement of
grading shall be a violation of this code. However, the county engineer may
issue an exception permit if the county engineer finds that an emergency
existed which made it impossible first to obtain a permit.
      2.   Violations: A violation shall result in issuance of a stop-work
order and penalties in accordance with Section
18.95.040 (Compliance and Enforcement). Payment of a fine shall not relieve any
person from complying with the requirements of this chapter.
   D.   Special Investigation and Special Investigation Fee; Work without a
Permit.
      1.   Special Investigation. Whenever work for which a grading permit is
required is done without a grading permit, a special investigation shall be
made by the development services department before a grading permit may be
issued to determine whether to allow such grading to remain without remediation
and to confer retroactive approval. In the event the special investigation
determines that remediation is required, it may be made a condition of the
issuance of a grading permit and may be required even if the application for a
grading permit is denied.
      2.   Special Investigation Fee. The development services department shall
assess a special investigation fee in accordance with the development services
fee schedule, in addition to the permit fee, whether or not a permit is then or
subsequently issued. Payment of the special investigation fee is required prior
to the issuance of a grading permit or any other permit for the property on
which the special investigation fee is assessed. The payment of the special
investigation fee shall not exempt the property on which the special
investigation fee is assessed from compliance with all other provisions of this
code nor from any penalty prescribed by law.
(Ord. 2011-2 § 20 (part), 2011; Ord. 2001-167 1, 2001; Ord. 1986-187 § 1
(part), 1986)
18.81.090   Administrative modification.
   A.   Quantifiable requirements of Section
18.81.020(B) Type 1 (grading sketch) permit applicability, Section
18.81.040 general grading performance standards, and Section 005 grading
mitigation on the Grading Design Manual, may be modified up to a maximum of
twenty percent by the county engineer when it is demonstrated that an unusual
site or use condition exists and when such adjustment will not result in a
danger to persons or property.
   B.   In determining whether to grant the adjustment, the county engineer
shall follow the board of adjustment standards for granting variances set forth
in Section
18.93.030(B), and enumerated below:
      1.   The strict application of the provision would work an unnecessary
hardship;
      2.   The unnecessary hardship arises from a physical condition that is
unusual or peculiar to the property and is not generally caused to other
properties in the zone;
      3.   The unnecessary hardship does not arise from a condition created by
an action of the owner of the property;
      4.   The variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief;
      5.   The variance does not allow a use which is not permitted in the zone
by the code;
      6.   The variance is not granted solely to increase economic return from
the property;
      7.   The variance will not cause injury to or adversely affect the rights
of surrounding property owners and residents;
      8.   The variance is in harmony with the general intent and purposes of
the code and the provision from which the variance is requested;
      9.   The variance does not violate state law or other provisions of Pima
County ordinances;
      10.   No condition attached to the variance by the board is personal to
the appellant.
(Ord. 1990-61 § 1 (part), 1990)
18.81.100   Waivers and interpretation review.
   A.   Waivers:
      1.   Scope: A waiver from a provision of this chapter may be granted by
the technical review committee (refer to Section
18.99.040, Review Committees) when the strict application of the provision
would require work by the permit holder detrimental to the purposes of this
chapter and cause an unnecessary hardship which substantially limits the
preservation and enjoyment of property rights.
      2.   Standards: A waiver shall not be granted unless:
         a.   The hardship is not generally caused to other properties subject
to the provision;
         b.   The waiver is the minimum necessary to afford relief;
         c.   The waiver will not be materially detrimental to the rights of
owners and residents of other affected properties; and
         d.   The waiver is in harmony with the intent and purposes of this
code and the provision of this chapter from which the waiver is requested.
      3.   Conditions: Conditions may be imposed on a waiver that will:
         a.   Secure the intent and purposes of this code and the provision of
this chapter from which the waiver is granted; and
         b.   Provide adequately for the protection of surrounding property
owners and residents.
      4.   Application: The request for waiver shall be made on a form provided
by the planning and development service department and shall be heard within
sixty days. Hearing fees shall be required.
      5.   Review and notice: The committee shall hold a hearing on the waiver
request and, within five working days, notice of the decision shall be mailed
to all property owners within three hundred feet of the grading site. Failure
to provide notice shall not invalidate an action of the committee.
      6.   Appeal: A decision of the committee may be appealed within fifteen
days of the decision to the board of adjustment in accordance with
Chapter 18.93.
   B.   Interpretation review:
      1.   Scope: Upon request by an affected person who believes there has
been a misinterpretation, the technical review committee shall review an
interpretation of a provision of this chapter made by a county official.
      2.   The request for review shall cite:
         a.   The disputed interpretation made by the county official; and
         b.   The words alleged to have been misinterpreted.
      3.   Application: The request shall be made on a form provided by the
planning and development services department and shall be heard within sixty
days. Hearing fees shall be required.
      4.   Review and notice: The committee shall hold a hearing on the waiver
request and, within five working days, notice of the decision shall be mailed
to all property owners within three hundred feet of the grading site. Failure
to provide notice shall not invalidate an action of the committee.
      5.   Appeal: A decision of the committee may be appealed within fifteen
days of the decision to the board of adjustment in accordance with
Chapter 18.93.
   C.   Appeal to superior court: Appeal from a decision of the board of
adjustment may be made to the superior court by the owner or affected persons.
(Ord. 1990-61 § 1 (part), 1990; Ord. 1986-187 § 1 (part), 1986)
18.81.110   Illustrations.
   See Illustrations 18.81-1, 18.81-2, and 18.81-3.
(Ord. 1990-61 § 1 (part), 1990; Ord. 1986-187 § 1 (part), 1986)
Illustration 18.81-1 
BUILDING HEIGHT CONTOUR LINE 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4451.png]
 
Illustration 18.81-2 
SLOPE DETERMINATION 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4453.png]
 
Illustration 18.81-3 
SETBACKS 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4455.png]
 
Chapter 18.83
ADDRESS STANDARDS
18.83.010   Purpose.
18.83.020   Definitions.
18.83.030   General provisions.
18.83.040   Addressing.
18.83.050   Address display.
18.83.060   Street name signs.
18.83.070   Display exceptions, nonconforming street names and addresses.
18.83.080   Address and street name changes.
18.83.090   Conflicting actions, compliance, citation and appeals.
18.83.100   Jurisdictions.
18.83.110   Maps and illustrations.
18.83.010   Purpose.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for uniformity in street names
and addresses, and to facilitate emergency vehicle response, by establishing a
uniform system for street names and address numbers, street name standards,
display standards, and official address maps, and by eliminating nonconforming
street names and addresses.
(Ord. 2010-26 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 1988-2 § 1 (part), 1988)
18.83.020   Definitions.
   A.   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall mean:
      1.   "Abutter" means a person whose parcel (occupied or owned) directly
touches or has legal access to an access easement or road or the person's
authorized representative.
      2.   "Access" means a way or means by which a vehicle enters a lot or
parcel.
      3.   "Address" means a number, directional prefix, primary street name,
and suffix, and an occupant identifier when required. The property address is
also called the situs.
      4.   "Address system" means a discrete area of Pima County given its own
baselines, grid system and street numbers.
      5.   "Addressing official" means the director of the development services
department or an authorized representative charged with the administration of
the standards in this chapter.
      6.   "Administrative address" means an address assigned by the county
exclusively for the management of records and permits. It shall not be used for
other purposes unless occupant identifiers are included. (E.g., commercial and
residential complexes or developments which only consist of one structure.)
      7.   "Baseline" means a north-south or east-west line used as a zero
starting point for address numbers.
      8.   "Building" means a structure designed for human occupancy or use.
      9.   "Certificate of occupancy" means a document issued by the governing
authority granting a property owner permission to occupy and use premises for
the declared purpose and in accordance with adopted building regulations.
      10.   "Commercial" means a development not intended for human residence.
      11.   "Cul-de-sac" means a street ending in a dead-end, not being an
extension of another street, having no other street intersections, and not
having the capability of connecting or intersecting with another street in the
future.
      12.   "Directional prefix" means a prefix assigned to a street based on
the general direction of travel from an appropriate baseline. "North (N.),
South (S.), East (E.) and West (W.). The determination may be forty-five
degrees either side of the true direction.
      13.   "Directional signage" means address information signs.
      14.   "Entrance signage" means address information signs located at
access points.
      15.   "Hundred block" means an incremental number breakdown of a section
of land. Its length is generally one-eighth of a side or approximately six
hundred feet (the distance may vary depending on the location in Pima County).
It has a hundred numbers, 0 through 99.
      16.   "Hundred block base map" means a graphic representation of Pima
County boundaries showing established hundred block numbering grids for each
section, township and range in Pima County.
      17.   "Hundred block indicator" means a number and a directional prefix
indicating the perpendicular distance of a street from its parallel baseline,
e.g., E. Ina Road is located at 7200 N. It is 72 hundred blocks north of
Congress Street.
      18.   "Major arterial" means a street falling on a section line, quarter
section line or sixteenth section line and designed to accommodate through
traffic with comparatively long vehicle trip lengths. A street so designated on
the County Major Streets and Scenic Routes Plan.
      19.   "Number" means part of an address based on numerical distance from
an appropriate baseline. May include the occupant identifier.
      20.   "Numbered address" means the base number of an address that does
not include the unit identifier.
      21.   "Occupant identifier" means a specific number delineating
individual unit locations within a single situs address. This number shall be
used following the situs address. (E.g., 1000 N. Oracle Rd. Apt. 1100 or 1000
N. Oracle Rd. Suite 100.)
      22.   "Person" means any individual, firm, corporation, partnership or
other legal entity or their authorized agent.
      23.   "Point-of-origin" means the intersection of the north-south and
east-west baselines establishing zero at the intersection.
      24.   "Prefix" means a word at the beginning of a street name used to
indicate a type of street, e.g., E. Camino Aurelia's prefix is Camino.
      25.   "Primary access" means the principal legal point of ingress-egress.
It may be different than recorded access.
      26.   "Primary street name" means the principal component of street name
not including suffix or directional prefix, e.g., E. Broadway Boulevard's
primary street name is Broadway.
      27.   "Property Owner" means the title holder of a lot, parcel, building
or structure or the owner's authorized representative.
      28.   "Residential" means facilities intended for human dwelling.
      29.   "Site plan" means a map showing property boundaries with
dimensional ties to section, township and range monuments, building locations,
dimensions of property, buildings and setback distances to property lines,
primary access points for property and buildings, dimensional ties of tenant
improvements to building shell, access from closest public street for
unsubdivided parcels, with north arrow.
      30.   "Situs" means address of a lot, parcel or building; also called
"property address".
      31.   "Street" means a public or private thoroughfare or easement with
abutting properties. Reserved for vehicle travel and access.
      32.   "Street name" means a primary street name and suffix. Does not
include the directional prefix, e.g., E. Broadway Boulevard's street name is
Broadway Boulevard.
      33.   "Street sign" means displays primary name, suffix, direction from a
baseline, and the north, south, east or west hundred block indicator of each
street name.
      34.   "Subdivision design review" means the submittal of a subdivision
plat or development plan for review by the county subdivision design review
committee.
      35.   "Suffix" means a word at the end of a street name used to indicate
a type of street, e.g., E. Broadway Boulevard's suffix is Boulevard.
      36.   "Tax code number" means the number assigned a lot or parcel for tax
assessment identification. Also known as parcel number, book map and parcel,
and APN.
      37.   "Tenant improvement" means space within a building, which is under
separate control, has primary access to exterior or interior public spaces, and
is used for business activity.
(Ord. 2010-26 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 1996-58 § 4 (part), 1996; Ord. 1988-2 § 1
(part), 1988)
18.83.030   General provisions.
   A.   Authority:
      1.   The director of the development services department or his
authorized representative shall be designated as the addressing official and
shall be responsible for the administration of the standards in this chapter.
      2.   These standards shall regulate all development, lots, parcels,
buildings, occupant identifiers and streets within the unincorporated areas of
Pima County and those incorporated areas included by intergovernmental
agreement.
      3.   Only the addressing official or authorized representative, may
assign, approve or change an address.
   B.   Address standards regulations: The board of supervisors by resolution
may adopt and amend regulations to implement the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Address maps and indexes:
      1.   The addressing official shall establish and maintain the following
maps and indexes:
         a.   A hundred block grid address map of Pima County;
         b.   Map sets delineating each assigned address for residential and
commercial subdivided land and unsubdivided parcels;
         c.   An index of approved street names; and
         d.   An index of approved reserved street names.
      2.   All maps and indexes shall be kept on file with the development
services department and shall be available for inspection during normal working
hours.
      3.   Maps and indexes may be created, updated, stored and viewed in
electronic media.
   D.   Development Information. The department of transportation, flood
control district, and real property shall provide the development services
department maps and legal descriptions of the following proposed right-of-way
developments and modifications at the planning stages:
      1.   Amendments to the Major Streets and Scenic Routes Plan;
      2.   Right-of-way development;
      3.   Realignments of existing rights-of-way;
      4.   Abandonments of existing rights-of-way;
      5.   Changes in access to property caused by road improvements; and
      6.   Subdivision plat, development plan, site plan and improvement plan
information.
   E.   Application Information. Any person requesting an address or a change
of address from the addressing official shall provide the information required
by this chapter and any regulations adopted under this chapter.
   F.   Fees. Fees shall be adopted by the board of supervisors in a fee
schedule to cover the administration and enforcement of this chapter and any
regulations adopted under this chapter.
(Ord. 2010-26 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 1996-58 § 4 (part), 1996; Ord. 1988-2 § 1
(part), 1988)
18.83.040   Addressing.
   A.   Address numbering concept: The address numbering concept used in this
chapter is point-of-origin/baseline. North-south and east-west baselines shall
be established for each address system. The intersection of the north-south and
east-west baselines shall be the point-of-origin. Numbering shall increase in
the north, south, east and west directions from the point-of-origin.
   B.   Address Systems. Discrete areas of Pima County shall be given their own
baselines, points-of-origin, grids radiating from the points-of-origin, and
street numbers.
      1.   Address systems shall be established only in areas which will not
overlap other address systems, however distant.
      2.   If an existing address system expands to overlap another address
system, a dominant system shall be selected, and:
         a.   The nondominant system shall have limits established to restrict
further expansion; or
         b.   The nondominant system shall be abandoned and readdressed to
conform to the dominant system.
      3.   A grid shall be based upon the standard land surveying construct of
section, township and range.
      4.   The section (one square mile) shall be the primary grid division
with:
         a.   Each section line divided into eight equal parts, each part being
a hundred block; and
         b.   Each hundred block divided into equal numeric increments 0
through 99;
         c.   Hundred block numbers shall be established on each section line,
quarter-section line, sixteenth-section line, and sixty-fourth section line;
         d.   Hundred block numbers shall be displayed on each section line of
the hundred block base map for each address system;
         e.   Existing sections with nonconforming hundred blocks shall remain
unchanged.
   C.   The following address systems are established:
      1.   Tucson.
         a.   East-west baseline: Congress Street thence into Broadway
Boulevard and the east and west prolongations of their alignments. Deviations
are shown on
Map 18.83.110(A).
         b.   North-south baseline: Stone Avenue and the north and south
prolongations of its alignment. Deviations are shown on
Map 18.83.110(B).
      2.   Green valley:
         a.   East-west baseline: Esperanza Boulevard and the east and west
prolongations of its alignment.
         b.   North-south baseline: Interstate 19 (I-19) and the north and
south prolongations of its alignment.
         c.   Boundaries: Beginning at the northeast corner of section 32,
township 17 south, range 14 east. Thence south to the southeast corner of
section 20, township 18 south, range 14 east. Thence west to the southwest
corner of section 19, township 18 south, range 14 east. Thence north to a point
which intersects the west line of section 19, township 18 south, range 14 east,
and the east boundary line of the San Ignacio de la Canoa land grant. Thence
southwesterly along the east boundary of the San Ignacio de la Canoa land grant
to the southeast corner of said land grant. Thence northwesterly along the
south boundary of the San Ignacio de la Canoa land grant to the southwest
corner of said land grant. Thence west to the southwest corner of section 24,
township 19 south, range 12 east. Thence north to the northwest corner of
section 36, township 18 south, range 12 east. Thence east to the southeast
corner of section 29, township 18 south, range 13 east. Thence north to the
northeast corner of section 17, township 18 south, range 13 east. Thence west
to a point which lies on the centerline of Duval Mine Road. Thence
northeasterly along the centerline of Duval Mine Road, also known as Nogales
Highway (U.S. 89), east of Interstate I-19, to a point which intersects the
north section line of section 36, township 17 south, range 13 east. Thence east
to the northeast corner of section 32, township 17 south, range 14 east, the
point of beginning.
   Deviations are shown on
Map 18.83.110(E).
      3.   Ajo:
         a.   Addressing area containing all of sections 1-36, township 11
south, range 6 west, all of sections 1-36, township 12 south, range 6 west and
all of sections 1-36, of township 13 south, range 6 west of the Gila and Salt
River Base Meridian, Pima County, Arizona.
   Deviations are shown on
Map 18.83.110(C).
         b.   Boundaries: Beginning at the northeast corner of section 1,
township 11 south, range 6 west. Thence, south along the east lines of sections
1,12,13,24,25 and 36, township 11 south, range 6 west, to its intersection with
the north line of section 1, township 12 south, range 6 west.
            Thence south along the east lines of sections 1, 12, 13, 24, 25 and
36, township 12 south, range 6 west, to its intersection with the north line of
section 1 of township 13 south, range 6 west.
            Thence south along the east lines of sections 1, 12, 13, 24, 25,
and 36, township 13 south, range 6 west, to its intersection with the north
line of section 1 of township 14 south, range 6 west.
            Thence west along the south lines of sections 36, 35, 34, 33, 32
and 31, township 12 south, range 6 west, to its intersection with the east line
of section 36 of township 13 south, range 7 west.
            Thence north along the west lines of sections 31, 30, 19, 18, 7 and
6, township 13 south, range 6 west, to its intersection with the north line of
section 31 of township 12 south, range 6 west.
            Thence north along the west lines of sections 31, 30, 19, 18, 7 and
6, township 12 south, range 6 west, to its intersection with the north line of
section 31 of township 11 south, range 6 west.
            Thence north along the west lines of sections 31, 30, 19, 18, 7 and
6, township 11 south, range 6 west, to its intersection with the north line of
section 31 of township 10 south, range 6 west. Also known as the Pinal County
Limits.
            Thence east along the north lines of sections 6, 5, 4, 3, 2 and 1,
township 11 south, range 6 west, to the northeast corner of section 1, township
11 south, range 6 west and being the point of beginning.
Map 18.83.110(C).
      4.   Corona De Tucson:
         a.   Addressing area containing all of sections 32, 33 and 34,
township 16 south, range 16 east, all of sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 23 and 25 of township 17 south, range 15 east and all of sections 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 30 of township 17 south, range 16 east.
         b.   Boundaries: Beginning at the northwest corner of section 32,
township 16 south, range 16 east. Thence east along the north lines of sections
32, 33 and 34 to its intersection with the west line of section 26, township 16
south, range 16 east.
            Thence south along the east line of section 34, township 16 south,
range 16 east to its intersection with the north line of section 3, township 17
south, range 16 east.
            Thence east along the north lines of sections 3, 2 and 1, township
17 south, range 16 east to its intersection with the west line of section 6,
township 17 south, range 17 east.
            Thence south along the east lines of sections 1 and 12, township 17
south, range 16 east to its intersection with the north line of section 13,
township 17 south, range 16 east.
            Thence west along the south lines of sections 12, 11, 10, 9, 8 and
7, township 17 south, range 16 east, to its intersection with the east line of
section 13, township 17 south, range 15 east.
            Thence south along the east line of section 13, township 17 south,
range 15 east, to its intersection with the north line of section 24, township
17 south, range 15 east
            Thence west along the south line of section 13, township 17 south,
range 15 east, to its intersection with the north line of section 23, township
17 south, range 15 east.
            Thence south along the east line of section 23, township 17 south,
range 15 east to its intersection with the north line of section 25, township
17 south, range 15 east.
            Thence east along the north line of section 25, township 17 south,
range 15 east and east along the north line of section 30, township 17 south,
range 16 east to its intersection with the north line of section 29, township
17 south, range 16 east.
            Thence south along the east line of section 30, township 17 south,
range 16 east to its intersection with the north line of section 31, township
17 south, range 16 east.
            Thence west along the south line of section 30, township 17 south,
range 16 east and west along the south line of section 25, township 17 south,
range 15 east to its intersection with the east line of section 26, township 17
south, range 15 east.
            Thence north along the west line of section 25, township 17 south,
range 15 east to its intersection with the south line of section 23, township
17 south, range 15 east.
            Thence west along the south line of section 23, township 17 south,
range 15 east to its intersection with the east line of section 22, township 17
south, range 15 east.
            Thence north along the west line of sections 23 and 14, township 17
south, range 15 east to its intersection with the south line of section 10,
township 17 south, range 15 east.
            Thence south along the west line of sections 10 and 9, township 17
south, range 15 east to its intersection with the east line of section 8,
township 17 south, range 15 east.
            Thence north along the west line of sections 9 and 4, township 17
south, range 15 east, to its intersection with the north line of section 33,
township 16 south, range 15 east.
            Thence east along the north line of sections 4, 3, 2 and 1,
township 17 south, range 15 east and east along the north line of section 6,
township 17 south, range 16 east to its intersection with the west line of
section 32, township 16 south, range 16 east.
            Thence north along the west line to the northwest corner of section
32, township 16 south, range 16 east and being the Point of Beginning.
Map 18.83.110(D).
      5.   Why:
            Addressing area containing all of section 25, township 13 south,
range 5 west of the Gila and Salt River Base Meridian, Pima County Arizona.
Map 18.83.110(F).
   D.   Street names.
      1.   Any property owner or abutter may request establishment of a street
name for any unnamed existing or proposed street or the renaming of any street.
The requesting person shall submit proposed names.
         a.   A request for naming or renaming shall be made during the
planning stages or the tentative subdivision plat or development plan phases if
the street lies within a subdivision plat or a development plan.
         b.   A request for naming or renaming shall be accompanied by the
written consent of the owners of more than fifty percent by number of the
properties addressed from the street. Consent petitions shall be on forms
provided by the development services department.
         c.   Street names found by the addressing official to be in
conformance with the standards in this chapter or adopted under this chapter
shall be recorded with the county recorder.
      2.   Street names shall be composed of:
         a.   A directional prefix: The following are acceptable directional
prefixes. These shall not be spelled out in the street name. Definitions in
parenthesis shall not be used:
            1)   N (North);
            2)   S (South);
            3)   E (East);
            4)   W (West).
         b.   A primary name: The primary name may be composed of one or more
words and each primary name shall be considered unique. For example, Park
Avenue, Midvale Avenue and Midvale Park Road would each be considered unique
primary names. Foreign language names are also included, such as Placita Vista
Hermosa and Via Hermosa.
         c.   A suffix: The following are acceptable suffixes and the two
letter abbreviation shall be used on all street signs when complete spelling is
limited by space. Abbreviations in () may be used only on signs which must meet
TFCD installation standards:
            1)   Alley, Al;
            2)   Avenue, Av (Ave);
            3)   Beltway, Bw;
            4)   Boulevard, Bl (Blvd);
            5)   Circle, Ci (Cir);
            6)   Court, Ct;
            7)   Drive, Dr;
            8)   Highway, Hy (Hwy);
            9)   Lane, Ln;
            10)   Loop, Lp;
            11)   Parkway, Pw (Pkwy);
            12)   Pass, Ps;
            13)   Path, Ph;
            14)   Place, Pl;
            15)   Road, Rd;
            16)   Square, Sq;
            17)   Stravenue, Sv (Stra);
            18)   Street, St;
            19)   Terrace, Te (Terr);
            20)   Trail, Tr;
            21)   Way, Wy;
      3.   Review criteria for acceptance of street names:
         a.   Nonduplication;
         b.   Alignment;
         c.   Correct spelling;
         d.   Reasonableness;
         e.   Phonetics;
         f.   Length of name;
         g.   Same language usage;
         h.   Compliance with Section
18.83.040.D.4.; and
         i.   Street names shall not include language determined by the
addressing official to be derogatory.
      4.   Use of languages other than English:
         a.   The person submitting foreign language street names shall provide
the addressing official with a notarized affidavit of review compliance from a
qualified street name reviewer. An applicant for qualification as a street name
reviewer shall submit to the addressing official evidence of a degree from a
four-year college or university with a major in the language being reviewed.
         b.   Street names using native American words shall be certified by an
authorized representative of the appropriate nation.
         c.   Foreign language name review shall include:
            1)   Proper gender and number (generally used version; avoid
exceptions);
            2)   Appropriate article;
            3)   Commonly used meanings;
            4)   English translation;
            5)   Language type; and
            6)   Proper prefix or suffix translation in the language being
reviewed.
      5.   General Restrictions on Street Names. Unless otherwise permitted by
these standards:
         a.   A new street falling on the alignment of an existing named street
shall not assume a different name than the existing aligned street, regardless
of distance or jurisdiction. Exception: Natural/physical barriers may
permanently prevent an alignment and a new name may be required as determined
by the addressing official.
         b.   A new street falling on an alignment with multiple names shall
assume the predominate or closest proximity street name.
         c.   Perpendicular directions for the same street name shall not be
permitted.
         d.   Existing names shall not be assigned to any other alignment.
         e.   Each name shall not have more than one version of spelling.
      6.   Phonetically unsuitable names shall not be used:
         a.   Homonyms, homophones;
         b.   Names that tend to be slurred;
         c.   Names which are likely to be run together (e.g., Golden Rod,
Goldenrod); and
         d.   Names which may be difficult to pronounce.
      7.   Primary name and suffix (abbreviation) shall be limited sixteen
characters and spaces in length.
      8.   Mixed language usage shall not be used (e.g., Camino Rock).
      9.   Directional prefixes in primary names:
         a.   Directional prefixes shall not be used as a primary name, either
in whole or in a compound form (e.g., North St., Northaire Ave., or Northwest
Road).
         b.   Derivative forms of directional prefixes are permissible (e.g.,
Northern Ave., Southern Star Lane).
      10.   A primary street name may be duplicated once if the street has:
         a.   The same primary name as a street it intersects perpendicularly;
and
         b.   A suffix of place or court.
      11.   Abbreviations and slang terms shall not be used.
      12.   Numbered streets shall be recorded and displayed numerically and
not spelled.
      13.   No east-west numbered street shall be permitted north of E.
Speedway Boulevard and no north-south numbered street shall be permitted east
of N. 1st Avenue.
      14.   All east-west numbered streets shall use the suffix of street
unless otherwise permitted.
      15.   All north-south numbered streets shall use the suffix of avenue
unless otherwise permitted.
      16.   No new east-west numbered streets shall be permitted between the
existing 48th Street (3700 South) and Irvington Road (4900 South). Entirely new
east-west numbered streets south of Irvington Road shall be permitted but shall
conform numerically to established hundred blocks in which they are aligned
(e.g., 5400 South = 54th Street).
      17.   No new north-south numbered streets shall be permitted between the
existing 19th Avenue (950 West) and La Cholla Boulevard (2100 West). Entirely
new north-south numbered streets west of La Cholla Boulevard shall be permitted
but shall conform numerically to established hundred blocks in which they are
aligned (e.g., 2400 West = 24th Avenue).
      18.   Fractions of streets shall not be used (e.g., 25 1/2 Street).
      19.   No primary street name shall be duplicated in another Address
System.
      20.   Suffix Identifier. The following suffixes shall be restricted to
specific street directions or configurations. Spanish equivalent prefixes are
shown in parentheses and shall be treated as suffixes as well as any other
approved foreign language suffix or prefix:
         a.   Avenue (Avenida): A north-south street.
         b.   Beltway: A very large oval-shaped street, considered a major
thoroughfare, with multiple intersections and limited access.
         c.   Circle (Circulo): An oval-shaped street having a single
intersection with one street and not accessing or intersecting another street.
         d.   Loop (Vuelta): A horseshoe-shaped street having two distinct
intersections with the same street.
         e.   Parkway: A meandering street, considered a major thoroughfare,
which has limited access and multiple intersections.
         f.   Place (Placita) or Court (Corte): A cul-de-sac or dead-end road
not having an intersection with another through road.
         g.   Stravenue: A street which runs diagonally between and intersects
a Street and an Avenue.
         h.   Street (Calle): An east-west street.
      21.   Criteria and configurations for street naming:
         a.   Alignment: A street shall be considered aligned and carry one
name if:
            1)   The street is designated a major street, route or arterial; or
            2)   The street connects with or has reasonable potential of
connecting with an existing street or an extension of the original line of an
existing street; or
            3)   The street predominantly follows a section line (mile line),
quarter-section line (half-mile line) or sixteenth-section line.
         b.   Offset alignments:
            1)   Streets with less than a 150 foot centerline-to-centerline
offset shall be considered aligned.
            2)   Multiple street offsets deviating from the original alignment
shall not be considered aligned and shall comply with other provisions of these
standards.
         c.   Circle street: Shall require a different primary name than the
street which it aligns with and shall require two names when required addresses
exceed available numbers within a hundred block.
         d.   Cul-de-sac: A cul-de-sac having a centerline distance less than
one hundred feet may assume the primary name and directional prefix of the
street it intersects, but shall require a unique primary name and directional
prefix for lengths which exceed one hundred feet.
            1)   A "T" cul-de-sac is one which has an initial street segment
perpendicular to the intersected street, and the remaining segments parallel
with the intersected street. One primary name may be used if the perpendicular
street segment is less than one hundred feet. A different name than that of the
cul-de-sac shall be used for the perpendicular street segment exceeding one
hundred feet in length.
         e.   Loop street: Shall have a unique street name and shall not assume
the name of any aligned street, and shall only occur on one side of the
intersected street.
         f.   Major arterial alignment and realignment:
            1)   For name continuity along the entire length of a major
arterial which deviates from its original alignment and connects with other
street alignments, the arterial may retain one name with the approval of the
addressing official.
            2)   The addressing official may require existing street alignments
and established street names to be changed to facilitate one name for a newly
constructed major arterial that deviates from its primary alignment.
         g.   Frontage roads (also called service roads): A frontage road is a
local street that generally parallels and is adjacent to a freeway or through
street and that provides access to property isolated by access controls from
the freeway or through street.
            1)   A frontage road shall assume the name of the freeway or
through street it services.
            2)   Interstate 10 (I-10) frontage roads shall be delineated and
addressed as "I-10 Frontage Road" and shall be the only frontage road to have a
name different than that which it parallels.
   E.   Situs numbering assignment:
      1.   All recorded lots and parcels of land, subdivided or unsubdivided,
and all proposed or built structures, shall have an address assigned before a
building permit is issued or occupancy occurs.
      2.   An address shall not be assigned to a lot or parcel until a fronting
named street or easement has been approved. Frontage may not be required if
recorded legal access is less than three hundred thirty feet to a named street.
Exception: An address may be assigned to a parcel with a fronting unnamed
easement on the condition that the address is subject to change upon the
official naming of the unnamed easement. The address shall be assigned from
legal access to the closest existing named street or easement.
      3.   An address shall not be issued to a lot, parcel or structure until
Section
18.83.040.E.6 is complied with.
      4.   Addresses shall be assigned based upon primary physical access from
a named street and not legal access if different. Exception: Corner lots which
fall on major streets, routes or arterials may have the option of obtaining an
address off of the major street, route or arterial provided:
         a.   A notarized acknowledgement of non conformance signed by the
owner or authorized representative is submitted to the addressing official on a
form provided by the department.
         b.   The owner/authorized representative shall notify any/all
emergency services of the physical access to the parcel.
         c.   The owner/authorized representative shall permanently display the
entire approved address clearly and visibly to all directions of traffic.
      5.   General assignment requirements:
         a.   The addressing official shall determine official addresses upon
compliance with Section
18.83.040.E.6); and:
            1)   Final plat approval;
            2)   Approval of a development plan and the submittal of building
details (floor plans) as required;
            3)   Submittal of an approved site plan and building details (floor
plans) as required; or
            4)   The request by a person, subject to compliance with these
standards.
         b.   In the case of conflict regarding the proper address, the
addressing official or authorized representative shall make the final
determination.
         c.   Requests for numerical addressing of recorded subdivisions or
approved development plans shall not be processed until the recording or
approval process is completed pursuant to
Chapter 18.69 or 18.71.
      6.   Document requirements for address issuance:
         a.   Subdivided property:
            1)   Tax Code number, shown on a property tax statement or a copy
of assessor's map; and
            2)   Recorded deed, or sales agreement and property description
with escrow number and title company name if newly purchased; and
            3)   Subdivision name, block number and lot number; and
            4)   If a corner lot, a site plan showing access; and
            5)   If multiple buildings or tenants, a site plan.
         b.   Unsubdivided parcels:
            1)   Tax Code number, shown on a property tax statement or a copy
of assessor's map; and
            2)   Recorded deed, or sales agreement and property description
with escrow number and title company name if newly purchased; and
            3)   Site plan showing complete ingress and egress from the closest
public road.
         c.   Projects requiring subdivision design review:
            1)   For building address: Approved and signed development plan.
Additional copies of site plan may be required for multiple-story projects;
            2)   For administrative address: Name of development and case
number assigned for subdivision design review.
            3)   For lot address: Signed and recorded subdivision plat.
         d.   Projects not requiring subdivision design review—Single building
or single tenant:
            1)   Tax Code number, shown on a property tax statement or a copy
of assessor's map for parcel;
            2)   Legal description and deed or title report;
            3)   Site plan showing layout of structures; and
            4)   If a structure is being added to an existing multi-building
site, refer to additional requirements in
18.83.040.E.6.f).
         e.   Projects not requiring subdivision design review—Multi-tenant or
multi-buildings:
            1)   Tax Code number shown on a property tax statement or a copy of
the assessor's map for the parcel; and
            2)   Legal description and deed or title report; and
            3)   Site plan showing layout of structures—Initial (only
administrative address shall be issued); and
            4)   Upon final approval of site plan:
               i)   An approved and signed site plan meeting department
specifications; additional copies of site plan may be required for multiple-
story projects; and
               ii)   Site plan of maximum tenant space layout for each building
or floor.
         f.   If buildings, building expansions or multiple tenants are added
to an existing multi-building site, a site plan of the total site shall be
required, with all buildings and addresses as displayed at the site
appropriately labeled.
         g.   Tenant improvements—New buildings or existing buildings having an
approved development plan or site plan on file with the development services
department:
            1)   Address of building;
            2)   Site plan showing tenant improvements dimensionally tied to
building; and
            3)   Development name and case number.
         h.   Tenant improvements—Existing buildings not having an approved
development plan or site plan on file with the development services department:
            1)   Site plan showing all existing structures and addresses as
displayed on the site and tenant improvements dimensionally tied to building
shell;
            2)   Development name;
            3)   Tax code number;
            4)   Copy of the recorded deed.
         i.   Type and quality of required documents: Documents required shall
be of sufficient image quality and density to make legible contact prints and
to produce scanned images.
      7.   Criteria for Address Numbering.
         a.   Even or odd numeric integer of the address: Lots, parcels,
buildings and other structures on the right side of a street, ascending from
the base line, shall have even numbers. Lots, parcels, buildings and other
structures on the left side of a street, ascending from the base line, shall
have odd numbers.
         b.   Address determination:
            1)   The appropriate hundred block number line shall determine the
number of an address for any lot, parcel or building.
            2)   Address numbers shall be determined by primary property
entrance (access) from a named street and mean property street frontage.
            3)   Property entrances, mean property frontages which are directly
across the street from one another shall generally be one unit apart in the
ascending numerical value of the address number (e.g., 1246 across from 1247).
            4)   With the exception of multi-tenant commercial buildings, one
address shall be assigned to each property representing a legal entity; that
is, there shall be one address for each legal description and deed. However,
multiple street access points to multiple structures may require multiple
addresses.
         c.   Corner lot:
            1)   The address shall be assigned to the primary access (entrance)
street. Exception: Corner lots which fall on major streets, routes or arterials
may have the option of obtaining an address off of the major street, route or
arterial provided:
               a)   A notarized acknowledgement of non conformance signed by
the owner or authorized representative is submitted to the addressing official
on a form provided by the department.
               b)   The owner/authorized representative shall notify any/all
emergency services of the physical access to the parcel.
               c)   The owner/authorized representative shall permanently
display the entire approved address clearly and visibly to all directions of
traffic.
            2)   Subdivision plats shall have a star placed by a lot line to
indicate proposed access.
         d.   Building orientation, ingress and egress: If buildings will
occupy all or a major portion of a lot, the primary ingress and egress of the
building shall determine the property address. The primary entrance used by the
public shall be considered the primary entrance; secondary doors, such as
employee entrances, back or side doors, or delivery doors, shall not be
considered primary.
         e.   The order of address determination shall be:
            1)   Vehicular access for multiple parking;
            2)   Vehicular street frontage parking if there is no on-site
parking or drop-off point;
            3)   Primary pedestrian site access;
            4)   Structure orientation and general public building ingress and
egress.
         f.   Circle street: Address shall be assigned in a counter-clockwise
direction beginning at the intersection. Number availability within a hundred
block shall determine if multiple names are required.
         g.   Loop street: Address shall be assigned based on the overall
direction of the street layout in relation to the intersected street.
         h.   Directional prefix: At the time the address is assigned, the
street shall have a directional prefix assigned to facilitate address
numbering.
         i.   Number restrictions: A fractional unit of a number or occupant
identifier, or alphabetic letters with a number or occupant identifier, or any
combination thereof, shall not be used. E.g., 1010 1/2 E. Speedway Blvd.; or
1010 E. Speedway Blvd., Unit 100 1/2; or 1010A E. Speedway Blvd.; or 1010 E.
Speedway Blvd., Unit 100A.
         j.   Address numbering for specific development types:
            1)   Residential single family: Each lot or parcel shall be
assigned a unique address.
            2)   Residential multifamily: Each lot or parcel having multiple
tenants shall be assigned a unique address and, in addition, occupant
identifiers for each tenant.
               a)   For example, Unit 2 in a duplex or triplex or Space 3 for a
trailer or mobile home.
               b)   Occupant identifier numbers shall ascend from the baseline
for parallel building layouts or from the front to rear of the lot or parcel
for building layouts.
            3)   Apartments: All separate and distinct developments having
multiple tenant accommodations intended for human dwelling shall be assigned
one unique situs address. In addition, an occupant identifier consisting of a
four to five-digit number shall be assigned to each apartment unit. This number
shall be considered its complete apartment number, and shall be used with the
situs address.
               a)   The apartment number shall consist of a building number
plus a floor number plus a unit number. For example, Apartment 12130 is in
Building 12, on Floor 1, and is the 30th apartment on that floor, or the first
apartment on Floor 3 of Building 2 would be Apartment 2301.
               b)   A zero shall be used for a floor number for all units below
ground level.
            4)   Townhomes: Townhouse developments shall be assigned a separate
situs address for each legal lot.
            5)   Condominiums:
               a)   Condominium developments shall be assigned a situs address
for each building.
               b)   Individual living facilities in each building shall be
assigned occupant identifiers (unit numbers): First floor units shall have 100
series numbers, second floor units shall have 200 series numbers, and
additional floors shall be numbered accordingly.
            6)   Commercial developments may be addressed in one of the
following formats, which shall not be mixed within a complex:
               a)   A commercial development is assigned only one situs
address. In addition, building numbers and tenant (suite) numbers are used.
Occupant identifiers are building number, plus floor number, plus a two-digit
number.
               b)   A commercial development is assigned individual building
addresses plus tenant (suite) occupant identifiers. First floor units shall
have 100 series numbers, second floor units shall have 200 series numbers, and
additional floors shall be numbered accordingly.
               c)   A high-rise building shall require a single situs address,
plus tenant (suite) occupant identifiers. The occupant identifier for each
separate tenant shall be a floor number plus a two-digit number.
               i)   A single tenant leasing an entire floor shall use the floor
shall use the floor number plus 00. E.g., 2300 is the 23rd Floor.
               ii)   Multiple tenants on a single floor shall require separate
two digit identifiers other than 00 for any tenant on the same floor. E.g.,
1217 is number 17 on the 12th floor.
            7)   Mobile home and recreational vehicle parks:
               a)   Lot or parcel having five or more spaces developed for the
installation of mobile homes, or the parking of travel trailers or recreational
vehicles on a daily, seasonal or permanent rental basis, shall require a situs
address plus space occupant identifiers.
               b)   The park's appurtenant structures (offices, recreation
buildings, etc.) shall be assigned the situs address plus building identifiers
or retain the primary address without an occupant identifier if consisting of a
single structure.
               c)   Interior street names shall not be used. The streets shall
be called rows and shall be assigned numbers. East-west rows shall use even
numbers. North-south rows shall use odd numbers. E.g., Row 9.
               d)   Space numbers shall be used with the row numbers. E.g.,
Space 9-53 is the 53rd space on Row 9.
(Ord. 2010-26 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 1990-10 § 1 (part), 1990; Ord. 1988-2 § 1
(part), 1988)
18.83.050   Address display.
   A.   General requirements:
      1.   All structures designed for human occupancy or use which have an
assigned address shall display the address.
      2.   Upon commencement of construction, the assigned address shall be
displayed at the primary access of the subject lot parcel or structure. The
address display may be temporary signage during construction.
      3.   Permanent address display shall be installed on all buildings,
tenant spaces and entrance signage, or as otherwise required by these
Standards, prior to building inspection final approval, certificate of
occupancy or occupancy of any building or structure. Display shall be required
at all times thereafter, conforming to standards.
      4.   More than one address or number display may be required for each
building or site.
      5.   The address number shall be displayed on all corner buildings at a
street intersection, for each side of building facing any street.
      6.   Addresses shall be displayed and visible from both directions of
approaching vehicular travel.
      7.   Numbers and letters (letters refers to the street spelling on sites
that require the entire address to be displayed) shall be made of durable and
clearly visible material. Paint shall not be considered durable for building
addresses.
      8.   Numbers and letters (letters refers to the street spelling on sites
that require the entire address to be displayed) shall be of colors contrasting
with the background of the sign or wall to which they are attached.
      9.   Numbers and letters (letters refers to the street spelling on sites
that require the entire address to be displayed) shall have a minimum
proportion ratio of height to width of six to one. The formula for width to
height is w = h/6, where w is width and h is height in inches. Width refers to
the brush stroke width.
      10.   Numbers shall not be spelled.
      11.   All height requirements are minimum sizes.
   B.   Residential: The address numbers assigned shall be conspicuously placed
immediately at the appropriate location on each building, structure entrance or
at the property access point.
      1.   For properties containing multiple addresses, addresses shall be
placed near the primary entrance in addition to the structure placement.
      2.   A building or structure set back fifty feet or more from the curb
line or edge of pavement shall permanently display the address a minimum of
thirty-six inches from ground level at the primary access point of the
property. Structure display may also be required by the addressing official.
      3.   Minimum number height shall be four inches.
   C.   Apartments: The address numbers assigned shall be conspicuously placed
immediately at the property access points, appropriate locations on each
building, and structure entrances.
      1.   Building numbers shall be a minimum of fifteen inches in height.
      2.   Apartment number ranges shall be placed below building numbers or on
signage near the building. Apartment number ranges shall be a minimum of eight
inches in height.
      3.   Individual apartment numbers shall be a minimum of four inches in
height for exterior entrances and a minimum of one inch in height for interior
(hallway) entrances.
      4.   Both exterior signage and interior numbering may be required by the
addressing official on specific development types.
      5.   Apartment complex with multiple buildings:
         a.   All buildings shall have pedestrian directional signage visible
from both directions of pedestrian travel, with numbers a minimum of two inches
in height.
         b.   All interior accessory buildings, structures and pool areas shall
be identified and have directional signage.
         c.   The apartment complex shall have entrance signage at all access
points address.
         d.   For access points that enter the complex from other than the
addressed street, the complete address shall be displayed on entrance signage.
         e.   Site and building addresses shall be visible at all times.
   D.   Commercial: The address number assigned shall be conspicuously placed
immediately at each property access point, and the appropriate locations on
each building, and each structure entrance.
      1.   Buildings or structures set back no more than fifty feet from the
curb line or edge of pavement shall display a twelve-inch minimum height
number.
      2.   Buildings or structures set back more than fifty feet from the curb
line or edge of pavement shall display a fifteen-inch minimum height number.
      3.   Individual addresses shall be placed near the primary entrance, a
minimum of four inches in height.
      4.   The low and high number range may be displayed on buildings with
multiple addresses, a minimum of twelve inches in height.
      5.   Site and building addresses shall be visible at all times.
   E.   RV and mobile home park: The address numbers assigned shall be
conspicuously placed immediately at each property access point, and at the
appropriate locations for each building, structure, and property rental space.
      1.   Number height:
         a.   Space, directional signage and internal street signage numbers
shall be a minimum of four inches; and
         b.   Building numbers shall be a minimum of six inches.
      2.   Internal street signs shall be placed at each street intersection.
The signs shall display the word "Row" plus the appropriate number (e.g., Row
9).
   F.   Entrance signage: The address or address numbers assigned shall be
placed at primary access points immediately and shall be permanently installed
prior to first occupancy of any internal structure or building.
      1.   Numbers or address shall be a minimum of twelve inches in height on
all entrance signage.
      2.   Complete address display shall be required at all street access
points in addition to the primary access street.
   G.   Directional signs: If buildings within a commercial development are
obscured from the primary street to which the development is addressed and from
parking and access areas, directional signs shall be installed.
      1.   A directional sign shall be required at each primary entryway to the
obscured buildings.
      2.   A directional sign shall be clearly visible from all parking areas
serving a building and shall have numbers of not less than six inches in
height.
      3.   Each directional sign shall carry appropriate addresses or range of
addresses and a directional arrow or locational instructions as minimum
directional information.
      4.   Additional signs: Buildings having parking and access areas only at
their side or rear shall display additional numbers, at least six inches in
height, visible from all such areas.
(Ord. 2020-41, § 6, 2020; Ord. 2010-26 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 1988-2 § 1
(part), 1988)
18.83.060   Street name signs.
   A.   General requirements:
      1.   Approved street names shall be clearly and visibly displayed at
every intersection and street name change break on all public streets and on
all private streets within subdivisions and development plans.
      2.   Approved street names shall be displayed in a temporary manner at
all times during construction of such public or private streets.
      3.   Approved street names shall be displayed in a permanent manner upon
completion of street construction.
      4.   A private street which intersects a public street shall have street
name signs of department of transportation installation standards installed by
the owner or authorized representative at the intersection or street name
change point.
      5.   Private street name signs within subdivisions and development plans
which are not at intersections with public streets may be of owner design and
not of department of transportation installation standards, but shall be
clearly visible from all directions of vehicular travel, and shall be in
conformance with subsections A.6 through A.10 of this section.
      6.   All street name signs shall be reflective.
      7.   The direction of each street shall precede the name.
      8.   Primary street names shall be displayed in a uniform size and be at
least four inches in height. The primary name shall not be abbreviated.
      9.   Street name suffixes may be abbreviated and in a smaller size than
the primary name, but shall be at least two inches in height.
      10.   All street signs shall display the appropriate north, south, east
or west hundred block indicator for each street name. Sign placement shall not
change the value of the hundred block indicator for each name.
      11.   A homeowners association or the property owners adjacent to the
street shall be responsible in equal shares for maintenance and replacement of
signage after installation on a private street in a subdivision or development
plan. If the responsible parties fail to adequately maintain or replace street
signs in a timely manner, the county may, after thirty days written notice to
the responsible homeowners association or property owners, make the necessary
repairs or replacements and collect the costs of labor and materials equally
from each responsible party.
      12.   A privately installed street name sign not on a public street or in
a subdivision or development plan:
         a.   Shall be of department of transportation installation standards
if on a private street which intersects a public street;
         b.   May be of owner design and not of department of transportation
installation standards if not at an intersection with a public street, but
shall be clearly visible from all directions of vehicular travel, and shall be
in conformance with subsections A.6 through A.10 of this section and subsection
B of this section; and
         c.   Shall have additional signage displaying: (Not a County Street
Pvt.)
   B.   Street Sign Format.
      1.   All street-name signs installed or replaced after the effective date
of this chapter shall conform to the following format:
         a.   Directional prefix (N., S., E. or W.): Upper left corner.
         b.   Primary name: Main body of sign.
         c.   Suffix: Centered following primary name, or upper right, or, if
foreign language requires, centered preceding primary name.
         d.   Hundred block indicator: Lower right corner.
         e.   The minimum height of a directional prefix, street suffix or
hundred block indicator shall be one-half the height of the primary name.
         f.   See Illustration 18.83.110(G).
(Ord. 2010-26 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 1990-10 § 1 (part), 1990; Ord. 1988-2 § 1
(part), 1988)
18.83.070   Display exceptions, nonconforming street names and addresses.
   A.   Existing addresses displayed prior to January 13, 1981, shall be exempt
from the address display provisions of these standards until January 1, 1991,
except in the event of:
      1.   An address change;
      2.   A building or structure remodeling or repair which requires a
building permit; or
      3.   An exterior sign replacement or repair which requires a building
permit.
   B.   Except as provided in subsection A of this section, these standards
shall not apply to existing street names or to addresses of buildings existing
prior to January 13, 1991, unless there is:
      1.   Gross error in the physical placement of a hundred block increment;
      2.   Gross error or discontinuity in the assignment of an address number;
      3.   An incorrect directional prefix for a street;
      4.   More than one directional prefix for the same street;
      5.   More than one spelling for same street name;
      6.   Homonyms, Homophones;
      7.   Use and display of an address not assigned;
      8.   Duplication of a street name;
      9.   Excessive discontinuity of alignment for a street name;
      10.   More than one name for the same alignment;
      11.   An overlap in address ranges for the same primary name; or
      12.   Primary access from a street different than the address.
(Ord. 1988-2 § 1 (part), 1988)
18.83.080   Address and street name changes.
   A.   An owner of property may request the change of its address, provided:
      1.   The change shall not conflict with these standards;
      2.   The change shall bring the address into conformance with these
standards;
      3.   The applicant shall comply with the display requirements of these
standards; and
      4.   The applicant shall provide the required materials specified in
Section
18.83.040E6.
   B.   The addressing official shall correct an address number or street
direction prefix not in conformance with these standards as follows:
      1.   Notice of the change shall be mailed to all owners and the occupants
of the property whose address is changed. The notice shall:
         a.   Advise the property owners or occupants that they may submit a
written objection to the change to the addressing official within fifteen
working days of the mailing of notice;
         b.   State the reasons for the change and the effective date of
change; and
         c.   Include an objection form.
      2.   An owner or occupant of property whose address numbers or street
direction prefix is to be changed may object to the change, and shall submit
the objection in writing, within fifteen working days of the mailing of notice.
Objections received after the fifteen days shall not be considered.
      3.   Action of address official: The addressing official shall render a
decision on the objection within five working days of receipt and notify the
objector in writing of the decision. The effective date of the change shall be
unaffected unless altered by the addressing official or an order of the
superior court.
   C.   The addressing official shall change the name of a street as follows:
      1.   Notice of the change shall be mailed to all owners and occupants of
property whose existing address will be changed by the renaming. The notice
shall:
         a.   Advise the property owners or occupants that they may submit a
written objection to the change to the addressing official within fifteen
working days of the mailing of notice;
         b.   State the reasons for the change and the date the addressing
official will consider the renaming; and
         c.   Include an objection form.
      2.   Action of address official: The addressing official shall render a
decision on the objection within five working days of receipt of a timely
objection and notify the objector in writing of the decision. The effective
date of the change shall be unaffected unless altered by the addressing
official, the board of adjustment on appeal or an order of the superior court.
(Ord. 2010-26 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 1988-2 § 1 (part), 1988)
18.83.090   Conflicting actions, compliance, citation and appeals.
   A.   Conflicting actions: County departments, officials and staff shall not
perform any of the following acts which conflict with these standards:
      1.   Approve a final plat or development plan;
      2.   Issue a permit or address;
      3.   Inspect a building.
      4.   Grant permission to occupy any construction project, structure
relocation, erection, repair, alteration or modification until the address
assigned is displayed as required by these standards;
      5.   Install a street sign;
      6.   Approve an area, community or neighborhood plan;
      7.   Approve a transportation or corridor plan; or
      8.   Change a person's property access through road improvements without
prior notice to the development services department.
   B.   Invalidity: Any address or street name used or issued in conflict with
these standards shall not be deemed or construed to be a valid address or
street name.
   C.   Citation: If the addressing official determines an address display
violation exists, a written citation may be posted at the site by an authorized
representative of the addressing official or the zoning inspector. In addition,
the property owner may be notified of the citation by mail. The citation may
include required corrective measures.
   D.   Compliance: Compliance is required within thirty days of citation. One
written time extension of thirty days may be granted by the addressing official
if adequate progress is being made toward compliance.
   E.   Appeals: Decisions of the addressing official may be appealed in
accordance with the following provisions:
      1.   An owner of property who disagrees with a decision of the addressing
official, or his/her representative, may submit the objection in writing to the
addressing official. The addressing official shall have fifteen days to respond
to the objection.
         a.   Objections regarding changed addresses need to be received within
fifteen working days of the mailing of notice. Objections received after the
fifteen days shall not be considered.
      2.   Hearing: If a property owner continues to disagree with the
addressing official following the fifteen day addressing official response
time, the decision of the addressing official may be appealed to the board of
adjustment as an interpretation under
Chapter 18.93 of this title.
      3.   Appeal to superior court: Decisions of the board of adjustment may
be appealed to superior court within thirty days of the decision.
(Ord. 2010-26 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 1988-2 § 1 (part), 1988)
18.83.100   Jurisdictions.
   These standards shall apply in the unincorporated areas of Pima County and
in such incorporated areas as are included by intergovernmental agreements. The
governing body and appropriate officials of an incorporated area included by
intergovernmental agreement shall be substituted for the board of supervisors
and county officials, except the addressing official, in the application of
these standards within their areas of jurisdiction. The governing bodies of
included incorporated areas may establish, by intergovernmental agreements or
ordinances, appeals procedures which differ from these standards.
(Ord. 2010-26 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 1988-2 § 1 (part), 1988)
18.83.110   Maps and illustrations.
   See
Maps 18.83.110A through
18.83.110F and
Illustration 18.83.110G set out at the end of this chapter.
(Ord. 2010-26 § 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 1990-10 § 1 (part), 1990; Ord. 1988-2 § 1
(part), 1988)
Map 18.83.110A 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4457.png]
 
Map 18.83.110B 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4459.png]
 
Map 18.83.110C1 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4461.png]
 
Map 18.83.110C2 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4463.png]
 
Map 18.83.110D 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4465.png]
 
Map 18.83.110E 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4467.png]
 
Illustration 18.83.110F 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4469.png]
 
Illustration 18.83.110G 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4471.png]
 
Chapter 18.85
(RESERVED)
Chapter 18.87
(RESERVED)
Chapter 18.89
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN [2] 
18.89.010   Purpose.
18.89.020   Definitions.
18.89.030   Plan components.
18.89.040   Plan amendment program.
18.89.041   Other plan amendment procedures.
18.89.050   Comprehensive plan update program.
18.89.010   Purpose.
   A.   In accordance with A.R.S. §§ 11-804 and 11-805, this chapter provides
for a comprehensive plan, which comprises at a minimum a land use plan, goals,
elements, and regional, rezoning, and special area plan policies. The plan
provides guidance for accomplishing coordinated and harmonious physical, human,
and economic development consistent with current and anticipated needs of the
county.
   B.   The land use plan contained in the comprehensive plan furthers the
purpose of the plan by:
      1.   Establishing boundaries for urban/suburban, rural, and general land
use intensity categories as set forth in the Land Use Intensity Legend;
      2.   Establishing planned land use to guide planning and coordinate the
timing and implementation of capital improvement activities, such as
transportation, flood control, water delivery or wastewater reclamation
facilities;
      3.   Determining the relative suitability of individual geographic
sectors for various land use types and development intensities including
compatibility with a military airport operation;
      4.   Designating land use objectives and gross density limitations within
each land use intensity category and permitted zoning districts for certain
land use intensity categories to assist the board of supervisors and the
planning and zoning commission in determining whether proposed rezonings or
specific plans conform to the comprehensive plan, in accordance with Sections
18.90.030(E) and
18.91.040(C). However, conformance with the plan shall not in itself warrant
approval of the rezoning or specific plan. The final determination of the
merits of the rezoning request or specific plan application shall be made
during the rezoning or specific plan review process.
   C.   The regional policies contained in the comprehensive plan further the
purpose of the plan by:
      1.   Reflecting community values in goals and policies, including health
and social services, the natural environment, and economic development;
      2.   Providing direction on the delivery of infrastructure and services
in cost-effective, efficient ways;
      3.   Promoting consistency in decision making through various
implementation methods such as rezoning and specific plan requests, strategic
and facility plans, budgets, capital improvement programs, and possible bond
programs.
(Ord. 2016-37 § 1 (part), 2016)
18.89.020   Definitions.
   A.   Certain terms used in this chapter shall be defined, for purposes of
this chapter only, as follows:
      1.   Comprehensive Plan: The official document for the planning and
zoning commission, board of supervisors, and all county officials and agencies
for accomplishing coordinated physical and human infrastructure, and economic
development consistent with the current and anticipated needs of the county.
      2.   Comprehensive Plan Amendment Program: The twice yearly process which
facilitates the review of requested changes to the adopted land use plan and
policies of the comprehensive plan.
      3.   Comprehensive Plan Update Program: The process, conducted at least
every ten years, which facilitates the re-evaluation and revision of the plan
where necessary.
      4.   Element: A component of the comprehensive plan dealing with specific
topics that are either required (e.g. water) or optional (e.g. health and
economic development) as defined in the A.R.S. Title 11, Chapter 6, Article 1,
including but not limited to open space and land use.
      5.   Goal: The ultimate purpose of an effort stated in a way that is
general in nature and immeasurable. Goals are not quantifiable, time-dependent
or suggestive of specific actions for achievement. Goals often refer to one or
more aspects of the vision and incorporate specific values.
      6.   Land Use Intensity Legend: A description of the planned land use
intensity categories which govern the type of and density at which development
is allowed to occur.
      7.   Major Plan Amendment:
         a.   A requested change to the adopted land use plan for a site equal
to or greater than six hundred forty acres, or
         b.   Addition of a new plan element, or
         c.   Complete rewrite of an existing plan element, or
         d.   A reorientation of an existing plan element, goal, or regional
policy.
      8.   Non-major Plan Amendment: A requested change to the adopted land use
plan for a site less than six hundred forty acres, or a non-major revision to a
comprehensive plan goal, element, or policy.
      9.   Plan Policy: A course or principle of action defined to support a
goal. A written statement in the plan which provides general guidance on
pursuing or protecting a county interest, provides a procedural or development
recommendation, or may guide budget, capital improvement, future bonding, or
expansion plan decisions. A plan policy may be imposed as a special condition
of rezoning. A policy is further defined as one of the following:
         a.   Regional Plan Policy: A recommendation for all of the
unincorporated (unless otherwise specified) Pima County planning area; or
         b.   Rezoning Policy: A guideline that commonly applies to discrete
areas composed of one parcel or a limited number of parcels and frequently
reflects either an approved, individual plan amendment or a policy carried
forward from a previous (rescinded) area plan (e.g. Catalina Foothills Area
Plan).
         c.   Special Area Policy: A guideline that applies to sites typically
composed of multiple parcels that share a unique physical feature or location
over a relatively large area.
(Ord. 2016-37 § 1 (part), 2016)
18.89.030   Plan components.
   The plan shall include, at a minimum, the following components:
   A.   Map, including:
      1.   Planned land use intensity categories;
      2.   Special or rezoning policy areas;
      3.   Growth areas or focused development investment areas.
   B.   Land use intensity legend, including for each intensity category:
      1.   Purpose or objective statement;
      2.   Allowable gross density for categories permitting residential
development;
      3.   Permitted zoning districts for selected land use intensity
categories.
   C.   Plan Goals and Policies. The plan may propose development, design or
procedural goals and policies more restrictive than this code.
      1.   A plan policy is identified as either a regional, rezoning, or
special area policy as defined in Section
18.89.020(A)(6).
      2.   Rezoning and special area plan policies may:
         a.   Identify zoning districts or densities other than those set forth
in the Land Use Intensity Legend that may, in accordance with Sections
18.90.030 and
18.91.040, be deemed in conformance with the land use plan, or
         b.   Eliminate or limit zoning districts or densities that would
otherwise be deemed in conformance with the land use plan in accordance with
the Land Use Intensity Legend, or
         c.   Recommend development standards.
      3.   Regional, special area, and rezoning policies may address land use
and non-land use issues.
      4.   Adopted plan policies may recommend that further public hearings be
held concerning land proposed for rezoning for uses that may conflict with plan
policies.
   D.   Plan Elements.
      1.   The plan shall include, at a minimum, the following elements:
         a.   Growth area;
         b.   Land use;
         c.   Circulation;
         d.   Open space;
         e.   Cost of development;
         f.   Water resources;
         g.   Environmental (including, but not limited to, the Conservation
Lands System (CLS));
         h.   Other elements as may be required by Arizona Revised Statutes.
      2.   Other Plan Elements. The plan may also include other elements,
including the following:
         a.   Urban design;
         b.   Housing;
         c.   Neighborhoods;
         d.   Public services and facilities;
         e.   Public safety;
         f.   Cultural heritage;
         g.   Implementation;
         h.   Health;
         i.   Economic development.
      3.   Elements may be combined or re-titled in the comprehensive plan
provided the subject matter is fully covered in compliance with Arizona Revised
Statutes and the plan includes an explanation of where in the plan the content
is located.
(Ord. 2016-37 § 1 (part), 2016)
18.89.040   Plan amendment program.
   A.   The program provides two amendment periods. Both major plan amendment
and non-major plan amendment requests may be submitted during the three-month
period commencing on the first regular business day of February and ending on
the last regular business day of April. Only non-major plan amendments may also
be submitted during the two-month period commencing on the first regular
business day of August and ending on the last regular business day of
September.
   B.   Purpose.
      1.   The plan amendment program provides opportunities to better promote
implementation of:
         a.   Community values including principles of healthy communities and
economic development;
         b.   Arizona state legislation — Growing Smarter (1998) and Growing
Smarter Plus (2000) as may be amended, with particular emphasis given to
planning for mixed use, compact development, multi-modal transportation
opportunities, rational infrastructure expansion and improvements, conservation
of natural resources, and the growth area element (where applicable);
         c.   Adopted plan policies.
      2.   The plan amendment program provides opportunities to address
oversights, inconsistencies, or land use related inequities in the plan, or to
acknowledge significant changes in a particular area since the adoption of the
plan or plan updates.
   B.   Procedure.
      1.   Before setting a public hearing for a rezoning or specific plan
application that does not conform with the plan, an amendment to the plan which
would allow the rezoning or specific plan request shall be processed in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter and development services
department policies and approved by the board of supervisors.
      2.   Amendments to the plan may be requested by owners of the subject
property, the development services department, the commission or the board.
      3.   Amendment requests within each amendment period are reviewed
concurrently in order to analyze potential cumulative impacts.
      4.   Public participation, agency and jurisdictional review and comment,
public notification and adoption requirements for plan amendment requests and
elements shall be in accordance with ARS § 11-805.
      5.   Final action by the board shall be taken on all complete amendment
requests submitted as soon as practicable, depending on the number and nature
of amendment requests received. All major plan amendment requests shall be
presented at a single public hearing before the board during the calendar year
the proposal is made.
   C.   Contents of Amendment Requests.
      1.   Contents of complete requests for land use intensity category
amendments. Complete requests shall include, at a minimum:
         a.   A completed application form;
         b.   A legal description or tax code number of the property for which
the amendment is being requested;
         c.   A list, by name and title, of all ownership interest in the
property (e.g., individual, corporation, trust, or limited partnership);
         d.   If applicable, a letter of authorization from the owner
designating an agent to represent the property owner;
         e.   A sketch plan of the area of the proposed amendment drawn at an
appropriate scale, showing property boundaries, existing improvements, general
circulation, acreages and dimensions of existing and proposed land use
intensity categories, and features of future development if known. If more than
one land use intensity category is requested, the area proposed for each
category must be clearly delineated on the sketch plan, showing the acreage and
dimensions of each category, or under some circumstances specifically described
in text;
         f.   Applicable fee for comprehensive plan amendment, in accordance
with adopted fee schedule;
         g.   Any other requirement set forth in written departmental policies.
      2.   Contents of complete submittal for policy and other text amendment
requests. Complete requests shall include, at a minimum:
         a.   A concise written description of the proposed amendment;
         b.   Evidence that public benefit would result from such amendment;
         c.   Any other requirement set forth in written departmental policies.
      3.   Incomplete requests shall not be processed. Determinations as to
whether or not a request is complete may be appealed to the commission,
provided such an appeal is requested in writing within ten business days from
the date of determination.
   D.   Review and Comment.
      1.   Commission study session:
         a.   A study session is required if three or more non-major amendment
requests are received or one or more major plan amendment requests are received
within the same submittal period.
         b.   If a study session is required, the commission:
            1)   Shall review all of the amendment requests received within the
same submittal period during the study session;
            2)   Shall set the amendments for public hearing;
            3)   May expand the public hearing notice for an amendment;
         c.   Public notice for the study session shall be given by publication
once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county seat.
      2.   Commission public hearing:
         a.   At least one public hearing shall be held by the commission to
consider and take testimony on each amendment request.
         b.   For each amendment request, the commission shall make findings
and provide a recommendation to the board.
         c.   After the public hearing, the development services department
shall transmit the public hearing summaries containing the findings and
recommendations of the commission to the board.
         d.   The commission may continue the public hearing for a definite
time not to exceed four months.
      3.   Board public hearing:
         a.   At least one public hearing shall be held to consider and take
testimony on each amendment request.
         b.   The board may continue the hearing for a definite time not to
exceed four months.
      4.   Board action and subsequent referral to the commission: The board
shall consider amendment requests and may change the proposed amendment
requests after first referring the changed portion back to the commission for
its recommendation. The recommendation of the commission regarding the changed
portion may be accepted or rejected by the board during a subsequent public
hearing advertised in accordance with Section
18.89.040(D)(5) below.
      5.   Commission and board public hearing notice:
         a.   Land use intensity category amendment. The development services
department shall provide public notice a minimum of fifteen days before the
public hearings held by the commission and the board by:
            1)   Publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county seat;
            2)   Mailing first class notice to property owners within the area
proposed to be amended (amendment area) and, at a minimum, within three hundred
feet of the proposed amendment area.
         b.   Regional, rezoning, and special area policy, and other plan text
amendment requests. A minimum of fifteen days before the public hearing, the
development services department shall provide public notice by one-eighth of a
page display advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the county
seat. The commission or board may expand notification by requiring mailing
first class notice to property owners if there is a defined area affected by
the amendment.
(Ord. 2016-37 § 1 (part), 2016)
18.89.041   Other plan amendment procedures.
   A.   Board-Initiated Amendment Requests for Immediate Review.
      1.   The board may initiate the plan amendment process immediately,
provided, at a public hearing noticed in accordance with Section
18.89.040(D)(5), the board makes one of the following findings based on
substantial evidence in the record:
         a.   The applicant has demonstrated that waiting for the normal
amendment periods would deny substantial and significant benefits to the
greater community in terms of:
            1)   New jobs;
            2)   Expanded tax base;
            3)   Enhanced opportunity for disadvantaged populations;
            4)   Significant promotion of affordable housing, mixed use
planning, and compact development; or
            5)   Major regional economic development opportunities.
         b.   The applicant has demonstrated that waiting for a normal
amendment period would place the community at greater health or safety risks in
the form of:
            1)   Inadequate waste treatment facilities;
            2)   Inadequate or unsafe transportation improvements;
            3)   Hazardous environmental conditions; or
            4)   Insufficient community or governmental services facilities.
         c.   An application that would revise the FEMA one-hundred-year
floodplain designation as it affects the subject property has been submitted
to, and accepted by, the Pima County Regional Flood Control District.
   B.   Minor Revisions to Comprehensive Plan.
      1.   Type 1.
         a.   (Type 1a). The comprehensive plan may be amended administratively
by the development services department without hearing, but with notice to the
commission, when minor revisions are required due to annexation, ownership
transfers of government land (e.g., federal to state), or minor revisions to
resource sensitive or resource conservation categories consistent with accurate
FEMA one-hundred-year floodplain information.
         b.   (Type 1b). The comprehensive plan may be amended administratively
subject to ratification by the commission that a scrivener's error occurred
involving a mapping or text portion of the plan that did not reflect the board
of supervisors' action on a property or policy or is a non-substantive staff
error. For the purposes of this section, a scrivener's error is defined as a
minor mistake in writing, mapping, map labeling, or copying something on the
record, and not a mistake in reasoning or determination. Staff will provide the
commission with the factual background and basis of the scrivener's error. If
the commission is unable to ratify an amendment as a scrivener's error as
defined above, the amendment will be processed as a Type 2 minor revision,
subject to meeting the criteria of Section
18.89.041(F)(2), or through the amendment program.
      2.   Type 2.
         a.   The board of supervisors, planning and zoning commission, or
development services department may initiate at any time a plan amendment to
remedy a planning error, a planning oversight, or an incorrect planned land use
intensity category. The planning official shall prepare a report for public
hearing based on criteria that follow. The report shall demonstrate that the
subject property was designated in error during the plan development, update
program, or plan amendment program and that the change in planned land use
intensity category is not based on altered property or market conditions
subsequent to plan adoption. General criteria to support this administrative
procedure may include any of the following:
            1)   The subject property is designated at a lower land use
intensity category than its existing land use or existing hard zoning and such
designation is not founded on public recommendations or planning practice
documented at the time of designation, or does not represent implementation of
the environmental planning element of the plan;
            2)   The plan designation creates an isolated lower intensity
residential island, surrounded or nearly surrounded by property of higher
residential intensity;
            3)   The plan designation does not adequately reflect existing or
planned land uses along or at the intersections of major arterials, thereby
creating land use conflicts between low intensity and adjacent commercial uses.
In such a case the planning official shall report on whether the low intensity
designation was justified to avoid or mitigate the effects of commercial
strips.
            4)   The plan text does not reflect a process or policy previously
approved by the Board.
         b.   This administrative procedure shall not apply to properties
greater than eighty acres in size. Amendment requests for such properties that
may otherwise justify a change of designation based on a planning error in
accordance with this section must be processed during the plan amendment
program in order to provide sufficient public notice and opportunities for
public review.
         c.   A minimum of fifteen days before the scheduled commission and
board hearings, the development services department shall provide notice by
first class mail to property owners within the proposed amendment area and
within three hundred feet of the proposed amendment area.
         d.   The commission shall forward its recommendation to the board
along with the planning official's report for final action on the property by
the board.
   C.   Concurrent Plan Amendment/Rezoning or Specific Plan.
      1.   Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to allow the concurrent
application and processing of a plan amendment and a rezoning for requests that
have minimal impacts on surrounding properties. And this subsection is intended
to allow the concurrent application and processing of a plan amendment and a
specific plan for non-residential or mixed uses. This concurrent plan amendment
and rezoning process is not subject to the concurrent review requirements of
subsection
18.89.040 or the restriction of subsection
18.89.040 on the time that applications may be submitted.
      2.   Application. An application for a concurrent plan amendment/rezoning
or specific plan may be submitted by the property owner at any time.
Applications shall include information required for both the plan amendment
under
Chapter 18.89, and either rezoning under
Chapter 18.91 or specific plan under
Chapter 18.90. The planning director shall determine if the application meets
the criteria for a concurrent plan amendment/rezoning or specific plan as
provided in Section
18.89.041. If the planning director determines that the application does not
meet the criteria, a plan amendment may be applied for through the processes
described in
Chapter 18.89. However, the applicant may direct a written appeal to the
planning and zoning commission appealing the decision of the planning director
within ten working days of the planning director's decision. The appeal shall
be scheduled for the next regularly scheduled planning and zoning commission
meeting that is to occur at least ten working days after the date the written
appeal is received, but the appeal shall not require the notice described in
Section
18.89.040(D)(5). The planning and zoning commission shall make its decision
based on the criteria in Section
18.89.041(C)(4).
      3.   For purposes of this subsection, property adjacent to the subject
property is considered "abutting" the adjacent property only if the property
boundaries of the adjacent property and the subject property physically connect
or are separated by no more than one hundred feet from the subject property by
a road or alley.
      4.   Criteria.
         a.   Any request for a concurrent plan amendment/rezoning or specific
plan must meet the following criteria:
            1)   The proposed use must not conflict with any applicable
policies, including regional, special area or rezoning policies, of the
comprehensive plan.
            2)   There has not been a concurrent plan amendment/rezoning
previously approved for the subject property, or any portion thereof.
         b.   In addition to the requirements of subsection
18.89.041(C)(4)(a) a concurrent plan amendment/rezoning may be requested for
residential uses if Section
18.91.030(E)(2) does not require a preliminary development plan and if the
following restrictions are met:
            1)   One additional residence may be requested if at least five
percent of the perimeter of the subject property, as measured in linear feet,
abuts properties with a zoning district or comprehensive plan designation that
allows a density equal to or greater than that requested for the concurrent
plan amendment/rezoning.
            2)   More than one additional residence may be requested if fifty
percent or more of the perimeter of the subject property, as measured in linear
feet, abuts properties with a zoning district or comprehensive plan designation
that allows a density equal to or greater than that requested for the
concurrent plan amendment/rezoning.
         c.   In addition to the requirements of subsection
18.89.041(C)(4)(a) a concurrent plan amendment/rezoning or specific plan may be
requested for non-residential or mixed uses:
            1)   If Section
18.91.030(E) does not require that a preliminary development plan be submitted
with a proposed rezoning and at least five percent of the perimeter of the
subject property, as measured in linear feet, abuts properties with a zoning
district or comprehensive plan designation equal to or less restrictive than
that requested for the concurrent plan amendment/rezoning;
            2)   If Section
18.91.030(E) requires that a preliminary development plan be submitted with a
proposed rezoning and the property is not greater than ten acres in area and
seventy-five percent or more of the perimeter of the subject property, as
measured in linear feet, abuts properties with a zoning district or
comprehensive plan designation equal to or less restrictive than that requested
for the concurrent plan amendment/rezoning; or
            3)   If the applicant is requesting a Specific Plan.
      5.   Notwithstanding the planning director's decision to proceed, per
Section
18.89.041(C)(2), at the public hearing the planning and zoning commission may
separate the plan amendment and rezoning or specific plan processes. The
commission may continue either or both public hearings on the plan amendment
and rezoning applications for a definite time not to exceed a combined total of
nine months, in conformance with Section
18.91.070(A)(3) of the zoning code. The commission may continue either or both
public hearings on the plan amendment and the specific plan applications for a
definite time not to exceed a combined total of three months, in conformance
with Section
18.90.060(F)(4). If a continuance requires that new public notice be provided,
the cost of providing the new notice shall be borne by the applicant. If the
plan amendment and rezoning or specific plan hearings are separated by the
commission, they shall be heard concurrently by the board of supervisors.
      6.   If a concurrent plan amendment/rezoning or specific plan is approved
for the subject property, a rezoning policy shall be added to the comprehensive
plan stating that a concurrent plan amendment/rezoning or specific plan was
approved for the property and also stating the zoning district and uses
approved for the property, if limited by the board of supervisors.
      7.   Future rezoning or specific plan requests. If a property owner
wishes to apply for a zoning district or specific plan district less
restrictive than that approved for the concurrent plan amendment/rezoning or
specific plan, an amendment to the comprehensive plan, in accordance with
Chapter 18.89, must be approved before the rezoning or specific plan may be
scheduled for public hearing.
      8.   Public Meeting. An applicant for a concurrent plan amendment/
rezoning or specific plan shall hold a public meeting regarding the proposed
request at least fifteen days prior to the public hearing before the planning
and zoning commission. The applicant shall invite those property owners and
neighborhood and homeowners' associations of record within the public notice
area, as set forth in Section
18.91.060(B)(1)(c) for plan amendment/rezoning meetings and Section
18.90.060(E)(1)(c) for plan amendment/specific plan meetings. The list of
property owners shall be provided by the development services department but
the applicant is responsible for ensuring proper notice and conducting the
public meeting. For concurrent plan amendment/specific plan public meetings the
applicant shall comply with Section
18.90.060(C)(2). The applicant shall provide the development services
department with a copy of the notice sent to surrounding property owners at
least thirty days prior to the public hearing before the planning and zoning
commission and provide a copy of the sign-in sheet and a summary of the meeting
prior to the public hearing.
      9.   Public Notice. Public notice shall be as set forth in Section
18.91.060(B) for rezoning hearings and Section
18.90.060(E) for specific plan hearings, except that all required notice shall
include a statement that the proposed action is in accordance with the
requirements for a concurrent plan amendment and rezoning or specific plan.
   D.   Except as provided for in this subsection, all changes and amendments
to the comprehensive plan shall be processed in accordance with Sections
18.89.040 and
18.89.050 and all rezonings shall be processed in accordance with
Chapter 18.91.
(Ord. 2017-3 § 4, 2017; Ord. 2016-37 § 1 (part), 2016)
18.89.050   Comprehensive plan update program.
   A.   Purpose. The comprehensive plan update program is intended to
facilitate the review of the comprehensive plan, in its entirety, on a periodic
basis and to provide the means to amend and update the plan where necessary.
Development trends will be identified and assumptions underlying the plan will
be researched during this process. Extensive public participation will be
solicited to insure that revisions reflect community values.
   B.   Schedule.
      1.   The comprehensive plan update program shall be conducted at least
every ten years. On or before the tenth anniversary of the plan's most recent
adoption, the existing plan shall either be readopted or a new plan adopted.
      2.   A program to update the plan, including a proposed schedule for
completion, shall be prepared by the department and approved by the planning
and zoning commission.
   C.   Program Content. At a minimum, the update shall include an evaluation
of and, where necessary, revisions to the following:
      1.   Plan elements of Section
18.89.030(D)(1);
      2.   Other relevant plan elements of Section
18.89.030(D)(2);
      3.   Population, housing, and economic conditions and projections;
      4.   Land use map and legend;
      5.   Regional, rezoning, and special area plan policies;
      6.   Zoning code provisions and other ordinances and resolutions working
at cross purposes to the updated plan.
   D.   Plan Amendment Requests Submitted by Property Owners. During the
comprehensive plan update year, property owners may submit plan amendment
requests (including map amendment requests) in accordance with Section
18.89.040 and development services department policies.
   E.   Review and Public Notice Requirements. For the re-adoption of the
current plan or adoption of a plan update pursuant to this section, the
following shall occur:
      1.   Public participation, agency and jurisdictional review and comment,
public notification and adoption requirements shall be in accordance with ARS §
11-805 and the board adopted public participation plan.
      2.   Public comment shall be actively sought during the planning process.
      3.   Department public meetings: The development services department
shall, at a minimum:
         a.   Hold one public meeting to discuss the plan update, and receive
public comment at least four weeks before the study session by the commission;
         b.   Make available to the public a final draft of the plan update,
including all proposed land use intensity categories, plan policies, rezoning
and special policy areas, and growth areas at least fifteen days before public
hearing by the commission.
      4.   Planning and zoning commission review:
         a.   Commission study session:
            1)   The commission shall review the plan update during a study
session;
            2)   The commission may set the plan update for public hearing, or
send the plan update back to the development services department for further
development or evaluation;
            3)   Public notice for the study session shall be given by
publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county seat.
         b.   Commission public hearing:
            1)   At least one public hearing shall be held to consider and take
testimony on the plan update;
            2)   A minimum of fifteen days prior to the hearing, the
development services department shall provide notice by publication of a
display ad in a newspaper of general circulation which states the plan update
is available for public review;
            3)   If, during the public hearing, changes to the plan update are
requested that have not been evaluated by the department, the commission shall
identify those having merit for further consideration and take action during a
subsequent public hearing;
            4)   The commission shall provide a recommendation to the board
which shall require the affirmative votes of a majority of the members present;
            5)   After the public hearing, the department shall transmit the
public hearing summary and recommendations of the commission to the board;
            6)   The commission may continue the public hearing for a definite
time not to exceed nine months.
      4.   Board of supervisors review:
         a.   Board public hearing:
            1)   At least one public hearing shall be held to consider and take
testimony on the comprehensive plan update;
            2)   A minimum of fifteen days prior to the hearing, the
development services department shall provide notice by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation of a display ad which states the plan update
is available for review;
            3)   The board may continue the hearing for a definite time not to
exceed nine months;
            4)   If, during the public hearing, changes to the plan update are
requested that have not been evaluated by the department, the board shall
identify those having merit for further consideration and take action during a
subsequent public hearing.
         b.   Board action and subsequent referral to the commission: The board
may change any portion of the plan or amendment thereto, after first referring
the changed portion back to the commission for its recommendation. The
recommendation of the commission regarding the changed portion may be accepted
or rejected by the board during a subsequent public hearing advertised in
accordance with Section
18.89.050(E)(4)(a) above.
         c.   The board may adopt the plan update as a whole, or by successive
actions adopt separate parts of the plan.
(Ord. 2016-37 § 1 (part), 2016)
   FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-37, § 1, adopted July 5, 2016, amended
Chapter 18.89, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former
Chapter 18.89, §§ 18.89.010—18.89, pertained to similar material, and derived
from Ord. No. 1985-82; Ord. No. 1985-141; Ord. No. 1987-64; Ord. No. 1992-96;
Ord. No. 1994-11; Ord. No. 1994-147; Ord. No. 1994-148; Ord. No. 1995-94, 1995;
Ord. No. 1998-26, 1998; Ord. No. 1998-50, 1998; Ord. No. 2002-65, 2002; Ord.
No. 2007-41, 2007 and Ord. No. 2010-27, 2010. (Back)
Chapter 18.90
SPECIFIC PLANS
18.90.010   Purpose.
18.90.020   Definitions.
18.90.030   Application.
18.90.040   Plan initiation.
18.90.050   Specific plan requirements.
18.90.060   Planning and zoning commission review.
18.90.070   Board of supervisors review.
18.90.080   Ordinance adoption and amendment procedures.
18.90.090   Plan implementation requirements and procedures.
18.90.010   Purpose.
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to implement A.R.S. Section 11-
825 by establishing uniform criteria and procedures for the review, adoption
and implementation of specific plans within the unincorporated area of Pima
County, in order to:
      1.   Provide a bridge between the county's comprehensive plan and
individual development projects;
      2.   Establish, in an atmosphere of mutual consent, versatile, orderly,
cost effective and environmentally sound land development regulations for
designated areas;
      3.   Be used as the preferred planning tool for the development of land
within the buffer overlay zone,
Chapter 18.67.
(Ord. 1988-116 § 5, 1988; Ord. 1987-64 § 1 (part), 1987)
18.90.020   Definitions.
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this chapter only, the following terms
shall mean:
      1.   Certificate of Compliance: A document signed by the planning
director or designee certifying that all specific plan conditions which are
prerequisites to issuance of building permits have been satisfied.
      2.   Specific Plan district: The area proposed or adopted for specific
plan zoning.
(Ord. 2017-3 § 5 (part), 2017; Ord. 1987-64 § 1 (part), 1987)
18.90.030   Application.
   A.   Staff consultation: The applicant shall consult with the planning and
development services department prior to application in order to review
procedures and possible plan requirements.
   B.   Applicant: A specific plan shall be requested by filing a specific plan
application with the planning department and shall be made only by:
      1.   The property owner(s) of the subject property; or
      2.   An agent for the property owner(s); or
      3.   Pima County, upon initiation by the planning and zoning commission.
   C.   Restrictions on application:
      1.   Consent: The written consent of one hundred percent of property
owners of record within the proposed specific plan district shall be required
at the time of application submittal. If proper ownership of a parcel is in
question, the applicant shall be responsible for furnishing written proof of
the indicated ownership and authorization for signature.
      2.   Configuration: The proposed specific plan district shall not create
an area that is not within the plan but is surrounded by the plan boundary.
   D.   Submittals:
      1.   All specific plan applications shall include, at a minimum:
         a.   A completed and signed application form;
         b.   The tax code number and a legal description of the property;
         c.   A precise map showing the proposed specific plan district;
         d.   The written consent of all property owners within the specific
plan district and a list, by name and title, of all ownership interest (e.g.,
individual, corporate, trust or limited partnership) in the property, in
accordance with A.R.S. Section 33-506;
         e.   If applicable, a letter of authorization from the owner, with the
owner's original or electronic signature designating an agent to represent the
property owner;
         f.   A rezoning site analysis except the preliminary development plan
is replaced with a specific plan conceptual site map done in accordance with
Section
18.90.050;
         g.   Text elements done in accordance with Section
18.90.050;
         h.   Biological Impact Report.
      2.   Applicable specific plan fees in accordance with the adopted fees
schedule.
      3.   Submittals shall be prepared in a format consistent with
departmental policy.
   E.   Specific plan compliance with comprehensive plan:
      1.   The director of planning and development services shall determine if
a specific plan application complies with the comprehensive plan, or if
submitted as a Concurrent Plan amendment, it will comply with the comprehensive
plan.
      2.   If the zoning classifications proposed in the specific plan area
comply with the Pima Prospers Land Use Intensity Legend with regard to each
land use intensity category and the minimum and maximum gross density
limitations for the land use intensity category in which the subject property
is located and the Planning Official determines that the specific plan furthers
the intent of the policies of the Comprehensive Plan, including any special
district plans, the specific plan application shall be determined to be in
compliance with the comprehensive plan.
      3.   A determination as to whether or not a specific plan is in
compliance with the comprehensive plan may be appealed to the commission,
provided such an appeal is requested in writing within thirty working days from
the date of the determination.
      4.   Specific plans determined to not be in compliance with the
comprehensive plan shall not be set for a public hearing until the applicant
has submitted, and the board has approved, an application to amend the
comprehensive plan land use plan, in accordance with Section
18.89.040 or
18.89.041. If the plan amendment is approved by the board and it is
subsequently determined, in accordance with this section, that the rezoning
request complies with the comprehensive plan, upon request by the applicant,
the specific plan shall be set for public hearing in accordance with this
chapter.
      5.   The planning director shall notify the applicant of the
determination regarding compliance with the comprehensive plan within twenty
working days of submittal of a complete application.
   F.   Staff review coordination: The county planning and development services
department shall coordinate the comments and requirements of applicable county
departments and other agencies.
(Ord. 2017-3 § 5 (part), 2017; Ord 2007-41 § 3, 2007; Ord. 1998-35 § 1 (part),
1998; Ord. 1995-94 § 2 (part), 1995; Ord. 1994-114 § 5 (part), 1994; Ord. 1994-
11 § 2 (part), 1994; Ord. 1992-96 § 1 (part), 1992; Ord. 1987-64 § 1 (part),
1987)
18.90.040   Plan initiation.
   A.   Specific plan requests are deemed to be initiated upon complete
application.
   B.   Limitations on Application. An applicant shall have nine months from
the date of submittal of an application to request a public hearing on the
application. If a request is not submitted, the application shall be closed due
to a lack of further action. Incomplete applications shall be closed three
months after the date of submittal.
(Ord. 1994-114 § 5 (part), 1994: Ord. 1992-96 § 1 (part), 1992; Ord. 1987-64 §
1 (part), 1987)
18.90.050   Specific plan requirements.
   A.   Site analysis requirements:
      1.   A site analysis in accordance with adopted county policy is
required, except that the specific plan map (refer to Section
18.90.050B1) shall be substituted for the preliminary development plan.
      2.   The site analysis shall become part of the adopted specific plan
regulations.
   B.   Specific plan requirements:
      1.   Map elements:
         a.   Identification of primary land uses in accordance with the
preliminary development plan requirements (refer to Section
18.91.030E);
         b.   Adjacent lots and structures within one hundred fifty feet of the
plan boundary;
         c.   Open space, recreational facilities, parks, trails;
         d.   Public, educational, and religious facilities;
         e.   Drainage plan;
         f.   Areas affected by the hillside development overlay zone (
Chapter 18.61) or other overlay zones;
         g.   Name, location and extent of existing or proposed major and
collector streets located within the planning area or needed for servicing the
project;
         h.   Location and extent of existing or proposed provisions for sewage
disposal, effluent use, storm water drainage, solid waste disposal and public
utilities.
         i.   Underlying land use designation when Golf Course Zone (
Chapter 18.59) is used.
      2.   Text elements:
         a.   The detailed regulations and programs for the systematic
implementation of the specific plan, including plan amendment procedures and
regulations and density transfer limitations (refer to Section
18.90.080B);
         b.   Specific development standards for the map elements;
         c.   Hydrology analysis;
         d.   Standards for the phasing, construction and maintenance of major
and collector streets proposed for the planning area or needed for servicing
the project;
         e.   Standards for the phasing, construction and maintenance of sewage
disposal, effluent use, storm water drainage, solid waste disposal and public
utilities;
         f.   Standards for the conservation, development or utilization of
natural resources, including surface water, soils, vegetation and wildlife;
         g.   The methods of conservation (if any) for scenic natural and built
features and viewsheds;
         h.   General landscape program;
         i.   For single-phase plans, a draft schedule for the preservation of
site features established by the plan and the construction, dedication and
provision of public services;
         j.   For multi-phased plans;
            1)   A draft phasing schedule for the preservation of site features
established by the plan, the development of the various master blocks of the
specific plan, and the construction, dedication and provision of public
services, and
            2)   The draft form of master assurances to be recorded prior to
ordinance adoption (refer also to Section
18.90.070D5).
      3.   The plan text will specify how and to what extent the plan is to
supplement or supersede adopted county zoning regulations. The regulations of a
specific plan shall not supersede the regulations of
Chapter 18.57 applicable to the Davis-Monthan airport environs, Davis-Monthan
Approach-Departure Corridors, or the Davis-Monthan noise control zones.
   C.   Public hearing fees: Specific plan public hearing fees are required at
the time of submittal of the specific plan and are payable to the county
treasurer in accordance with the fees schedule adopted by county ordinance.
(Ord. 2017-3 § 5 (part), 2017; Ord. 2006-96 § 2, 2006; Ord. 1998-39 § 2, 1998;
Ord. 1987-64 § 1 (part), 1987)
18.90.060   Planning and zoning commission review.
   A.   Staff review:
      1.   The applicant shall submit the specific plan and site analysis to
the county planning division for review and comment.
      2.   The plan shall be reviewed as follows:
         a.   Planning staff shall review the documents and notify the
applicant of their adequacy for commission public hearing and the determination
regarding compliance with the comprehensive plan within thirty days of
submittal.
         b.   If no changes have been recommended, planning staff shall
schedule the plan for a public hearing. Comments on changes shall be returned
within ten days of receipt of such changes.
      3.   When the specific plan request is scheduled for public hearing, the
planning division shall prepare a report which, at a minimum:
         a.   Discusses and determines the extent to which the proposal is in
compliance with both the land use intensity categories, Section
18.89.030(A)(1), and plan policies, Section
18.89.030(A)(2);
         b.   Assesses the site analysis;
         c.   Analyzes the expected impact of the proposed development on the
site and surroundings;
         d.   Contains a departmental recommendation to the commission;
         e.   Recommends (if necessary) special regulations for the proposed
specific plan;
         f.   Includes the comments and conditions of other affected county
departments and public agencies.
         g.   If applicable, evaluates the conformance of the specific plan
request to the performance standards of
Chapter 18.67 (Buffer Overylay Zone).
      4.   Availability of report: The staff report shall be available for
public inspection fifteen days prior to the date of commission public hearing.
   B.   Public review and comment:
      1.   In accordance with Section
18.90.040B3, except that the applicant shall provide written proof of contact
and offer of meeting to the planning department at least thirty days prior to
the date of public hearing by the commission.
      2.   At the meeting, copies of the site analysis and proposed specific
plan that have been accepted for public hearing shall be available and the
applicant shall describe significant deviations by the specific plan from
existing regulations and the proposed density transfer mechanism.
   C.   Study session: A planning and zoning commission study session for
review of the specific plan may be scheduled after submittal of the specific
plan. At the discretion of the chair of the commission, and after proper
notice, the study session may be held at the specific plan site.
   D.   Public notice:
      1.   A minimum of fifteen days prior to the hearing, the planning
division shall provide notice by:
         a.   Publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county seat; and
         b.   Posting of the property to be considered at the hearing; and
         c.   Mailing written notice to all property owners within the specific
plan district and all property owners within six hundred feet of the district,
except that notice shall be expanded to include owners of property within one
thousand feet of the district if existing zoning of the district is RH, GR-1,
SR or SR-2.
      2.   Expansion of notice: The commission may expand the notification area
to greater than six hundred feet, which shall be noticed prior to a public
hearing.
      3.   Failure to provide written notice to, or the omission of the name
of, a property owner shall not invalidate an action of the commission.
      4.   When the area of the specific plan district is smaller than the area
defined by the property line boundaries of parcels included in the specific
plan, the notification area shall be measured from the property line
boundaries, unless the planning official determines that it is not necessary
for public awareness of the proposal.
   E.   Public hearing.
      1.   After proper public notice, the planning and zoning commission shall
hold a public hearing on the application, at which all interested parties shall
be heard.
      2.   The commission shall recommend regulations necessary to protect the
public health, safety and welfare, and may recommend regulations unique to the
plan or special instructions for plan administration.
      3.   The commission shall vote by separate motion on specific plan
regulations that supplement or supersede adopted county zoning regulations.
      4.   The commission may continue the public hearing, for a definite time
not to exceed three months, on its own initiative or at the request of the
applicant or affected property owners.
      5.   After the public hearing, the planning department shall transmit the
findings and recommendations of the commission to the board of supervisors,
except as provided in Section
18.90.060G.
      6.   The planning department may also transmit alternative
recommendations when staff and commission opinions differ.
   F.   Department evaluation:
      1.   The planning department is authorized to evaluate recommendations of
the commission when enforceability is uncertain.
      2.   If such evaluation results in, or implies, a change in intent, as
determined by the commission legal advisor, the evaluation shall be submitted
to the commission for its decision prior to transmittal of commission findings
to the supervisors.
      3.   All evaluations shall be submitted to the commission for noticed
public hearing at the next regular commission public meeting.
   G.   Limitations on application:
      1.   The applicant shall have three months from the date of final
commission action to request a board of supervisors public hearing on the
application. If a request is not submitted, the application shall be closed,
due to lack of further action.
      2.   Upon written request to the planning director, a single thirty-day
extension may be provided.
(Ord. 2017-3 § 5 (part), 2017; Ord. 2007-41 § 4, 2007; Ord. 1999-79 § 1 (part),
1999; Ord. 1998-51 § 4, 1998; Ord. 1998-39 § 3, 1998; Ord. 1995-94 § 2 (part),
1995; Ord. 1994-114 § 5 (part), 1994; Ord. 1994-11 § 2 (part), 1994; Ord. 1992-
96 § 1 (part), 1992; Ord. 1987-64 § 1 (part), 1987)
18.90.070   Board of supervisors review.
   A.   Public notice: Public notice of the board of supervisors hearing shall
be provided in accordance with Section
18.90.060E.
   B.   Protest petition and voting requirement:
      1.   A three-fourths vote of all members of the board of supervisors
shall be required for approval, if written protest submitted to the supervisors
two business days prior to the public hearing totals at least twenty percent of
the owners of property, by area and number, within three hundred feet of the
specific plan district.
      2.   In calculating protest by area, only that portion of a lot or parcel
of record situated within three hundred feet of the specific plan district
shall be included. In calculating protest by number or area, county property
and public rights-of-way shall not be included.
      3.   Written withdrawals of protest to a specific plan may be submitted
until the close of the supervisors' public hearing.
      4.   If the existing zoning of the specific plan district includes RH,
GR-1, SR or SR-2, the planning division shall provide to the supervisors an
additional calculation of written protests submitted from owners of property
within the one thousand foot notification area.
   C.   Public hearing:
      1.   After proper public notice, the board of supervisors shall hold a
public hearing on the application, at which all interested parties shall be
heard.
      2.   The supervisors may continue the public hearing, for a definite time
not to exceed nine months, on their own initiative or at the request of the
applicant or affected property owners.
      3.   The supervisors may approve the specific plan, amend planning and
zoning commission recommendations or approve additional specific plan
conditions, or deny the request. Substantial changes shall be referred to the
commission in accordance with Section
18.90.080C.
      4.   The supervisors shall vote by separate motion on specific plan
regulations that supplement or supersede adopted county zoning regulations.
      5.   If approved, the specific plan is subject to departmental evaluation
of enforceability of regulations approved by the supervisors (refer to Section
18.90.070D).
   D.   Department evaluation:
      1.   The planning division is authorized to evaluate specific plan
regulations approved by the supervisors when enforceability is uncertain.
      2.   If such evaluation results in, or implies, a change in intent, as
determined by the supervisors' legal advisor, the evaluation shall be submitted
to the supervisors at a public hearing within thirty days of approval.
(Ord. 2017-3 § 5 (part), 2017; Ord 1999-79 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1998-35 § 1
(part), 1998; Ord. 1994-114 § 5 (part), 1994; Ord. 1987-64 § 1 (part), 1987)
18.90.080   Ordinance adoption and amendment procedures.
   A.   Specific plan ordinance adoption:
      1.   The board of supervisors may add conditions at a public hearing
after the date of approval and before ordinance adoption when such additions
are determined necessary for the public health, safety or welfare.
      2.   The board of supervisors shall adopt an ordinance changing the
zoning district to the specific plan district no later than thirty days after
specific plan approval.
      3.   Existing zoning and the land use plan recommendation for the
property shall remain in effect and permits based on the approved specific plan
shall not be issued until a specific plan ordinance for the property is adopted
by the supervisors.
      4.   Upon adoption of the specific plan ordinance, the specific plan
shall become the zoning district of the subject property and shall replace the
existing zoning designation on the official county zoning map.
   B.   Density transfer:
      1.   The planning director may permit the transfer of densities to more
suitable locations within the specific plan; provided:
         a.   The locations and procedures for such transfers are explicitly
stated within the plan; and
         b.   The overall density of the plan or individual planning area is
not exceeded.
      2.   The specific plan shall designate density donor and recipient areas
within which density transfers are permitted. In areas adjacent to uses of
similar or less intensity, appropriate buffer areas shall be delineated by an
individual specific plan to be designated only as donor areas.
      3.   The total number of units transferred to a recipient area shall not
exceed ten percent of the number of dwelling units established for the area;
individual specific plans may establish a lower maximum transfer percentage.
Any transfer greater than the established maximum transfer percentage is a
substantial change (refer to Section
18.90.080C).
   C.   Specific plan substantial changes:
      1.   Scope: All specific plans shall describe in sufficient detail the
criteria and process for amendment based on the minimum requirements of this
section.
      2.   Consistency: All specific plan amendments shall be in substantial
conformance with the remainder of the specific plan and shall be in compliance
with the comprehensive plan in accordance with Section
18.90.030.E.
      3.   Procedure:
         a.   The owner or agent of the property may submit to the planning
department a written application to amend one or more of the specific plan
regulations;
         b.   The request shall be accompanied by documentation of unforeseen
changes in the marketplace, government regulations or natural conditions that
have occurred since plan adoption and that create special hardship due to
unique circumstances of the subject property;
         c.   The planning director shall determine if the amendment would
result in a substantial change in plan regulations, which is a change in a:
            1)   Density regulation, if the number of residences per acre
increases by more than ten percent or exceeds the maximum number of dwelling
units (dwelling-unit cap) permitted within the plan; or
            2)   Policy regulation, when the regulation is a policy or a
variation of a policy contained in an applicable land use plan; or
            3)   Design regulation, when change is to be made to quantified
physical dimensions (such as buffers) which were established to adapt the plan
to specific site characteristics or mitigate development impacts on the site
and surrounding area; or
            4)   Use regulation, when a use not otherwise permitted in the
specific plan is sought.
         d.   If the request is determined to be an insubstantial change, the
proposed amendment shall require a noticed public hearing and action by the
board of supervisors. In addition, the supervisors may refer any amendment
request to the planning and zoning commission for its recommendation prior to
taking action.
         e.   If the request is determined to be a substantial change, the
planning director shall refer the request to the commission for noticed public
hearing and recommendation prior to public hearing by the supervisors. Specific
plan substantial changes that occur after board of supervisors' approval of the
specific plan (Section
18.90.070.C) are subject to protest petition procedures.
         f.   A substantial change may require, as determined necessary by the
planning director, submittal of an amended site analysis.
         g.   For all hearings, the planning division shall prepare a staff
report in accordance with Section
18.90.060A.
(Ord. 1998-35 § 1 (part), 1998; Ord. 1994-114 § 5 (part), 1994; Ord. 1992-96 §
1 (part), 1992; Ord. 1987-64 § 1 (part), 1987)
18.90.090   Plan implementation requirements and procedures.
   A.   Plan administration: The planning and development services department
is the lead agency for the administration of specific plans and shall
coordinate the procedures and review by applicable county departments and other
agencies.
   B.   Plan implementation procedures:
      1.   The implementation of specific plans shall be in accordance with the
procedures of this code.
      2.   Specific plans may establish additional implementation procedures,
provided such methods are not in conflict with required procedures and are
fully described by the specific plan.
   C.   Assurances:
      1.   Standard assurances in accordance with Section
18.69.070 (Subdivision Standards) are required for specific plans that include
the subdivision of land.
      2.   Master assurances are required for specific plans that comprise
phases of development that are to be established by master block recording, or,
at the discretion of the county engineer, for specific plans that will not be
subdivided.
   D.   Plan implementation monitoring:
      1.   The principal owner or developer of the specific plan shall prepare
an annual implementation monitoring report for review by applicable county
departments and submittal at public hearings by the planning and zoning
commission and the board of supervisors.
      2.   The report shall describe in acceptable form and detail:
         a.   Project adherence to schedules established by the specific plan;
         b.   The number of dwelling units proposed, platted and permitted, and
the allocation of the balance of approved units;
         c.   A record of zoning violations charged to the project; and
         d.   Such items as shall be established by adopted county policy.
   E.   Plan enforcement: The enforcement of specific plan regulations shall be
in accordance with
Chapter 18.95 (Compliance and Enforcement).
(Ord. 1987-64 § 1 (part), 1987)
Chapter 18.91
REZONING PROCEDURES
18.91.010   Purpose.
18.91.020   Definitions.
18.91.030   Application.
18.91.040   Initiation.
18.91.050   Staff review.
18.91.060   Public review, notice and comment.
18.91.070   Planning and zoning commission review.
18.91.080   Board of supervisors review.
18.91.090   Rezoning Time Limits and Certificate of compliance.
18.91.100   Special procedures.
18.91.010   Purpose.
   A.   Purpose. As authorized by A.R.S. § 11-829, this chapter establishes a
public process for zoning district changes and amendments, upon recommendations
by the planning and zoning commission and adoption by the board of supervisors,
that:
      1.   Implement the comprehensive plan; and
      2.   Are consistent with the guiding principles of this code.
(Ord. 1985-141 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.91.020   Definitions.
   A.   Certain terms used in this chapter shall be defined, for purposes of
this chapter only, as follows:
      1.   Agent: An individual, corporation or partnership with written
authorization to represent a property owner in the rezoning process.
      2.   Applicant: A property owner or agent making application and
representing a subject property for rezoning.
      3.   Certificate of compliance: A document signed by the planning
director certifying that all rezoning conditions which are prerequisites to
issuance of building permits have been satisfied.
      4.   Condition: A performance requirement of rezoning.
      5.   Condition, special: A condition relating to development impact
mitigation.
      6.   Condition, standard: A condition relating to subdivision,
transportation, flood control or wastewater management facilities or policies.
      7.   Substantial change: A change in a:
         a.   Density special condition, if the number of residences per acre
(RAC) increases by:
            1)   Ten percent or greater; or
            2)   Fifty or more units; or
         b.   Policy special condition, when the condition is a policy or a
variation of a policy contained in a land use plan; or
         c.   Design special condition; that is, when change is to be made to
quantified physical dimensions which were established in a special condition to
adapt to specific site characteristics or mitigate development impacts on the
site and surrounding neighborhood. Examples of such dimensions include
setbacks, heights, natural areas, or areas to be disturbed, when these are
stated in a special condition; or
         d.   Use special condition which states that only a specific set of
uses of the zone are permitted on the site.
      8.   Zoning district: Any portion of Pima County in which the same set of
zoning regulations apply.
(Ord. 1994-114 § 6 (part), 1994; Ord. 1992-18 § 1 (part), 1992; Ord. 1985-141 §
1 (part), 1985)
18.91.030   Application.
   A.   Scope.
      1.   A zone change or amendment may be requested by filing a rezoning
application with the planning and development services department;
      2.   Application for rezoning may only be made by the following:
         a.   The property owner of the subject property; or
         b.   An agent for the property owner; or
         c.   Pima County, upon initiation by the planning and zoning
commission.
   B.   Restriction on Application. Applications shall not be considered on
property denied rezoning by the board of supervisors within the previous twelve
months, if the request is for zoning equal to or less restrictive than that
previously denied (Refer to Section
18.05.010B, Zones).
   C.   Staff Consultation. The applicant is advised to consult with county
staff concerning potential requirements prior to submittal of the application.
   D.   Application.
      1.   The completed rezoning application shall include, at a minimum:
         a.   A legal description of the property;
         b.   A list, by name and title, of all ownership interest in the
property (e.g., individual, corporation, trust or limited partnership), in
accordance with A.R.S. § 33-506;
         c.   A letter of authorization for an agent;
         d.   A precise plan showing the area of proposed zoning district
changes and land use intensity categories as shown on the comprehensive plan
land use plan;
         e.   Applicable rezoning fees, in accordance with the adopted rezoning
fees schedule;
         f.   A sketch plan or preliminary development plan (refer to
subsection E of this section);
         g.   Rezoning impact statement and a rezoning site analysis, when
required (refer to subsection F of this section);
         h.   A biological impact report, including a biological assessment
concerning endangered or threatened species.
      2.   Refer to written departmental policies for application specifics,
which may require additional submittals;
      3.   Incomplete applications shall not be processed;
      4.   Hearing notification maps shall be prepared only by the planning
division.
   E.   Plan Submittals.
      1.   Sketch plan:
         a.   Scope: A sketch plan which illustrates the basic features of the
proposed development shall be submitted for rezoning of any parcel that is:
            1)   Less than or equal to one acre in size; or
            2)   Greater than one acre but less than or equal to five acres in
size, to be developed at a residential density of less than four residences per
acre;
         b.   Specifications: A sketch plan shall contain the following
applicable elements:
            1)   Parcel boundaries and dimensions;
            2)   Approximate location and size of all structures;
            3)   Points of ingress and egress;
            4)   Adjacent public rights-of-way;
            5)   Building setbacks; and
            6)   Parking areas;
      2.   Preliminary development plan:
         a.   Scope:
            1)   A preliminary development plan and support data, which
illustrate and describe the proposed development, shall be submitted for
rezoning of any parcel that is:
               a)   Greater than one acre in size, to be developed for
nonresidential uses; or
               b)   Greater than one acre in size, to be developed at a
residential density of four or more residences per acre; or
               c)   Greater than five acres in size;
            2)   A plan to be developed in accordance with CPI (
Chapter 18.49 Campus Park Industrial Zone), GC (
Chapter 18.59 GC Golf Course Zone), cluster development option (Section
18.09.040 General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions) or the site analysis
policy may serve as the required preliminary development plan, provided that
all other conditions of this subsection are met:
         b.   Specifications: A preliminary development plan shall be drawn on
a topographic map at a scale which is adequate to show all necessary details
clearly. It shall contain, at a minimum, the following applicable mapped
elements and supporting information:
            1)   Map elements:
               a)   Parcel boundaries and dimensions;
               b)   Approximate location and size of all structures, or lots in
the case of single-family detached lot sales developments. On project sites
over one hundred acres, lots and structures within one hundred fifty feet of
the boundary of the property including the rezoning and proposed lots and
structures on visually prominent portions of the property shall be indicated.
Additionally, the project site may be divided into planning units, the total
number of which shall not exceed one per each ten acres of land in the proposed
rezoning area. Within each planning unit no more than three alternative
configurations depicting structures and/or lots may be proposed;
               c)   Existing and proposed adjacent public rights-of-way;
               d)   Points of ingress and egress, and internal streets and
circulation features, including bicycle and pedestrian paths;
               e)   Parking areas;
               f)   Existing and proposed utility and sewer easements;
               g)   Buffers, screening and walls;
               h)   Landscaped areas;
               i)   Recreation areas, common areas, open spaces and natural
areas;
               j)   Natural drainage features and proposed drainage
improvements;
               k)   Significant physical features such as restricted peaks or
ridges;
               l)   Areas where the natural grade of the site will be changed
by more than five feet;
               m)   Wells or well sites within one hundred feet of the site;
               n)   Land uses and number of stories of buildings within three
hundred feet of the site; and
               o)   Proposed trail right-of-way determined in consultation with
the Pima County parks and recreation department based upon the "Pima Regional
Trail System Master Plan Map or successor" and other available information.
            2)   Written support data: The following data shall also be
provided:
               a)   Gross floor area of commercial and industrial structures;
               b)   Building heights;
               c)   Total number of dwelling units;
               d)   Maximum residential density of each planning unit;
               e)   Total number of parking spaces;
               f)   Type of landscaping;
               g)   Pertinent preliminary hydrologic data, and a statement if
natural drainage courses are to be obstructed or disturbed or if regulatory
natural floodplains are to be altered or filled;
               h)   Statement of water service provision and availability; and
               i)   Any other illustrative information which cannot be depicted
on the preliminary development plan map;
         c.   Effect: The sketch plan or preliminary development plan shall be
presented at public hearings. Adherence to the applicable plan, as may be
amended, is a special condition of rezoning approval, unless the condition is
specifically deleted by recommendation of the planning and zoning commission
and/or action of the board of supervisors.
   F.   Site Analysis Requirements. The site analysis consists of specific
written and graphic requirements for inventory and analysis, and the subsequent
preliminary development proposal for a site. Refer to written county policy
concerning site analysis requirements.
(Ord. 2011-1 § 2 (part), 2011; Ord. 2001-103 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 1995-39 § 1
(part), 1995; Ord. 1994-114 § 6 (part), 1994; Ord. 1992-96 § 1 (part), 1992;
Ord. 1986-41 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-141 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.91.040   Initiation.
   A.   Scope. Rezoning requests are deemed to be initiated upon complete
application.
   B.   Exceptions: A request that conforms to a zoning plan does not require
public hearings.
   C.   Requirement of Compliance with Comprehensive Plan. Rezoning requests
shall be classified as to whether or not they are in compliance with the
comprehensive plan.
      1.   The director of planning and development services shall determine if
rezoning requests are in compliance with the comprehensive plan.
      2.   If a rezoning request complies with the Pima Prospers Land Use
Intensity Legend with regard to each land use intensity category and the gross
density limitation for the land use category in which the subject property is
located, the rezoning request shall be determined to be in compliance with the
comprehensive plan.
      3.   A determination as to whether or not a rezoning request is in
compliance with the comprehensive plan may be appealed to the commission,
provided such an appeal is requested in writing within thirty working days from
the date of the determination.
      4.   Rezoning requests determined to not be in compliance with the
comprehensive plan.
         a.   Rezoning requests determined to not be in compliance with the
comprehensive plan shall not be set for a public hearing until the applicant
has submitted, and the board has approved, an application to amend the
comprehensive plan land use plan, in accordance with Section
18.89.040. If the plan amendment is approved by the board and it is
subsequently determined, in accordance with this section, that the rezoning
request complies with the comprehensive plan, the rezoning request shall be set
for a public hearing upon request by the applicant, in accordance with Section
18.91.040.D.
         b.   Rezoning requests determined to not be in compliance with the
comprehensive plan, but which meet the requirements for a concurrent plan
amendment/rezoning in Section
18.89.041 shall be set for public hearing, in accordance with this chapter.
      5.   The planning director shall notify the applicant of the
determination regarding compliance with the comprehensive plan within ten
working days of submittal of a complete application.
   D.   Payment of Fees. The planning division shall not schedule a request for
commission public hearing until all applicable rezoning fees are paid.
   E.   Limitations on Applications. An applicant shall have nine months from
the date of submittal of an application to request a public hearing on the
application. If a request is not submitted, the application shall be closed due
to a lack of further action. Incomplete applications shall be closed three
months after the date of submittal.
(Ord. 2017-3 § 6 (part), 2017; Ord. 2010-27 § 2, 2010; Ord. 2007-41 § 5, 2007;
Ord. 1995-94 § 3, 1995; Ord. 1994-114 § 6 (part), 1994; Ord. 1994-11 § 3
(part), 1994; Ord. 1992-96 § 1 (part), 1992; Ord. 1987-20 § 1 (part), 1987;
Ord. 1986-41 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-141 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.91.050   Staff review.
   A.   Staff report. The planning division shall prepare a report on the
rezoning request which, at a minimum:
      1.   Discusses and determines the extent to which the proposed rezoning
is in compliance with both the land use intensity categories of the land use
plan, Section
18.89.030A, and plan policies, Section
18.89.040(B).
      2.   Assesses the site analysis (when required) or rezoning impact
statement;
      3.   Analyzes the expected impact of the proposed development on the site
and surroundings, including but, not limited to, the expected impact on
endangered or threatened species of plants and animals;
      4.   Contains a departmental recommendation to the planning and zoning
commission;
      5.   Includes the comments and standard conditions of other affected
county departments and public agencies, including any applicable county review
committees;
      6.   Recommends special conditions which would place density, design or
use restrictions on the use of the proposed zone.
      7.   If applicable, evaluates the conformance of the rezoning request to
the performance standards of
Chapter 18.67 (Buffer Overlay Zone).
   B.   Availability of report.
      1.   The staff report shall be available for public inspection fifteen
days prior to the date of commission public hearing;
      2.   The applicant shall be provided an opportunity to discuss staff
recommendations prior to public availability of the report.
(Ord. 2001-103 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 1998-51 § 5, 1998; Ord. 1994-11 § 3
(part), 1994; Ord. 1993-12 § 1 (part), 1993; Ord. 1992-96 § 1 (part), 1992;
Ord. 1992-18 § 1 (part), 1992; Ord. 1985-141 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.91.060   Public review, notice and comment.
   A.   Public review.
      1.   When a site analysis is required, the applicant is responsible for
written contact of all property owners within the notification area and of
affected neighborhood associations, and shall offer to hold a meeting, with a
specified date, for review of the proposed rezoning. An adequate site analysis
shall be available at the meeting;
      2.   The applicant shall provide written proof of contact and offer of
meeting to the department at least thirty days prior to the date of public
hearing by the commission;
      3.   The request shall not be set for public hearing without such written
proof.
   B.   Public Notice.
      1.   Planning and zoning commission public hearing: A minimum of fifteen
days prior to the hearing, the department shall provide notice by:
         a.   Publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county seat; and
         b.   Posting of the property or area to be considered at the hearing,
with a minimum of two notices and, for rezonings, at least one notice each
quarter mile of frontage along a public right-of-way, all such notices being at
least seventeen by eleven inches in dimension; and
         c.   Mailing written notice, for rezoning items only, to all property
owners within the proposed zoning district and all property owners within three
hundred feet of the proposed district, except that notice shall be expanded to
include owners of property within one thousand feet of the district if existing
zoning of the district is RH, GR-1, SR or SR-2;
      2.   Board of supervisors public hearing: As required for the commission;
      3.   Exceptions: Mailed, written notice and posting of property for
public hearings shall not be required for adoption or amendment of a county
land use plan (refer to
Chapter 18.89 Land Use Plans);
      4.   Expansion of notice: The commission or supervisors may expand the
notification area to greater than three hundred feet, which shall be noticed
prior to a public hearing;
      5.   Failure of notice: The unintentional failure to give written notice
or the unintentional omission of the name of a property owner shall not
invalidate an action of the commission or supervisors.
   C.   Public comment.
      1.   Neighborhood associations and other interested parties may register
for notification of public hearings in accordance with written departmental
policy;
      2.   Rules of procedure shall be in accordance with adopted written
commission or supervisors policies.
   D.   United States Fish and Wildlife Service Comment.
      1.   The applicant is responsible for written notice to the United States
Fish and Wildlife Service of the pending rezoning matter.
      2.   The applicant shall provide staff with written proof of notice to
the United States Fish and Wildlife Service at least 30 days prior to the date
of public hearing by the commission.
      3.   The United States Fish and Wildlife Service may register for
notification of public hearings pursuant to subsection
18.91.060(C).
(Ord. 2011-2 § 21, 2011; Ord. 2001-103 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 1999-79 § 1
(part), 1999; Ord. 1988-204 (part), 1989; Ord. 1985-141 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.91.070   Planning and zoning commission review.
   A.   Hearing.
      1.   After proper public notice, the planning and zoning commission shall
hold a public hearing on the application, at which all interested parties may
appear and shall be heard;
      2.   The commission may recommend amendments or additions to staff-
recommended rezoning conditions;
      3.   The commission may continue the public hearing, for a definite time
not to exceed nine months, on its own initiative or at the request of the
applicant or affected property owners.
   B.   Transmittal of findings to board of supervisors.
      1.   After the public hearing, the planning division shall transmit the
findings and recommendations of the commission to the board of supervisors,
except as provided in subsection (B)(3) of this section;
      2.   Planning staff may also transmit alternative recommendations when
staff and commission opinions differ;
      3.   Department evaluation:
         a.   The department is authorized to evaluate recommendations of the
commission when enforceability is uncertain;
         b.   If such evaluation results in, or implies, a change in intent, as
determined by the commission legal advisor, the evaluation shall be submitted
to the commission for its decision at a noticed public hearing, prior to
transmitting commission findings to the supervisors;
         c.   All evaluations shall be submitted to the commission at the next
regular commission public hearing.
   C.   Review of zoning plan plat waiver requests.
      1.   An application that conforms to the zoning designation of a zoning
plan requiring the filing of a subdivision plat as a condition of rezoning may
include a request to waive the platting requirement. The waiver request shall
be accompanied by a biological impact report and shall be referred to the
commission for review and recommendation.
      2.   An advertised public hearing or mailed notice is not require
         d.   The commission may make amendments or additions to staff
recommended conditions of the plat waiver. After the commission has made its
recommendation, the planning division shall transmit the recommendation of the
commission to the board of supervisors.
   D.   Limitations:
   The applicant shall have three months from the time of final commission
action on the application to request a board of supervisors public hearing on
the application. If a request is not submitted, the application shall be
closed, due to lack of further action.
(Ord. 2001-103 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 1997-68 § 2, 1997; Ord. 1994-114 § 6
(part), 1994; Ord. 1987-20 § 1 (part), 1987; Ord. 1985-141 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.91.080   Board of supervisors review.
   A.   Hearing.
      1.   After proper public notice, the board of supervisors shall hold a
public hearing on the application, at which all interested parties may appear
and shall be heard. An advertised hearing or mailed notice is not required for
zoning plan plat waiver requests.
      2.   The supervisors may continue the public hearing, for a definite time
not to exceed nine months, on their own initiative or at the request of the
applicant or affected property owners.
   B.   Protest petition and voting requirement.
      1.   A three-fourths vote of all member of the board of supervisors shall
be required for approval, if written protest submitted to the supervisors two
business days prior to the public hearing totals at least twenty percent of the
owners of property, by area and number, within three hundred feet of the
rezoning.
      2.   In calculating protest by area, only that portion of a lot or parcel
of record situated within three hundred feet of the rezoning shall be included.
In calculating protest by number or area, county property and public rights-of-
way shall not be included.
      3.   Written withdrawals of protest to a rezoning may be submitted until
the close of the supervisors public hearing.
      4.   If the existing zoning of the rezoning request area includes RH, GR-
1, SR or SR-2, the planning division shall provide to the supervisors an
additional calculation of written protests submitted from owners of property
within the one thousand foot notification area.
   C.   Approval by the supervisors.
      1.   The supervisors may amend commission recommendations or approve
additional rezoning conditions.
      2.   If the supervisors approve the request, the planning and development
services department shall schedule for adoption a rezoning ordinance comprising
a map and a list of all rezoning conditions approved by the supervisors. The
rezoning ordinance shall state that the supervisors may waive or amend
conditions, but that if the planning and development services director
determines that the amendment or waiver would result in a substantial change in
rezoning conditions, the planning and zoning commission shall hold a public
hearing on the request prior to public hearing by the supervisors.
      3.   If a rezoning is approved by the supervisors, the approval shall be
subject to a time limit of not more than five years from the date of approval
in which to meet all rezoning conditions.
      4.   Department evaluation:
         a.   The planning and development services department is authorized to
evaluate conditions approved by the supervisors when enforceability is
uncertain;
         b.   If such evaluation results in, or implies, a change in intent, as
determined by the board of supervisors legal advisor, the evaluation shall be
resubmitted to the supervisors for their decision and a noticed public hearing;
         c.   All evaluations shall be submitted to the supervisors at a
regular supervisors public meeting within thirty days of initial action.
   D.   Denial by the Supervisors. Future applications for rezoning are
restricted by Section
18.91.030B.
(Ord. 2017-3 § 6 (part), 2017; Ord. 1999-79 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1998-35 § 2,
1998; Ord. 1997-68 § 2, 1997; Ord. 1996-91 § 1 (part), 1996; Ord. 1994-114 § 6
(part), 1994; Ord. 1993-12 § 1 (part), 1993; Ord. 1992-18 § 1 (part), 1992;
Ord. 1985-141 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.91.090   Rezoning Time Limits and Certificate of compliance.
   A.   Time Limits
      1.   A certificate of compliance shall not be issued unless all rezoning
conditions are satisfied on or before the expiration date established for the
case under Section
18.91.080 or Section
18.91.100(C).
      2.   If rezoning conditions have not been satisfied within the required
time limit and a written request for a time extension has not been received by
the planning division. The case shall be forwarded to the board of supervisors
for reversion to its previous zone in accordance with Section
18.91.100(F). For purposes of this chapter, the term "previous zone" means the
zoning classification existing on the property immediately prior to the
rezoning.
   B.   Determination of Conformance. During satisfaction of the conditions of
a rezoning, if a subdivision plan (
Chapter 18.69, subdivision standards), development plan (
Chapter 18.71, development plan standards), landscape plan (
Chapter 18.73, landscape plan requirements and review procedures) or other
submittal does not substantially conform to the sketch plan or preliminary
development plan as approved, staff review shall cease and the planning and
development services director shall recommend that a waiver request be
initiated (refer to Section
18.91.100(A).
   C.   Issuance of Certificate of Compliance.
      1.   The planning official shall sign the certificate of compliance only
when all rezoning conditions which are prerequisites to the issuance of
building permits have been satisfied.
      2.   No permits based on the adopted rezoning ordinance shall be issued
unless and until a certificate of compliance is signed by the planning
official, except as otherwise provided in this code.
(Ord. 1996-91 § 1 (part), 1996; Ord. 1992-18 § 1 (part), 1992; Ord. 1985-141 §
1 (part), 1985)
18.91.100   Special procedures.
   A.   Amendment or Waiver of Rezoning Conditions.
      1.   The owner of a property may submit to the planning and development
services department a written request to amend or waive one or more of the
conditions of the rezoning;
      2.   The request shall be accompanied by a biological impact report and
documentation of unforeseen changes in the marketplace, governmental
regulations or natural conditions, that have occurred since the approval and
that create special hardship due to unique circumstances of the subject
property;
      3.   All requests for the amendment or waiver of approved or adopted
rezoning conditions shall require a noticed public hearing and action by the
board of supervisors;
      4.   If the planning official determines that the amendment or waiver
would result in a substantial change, as defined in Section
18.91.020(A)(7) in any rezoning condition, the planning official shall refer
the request to the planning and zoning commission for noticed public hearing
and recommendation prior to public hearing by the supervisors. A request for an
amendment or waiver that would result in a substantial change to an approved
condition of rezoning is subject to the protest petition procedures of Section
18.91.080(B);
      5.   For all hearings, the department shall prepare a staff report in
accordance with Section
18.91.050(A);
      6.   In addition, the supervisors may refer any amendment or waiver
request to the commission for its recommendation prior to taking action. If
they determine that an amendment or waiver would result in a substantial change
in rezoning conditions, they shall refer it to the commission;
      7.   If the supervisors amend or waive a rezoning condition, the planning
and development services department shall prepare a resolution stating the
approved amendment or waiver of condition, and schedule it for adoption by the
supervisors.
   B.   Sketch Plan or Preliminary Development Plan Changes.
      1.   Public hearing process: If modifications of a sketch plan or
preliminary development plan occur by action of the planning and zoning
commission or board of supervisors during the public hearing process, an
overlay map or a revised plan showing the recommended revisions shall be
submitted to the planning and development services department:
         a.   If changes are recommended by the commission, no further public
hearing shall be advertised until receipt of an acceptable overlay map or a
revised plan, which verifies the recommended changes;
         b.   If changes are made by the supervisors and, in the opinion of the
supervisors, the changes warrant the commission's reconsideration of the plan,
the supervisors may re-refer the plan to the commission for further
recommendation. No hearing before the commission shall be held until receipt of
an acceptable overlay map or a revised plan which verifies the changes made by
the supervisors;
         c.   If changes are made by the supervisors and, in the opinion of the
supervisors do not warrant the commission's reconsideration of the plan, the
changes shall be incorporated into the revised sketch plan or preliminary
development plan, which shall be submitted to the department within thirty
working days after the hearing. No subdivision plans, development plans or
other submittals shall be accepted until the revised plan is received and
verified;
      2.   Subsequent to approval:
         a.   Once a sketch plan or preliminary development plan has been
approved by the supervisors, only nonsubstantial changes which do not change
the intent of the plan can be made with the approval of the planning and
development services director. The director may, however, recommend that any
nonsubstantial change be referred to the commission or the supervisors as a
waiver request;
         b.   Any substantial change to an approved sketch plan or preliminary
development plan shall be considered as a waiver request (refer to Section
18.91.100A).
   C.   Time Extensions.
      1.   A property owner or the owner's authorized agent may request an
extension of the time limit established for a case under Section
18.91.080. A written time extension request shall be accompanied by a
biological impact report and shall be submitted to the planning division on or
before the expiration date of the time limit. Rezoning time extension fees
shall be paid in accordance with the adopted fees schedule.
      2.   The planning division shall prepare a report on the time extension
request in accordance with Section
18.91.050.A and may, as warranted by changed circumstances, also recommend the
addition, modification or deletion of rezoning conditions. The staff report
shall indicate whether or not the recommended modification or deletion would
result in a substantial change of a zoning condition that would require a
hearing before the planning and zoning commission under Section
18.91.100.A.6.
      3.   A noticed public hearing by the board of supervisors is required for
time extensions. Notice shall be provided in accordance with Section
18.91.060.B. At the time of consideration of a time extension request, the
supervisors may add, modify or delete rezoning conditions in conformance with
Section
18.91.100.A.6.
      4.   The board of supervisors shall not grant a time extension beyond ten
years from the date of original rezoning approval.
      5.   The supervisors may choose to approve only a portion of the rezoning
for a time extension. The approved new time limit begins as of the previous
expiration date.
      6.   If a rezoning ordinance has not been adopted for the rezoning prior
to the expiration date and the supervisors approve a new time limit, a rezoning
ordinance shall be forwarded to the supervisors for adoption.
      7.   If a rezoning ordinance has been adopted, a resolution for the new
time limit shall be forwarded to the supervisors for adoption.
      8.   If the supervisors deny the time extension request, the rezoning
case shall be closed and the property shall revert to its previous zone.
   D.   Rezoning Applications Approved Prior to April 3, 1992.
      1.   Rezoning requests which had conditional approval and no time limit
prior to April 3, 1992 may be closed or receive time limits in accordance with
Section
18.91.100.C or F, or be scheduled for rezoning ordinance adoption in accordance
with Section
18.91.080.C.2, after a decision of the board of supervisors.
      2.   Rezoning requests which received conditional approval prior to April
3, 1992, and are subject to a time limit may be scheduled for rezoning
ordinance adoption in accordance with Section
18.91.080.C.2. Prior to the expiration date, the planning division shall notify
the owner and process the rezoning in accordance with Section
18.91.100.C.
      3.   Public hearings and notice shall be provided in accordance with this
chapter.
   E.   Closure of Rezoning Cases.
      1.   The planning division shall close rezoning cases:
         a.   Upon expiration of time limits prescribed in Sections
18.91.040.E and
18.91.070.C;
         b.   Upon written request of the applicant made prior to adoption of a
rezoning ordinance by the board of supervisors for the entire property;
         c.   After the effective date of annexation for the entire property;
         d.   Upon denial of the rezoning request by the supervisors;
         e.   Upon issuance of a certificate of compliance by the planning
director for the entire property;
         f.   Upon reversion of the property to its previous zone by action of
the supervisors in accordance with Section
18.91.100.C and F.
         g.   Upon denial of a rezoning time extension request. If a time
extension request is denied for only a portion of the rezoning site, that
portion of the rezoning shall be closed.
   F.   Reversion of Rezoning.
      1.   After the expiration date of a time limit, if no time extension
request has been submitted and the required rezoning conditions have not been
satisfied which would allow a certificate of compliance to be issued for all or
a portion of the property, then the planning division shall schedule a public
hearing by the board of supervisors to cause the property to revert to its
previous zoning classification.
      2.   The planning division shall notify the property owner by registered
mail of a public hearing date before the supervisors.
      3.   If the supervisors decide not to close the rezoning case, the
applicant shall submit a time extension request and fee to the planning
division within 30 days of the date of the supervisors' decision. The planning
division shall prepare a time extension request for public hearing in
accordance with Section
18.91.100.C. If the time extension application and fee are not filed within the
required 30 days, the rezoning case shall be closed by the planning division.
      4.   If the supervisors close the rezoning case, the property shall
revert to its previous zone.
   G.   Special Procedures for Golf Course (GC) Zoning.
   Refer to Section 18.59.560 (GC Golf Course Zone) for GC requirements and
procedures.
(Ord. 2001-103 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 1996-91 § 1 (part), 1996; Ord. 1994-114 §
6 (part), 1994; Ord. 1993-12 § 1 (part), 1993; Ord. 1992-18 § 1 (part), 1992;
Ord. 1987-74 § 1, 1987; Ord. 1985-141 § 1 (part), 1985)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/823198ed86cc6c67e0b87a0572675e63d98264cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4473.png]
 
Chapter 18.92
TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS
18.92.010   Purpose.
18.92.020   Definitions.
18.92.030   Fee required.
18.92.040   Calculation of development rights.
18.92.050   Conditions for severance and use of development rights.
18.92.060   Severance and transfer of development rights.
18.92.070   Standard procedure for transfer.
18.92.080   Optional methods for transfer of development rights.
18.92.090   Effect of transfer.
18.92.100   Amendment and appeal procedures.
18.92.110   Delegation of authority.
18.92.120   Zoning maps.
18.92.010   Purpose.
   As authorized by A.R.S. § 11-821.03, this chapter establishes a process by
which potential development associated with one lot or parcel of land may be
transferred to another lot or parcel of land in Pima County. The intent of this
chapter is to provide property owners in defined "sending areas" with an
additional economic use of their lands in order to encourage development to
instead occur in defined "receiving areas" that comply with the adopted
comprehensive plan. All such transfers of development potential shall be in
compliance with the adopted comprehensive plan, as well as all other
requirements of Title 18 of the Pima County Code to the extent that the other
Code requirements do not conflict with the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2007-7 § 1 (part), 2007)
18.92.020   Definitions.
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this chapter only, the following terms
shall mean:
      1.   Comprehensive plan: The most recent adopted comprehensive plan of
Pima County, including but not limited to any adopted amendments to or updates
of the comprehensive plan, as well as any adopted special area policies or
rezoning policies of the comprehensive plan.
      2.   Department: The Pima County development services department.
      3.   Development rights: The maximum development that would be allowed on
a lot or parcel in the sending property under the Pima County comprehensive
plan or zoning code applicable to the sending property in effect on the date
this chapter is adopted, whichever provides greater density or intensity of
use, or both, respecting the permitted use, area, bulk or height of
improvements made to one or more lots or parcels.
      4.   Sending area: All those lands designated on the Pima County
development rights sending area overlay map attached as Exhibit A to this
ordinance. Each lot or parcel, or portion of a lot or parcel, contained within
the sending area designated on that map qualifies as one or more of the
following types of lands:
         a.   An "important riparian area", "biological core management area",
"special species management area", or "critical landscape connection"
designated in the Pima County conservation lands system, each of which
qualifies as natural habitat; or
         b.   A "high noise or accident potential zone" of a "military airport"
or an "ancillary military facility", as those three terms are defined in A.R.S.
§ 28-8461; or
         c.   A floodplain, geologic feature, recreation area or parkland, or
land that has unique aesthetic, architectural or historic value.
      5.   Sending property: Any lot or parcel, or portion of a lot or parcel,
contained in a sending area.
      6.   Receiving area: All those areas of Pima County designated on the
Pima County development rights receiving area overlay map attached as Exhibit B
to this ordinance.
      7.   Receiving property: Any lot or parcel, or portion of a lot or
parcel, contained in a receiving area, within which development rights are
increased under the comprehensive plan, a specific plan, if any, or the zoning
code, whichever provides greater density or intensity of use or, if applicable,
both, in effect prior to a transfer of development rights and an amendment to
the comprehensive plan, specific plan, zoning code, or a rezoning of the
property, whichever is required to implement the increase in development
rights.
(Ord. 2007-7 § 1 (part), 2007)
18.92.030   Fee required.
   Payment of an applicable development right registration fee in accordance
with the adopted fee schedule is required as a condition of registering the
sale of development rights severed from a sending property in accordance with
this chapter. Payment of an applicable development right use fee in accordance
with the adopted fee schedule is required as a condition of using development
rights on a receiving property in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-7 § 1 (part), 2007)
18.92.040   Calculation of development rights.
   A.   The number of development rights associated with a parcel shall be
calculated as of the initial effective date of this ordinance. An owner of the
parcel applies to the department for such a calculation, except as set forth in
this section.
   B.   For purposes of this chapter only, the number of development rights
associated with a sending property shall be the larger of:
      1.   One development right for each residential dwelling that could
potentially be constructed on the sending property without a conditional use
approval; or
      2.   One development right for each one hundred and eighty thousand
(180,000) square feet of commercial, institutional, or industrial gross floor
area that could potentially be constructed on the sending property without a
conditional use approval; or
      3.   If both residential dwellings and non-residential floor area could
potentially be constructed on the sending property without a conditional use
approval, then the number of development rights shall be based on the mix of
potential residential, commercial, institutional, and/or industrial development
that could be developed as part of the same project, without a conditional use
approval, that would maximize the number of development rights, calculated
pursuant to subsections 1 and 2 above, on the sending property.
      4.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections 1, 2, and 3 above, if
the owner of a sending property requests an amendment to the comprehensive plan
applicable to the parcel in order to allow a higher level of development, the
board of supervisors may, in its discretion, approve, deny, or approve the
application with a provision that the owner shall not be able to further
increase the amount of potential development rights for transfer.
   C.   For purposes of this chapter only, the amount of residential dwelling
units and/or commercial, institutional, or industrial gross floor area that
could potentially be constructed on a sending property shall be the larger of:
      1.   The amount of such potential construction based on the underlying
zone as modified by any applicable overlay districts, pursuant to the zoning
code; or
      2.   The amount of such potential construction based on the adopted
comprehensive plan; or
      3.   The amount of such potential construction based on any adopted
specific plan for the property.
   D.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection C above:
      1.   If all or any part of a sending property has been the subject of a
prior rezoning for which the board of supervisors has adopted an ordinance and
the rezoning was approved with conditions that specifically limit the number of
dwelling units or the amount of commercial, institutional, or industrial floor
area that can be developed on the property, then the number of development
rights on such property shall be calculated in accordance with such conditions.
However, if rezoning conditions have not been completed and the board of
supervisors closes the rezoning case, the owner may proceed to calculate and
transfer development rights pursuant to this chapter.
      2.   If the board of supervisors has not adopted an ordinance for the
approved conditional rezoning, then the owner may withdraw the conditional
rezoning, terminate the rezoning case, and proceed to calculate and transfer
Development Rights pursuant to this chapter.
   E.   If the sending property already has development on it, then the
calculation of development rights pursuant to subsections B, C and D above
shall be reduced to reflect such existing development, so that the resulting
calculation reflects only additional potential development available on the
property.
   F.   If the sending property contains sensitive lands or other areas where
development would not be permitted pursuant to (1) a past rezoning of the
property, or (2) a Specific Plan applicable to the property or (3) requirements
of the zoning code, then such areas shall not be counted in the calculations of
Development Rights available on the property.
   G.   The owner of any sending property may request the department to
document the total number of development rights associated with the sending
property by delivering a written request to the department, and the department
shall respond to such request within thirty (30) days.
   H.   The owner of any receiving property may request the department to
document the total number of development rights that may be used on the
receiving property, consistent with this chapter, by delivering a written
request to the department, and the department shall respond to such request
within thirty (30) days. The department's written response shall clarify that
all, or none, or some of the development rights may be used on the proposed
receiving property due to (1) zoning restrictions, or (2) the provisions of the
adopted comprehensive plan applicable to the property, or (3) other conditions
previously attached to the property through rezoning, subdivision, or
development agreements, or (4) a provision of this chapter.
   I.   The documentation provided by the department pursuant to subsections G
or H above shall be valid for a period of three years, absent further
development or restriction of the sending or receiving property by the property
owner or if the property owner applies for and receives a rezoning or an
amendment to the comprehensive plan. The documentation provided pursuant to
subsections G and H shall include a disclaimer reflecting the content of this
subsection I.
(Ord. 2007-7 § 1 (part), 2007)
18.92.050   Conditions for severance and use of development rights.
   A.   In addition to compliance with all other provisions of this chapter,
severance and use of development rights shall be subject to the requirements of
this chapter. Pima County shall not recognize or register attempts to complete
severance or use of development rights that do not comply with the following
conditions.
   B.   Conditions on severance in sending areas
      1.   Partial transfers of development rights
         a.   The owner of a sending property may sever some of the development
rights from that sending property, provided that the owner identifies the
portion of the sending property from which all development rights have been
severed, and upon which no future development shall be permitted. In the case
of a partial transfer of development rights:
   The ratio of A/B must be greater than or equal to the ratio of C/D where:
   A = the acreage of the sending property protected from development by
restrictive covenant;
   B = the total acreage of the sending property;
   C = the total number of development rights severed; and
   D = the total number of development rights that would have been available on
the sending property if no part of it had been developed.
   For example, if the owner of a sending property that has 10 development
rights, and no development has occurred on the sending property, and the owner
chooses to sever only four of those 10 development rights, the owner shall
identify at least 40% of the of the sending property as the area from which all
development rights have been severed. The restrictive covenant (or notice of
anticipated restrictive covenant) required by section
18.92.060(C) shall be applied to the area identified, and no further
development of that area shall be permitted.
         b.   Where the Pima County Code provides that more development rights
are available for severance and transfer than for development on the sending
property, the ratio of land from which all development rights are removed shall
be completed as set forth in subsection a above. The amount of development
rights available for development on the remainder of the property shall be
calculated without regard to any additional development rights that may have
been available for transfer. For example, if a property has 24 development
rights available for development, but 30 available for transfer, and the owner
chooses to transfer half of the available development rights, the owner may
transfer 15 development rights, provided that 50% of the sending property is
restricted from further development. On the remaining 50% of the land, the
owner may use one half of the development rights that would have been available
for development, or 12 development rights.
         c.   In the case of each transfer of development rights from a sending
property that does not include all of the development rights available for
severance and transfer, the lands protected from future development through the
restrictive covenant shall be located contiguous to either (i) any lands on the
same sending property previously protected from development or (ii) any lands
on adjacent parcels previously protected from development, if possible. If
these contiguity requirements would be required with more than one adjacent
area, the owner shall only be required to comply with one of the contiguity
requirements, and the owner shall determine which of the contiguity
requirements shall apply. In order to ensure that contiguity requirements are
met, the County may require the applicant for transferable development rights
certificate(s) to provide a title insurance report regarding surrounding
parcels of land. If the owner believes that it is not possible to comply with
any of the contiguity requirements, the owner may appeal the applicability of
the contiguity requirements to the sending property pursuant to section
18.92.100.
         d.   Land subject to a restrictive covenant must be maintained as
undisturbed open space unless the land, at the time of development right
severance, is in use as grazing or agricultural land, in which case these uses,
and all related ancillary structures, may continue.
      2.   Rocking K South sending area: No more than 500 development rights
may be transferred from the Rocking K South sending area, located south of Old
Spanish Trail.
   C.   Conditions on use in receiving areas: All development applications
incorporating the use of transferred development rights shall comply with all
development standards and dedication requirements applicable to the most
restrictive zone that (1) allows the proposed uses as permitted or conditional
uses, and (2) has a maximum development density or intensity equal to or
greater than the development density or intensity shown in the application. At
the owner's option, if there is another less restrictive zone that would allow
the same gross density as the proposed development (including development
rights) but would allow smaller individual lots the proposed development may
instead comply with the development standards provided that the development is
reviewed, based on guidelines in the Pima County Transferable development
rights Manual, and approved by the design review committee.
      1.   All receiving areas: Additional conditions applicable to all
receiving areas include the following:
         a.   Dedication of right-of-way as determined necessary by the Pima
County department of transportation.
         b.   Cultural resources conditions:
            i.   Prior to ground modifying activities, an on-the-ground
archaeological and historic resources survey shall be conducted on the subject
property, and submitted to Pima County for review.
            ii.   Cultural resources mitigation plan for any identified
archaeological and historic sites on the subject property shall be submitted to
Pima County at the time of, or prior to, the submittal of any tentative plan or
development plan. All work shall be conducted by an archaeologist permitted by
the Arizona State Museum, or a registered architect, as appropriate.
         c.   Flood control district conditions:
            i.   Portions of properties within FEMA floodways and the brawley
and black wash flow corridors may not be used for developments utilizing
development rights.
            ii.   Prior to submittal of a subdivision plat or development plan,
the property owner shall meet with the Pima County flood control district to
determine if the property to be developed in accordance with this chapter is
affected by any regulatory floodplains, and if so, what measures or studies may
be necessary.
            iii.   During review of the subdivision plat or development plan,
the flood control district may require that the proposed development be
redesigned, and if necessary, that the number of proposed residences be
reduced.
      2.   Rural receiving areas: Developments utilizing development rights in
biological rural receiving areas must dedicate at least fifty-five percent
(55%) of the development as natural open space. All other rural receiving areas
must dedicate at least thirty percent (30%) of the development as natural open
space. This dedication may also count towards the satisfaction of other open
space requirements.
      3.   Rocking K South vicinity receiving area: No more than 500
development rights can be transferred to the receiving areas adjacent to the
Rocking K specific plan, located south of Old Spanish Trail.
   D.   Notwithstanding the requirements of section
18.92.040 and sections
18.92.050(A), (B) and (C), development rights for an approved, undeveloped golf
course that has no approved, underlying uses or zoning within an adopted
specific plan may be either converted to residential uses on the golf course
property, transferred to land adjacent to the specific plan property if under
the same ownership, or may be considered a sending property provided the
following requirements are met:
      1.   The development rights for the approved golf course shall be
calculated at 2.5 residences per acres.
      2.   The dwelling unit cap of the approved specific plan shall not be
exceeded.
      3.   A restrictive covenant must be recorded on the golf course property
indicating that the rights to construct a golf course have been severed from
the property.
      4.   All other requirements of this chapter must be adhered to, except
that the open space required under Section
18.92.050(B) need not be provided if dwelling units are transferred from the
golf course area. A restrictive covenant, as required by Section
18.92.060(C), must be recorded indicating the number of dwelling units
transferred from the golf course.
(Ord. 2007-7 § 1 (part), 2007)
18.92.060   Severance and transfer of development rights.
   A.   Severance. The owner of any sending property may choose to sever one or
more development rights from the sending property, and may sell such
development right(s) to any person, at any price agreed upon between the buyer
and seller, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Development
rights may only be sold in increments of one (1) development right; fractional
development rights may not be sold.
   B.   Transfer. The owner of a receiving property may choose to purchase one
or more development rights from any person in order to increase the amount of
development permitted upon the receiving property, at any price agreed upon
between the buyer and seller, in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Development rights may only be purchased in increments of one (1)
development right; fractional development rights may not be purchased.
   C.   Restrictive covenant required
      1.   No transfer, sale or purchase of any development right shall create
any rights to additional development on a receiving property unless and until a
restrictive covenant meeting the requirements of this chapter has been recorded
with the Pima County Recorder identifying the portion of the sending property
restricted from future development and the number of development rights
transferred.
      2.   Each of the owner(s) of the sending property shall execute either
(1) the restrictive covenant meeting the requirements of this section, or (2) a
notice that the owner(s) are attempting to sell development rights from the
sending property, identifying the portion of the sending property from which
all development rights will be severed, and that the seller(s) intend to
execute a restrictive covenant meeting the requirements of this section no
later than the date on which a transaction for the sale of development rights
is completed. Each of the owners of the sending property shall execute the
restrictive covenant or notice and the restrictive covenant or notice shall be
recorded with the Pima County Recorder. No transfer of development rights shall
be registered pursuant to section
18.92.070(C)(1) below until the recording of the restrictive covenant has been
completed and evidence of such recording submitted to the County.
      3.   Written consent of lienholders. If all or part of the sending
property is subject to one or more recorded liens, each lienholder must sign
the instrument of transfer and the restrictive covenant or notice confirming
its consent to the transfer of the development right(s) and the restriction of
future development on the sending property.
      4.   The restrictive covenant shall be on a form provided by Pima County,
shall be adequate to confirm that the portions of the sending property
restricted from future development meet all applicable requirements of this
chapter, and shall confirm that the potential development on the sending
property has been reduced by an amount equal to the development rights sold.
The restrictive covenant form shall, at a minimum, include all of the following
clauses: (1) that the restrictions on development are for the benefit of the
citizens of Pima County; (2) that the restrictions shall apply in perpetuity;
(3) that the restrictions shall be non-revocable without the written consent of
the board of supervisors and that consent requires approval by at least four
members of the board of supervisors; (4) that the restrictions shall remain in
effect notwithstanding any future annexation of any portion of the land by any
municipality; and (5) that Pima County approves the restrictive covenant. The
form shall be signed by the Director of the Department or his designee, the
owner(s) of record for the sending property, and any lien holder(s).
      5.   The restrictive covenant shall be sufficient to preserve those
characteristics of the sending property that made it eligible to be a sending
property under A.R.S. § 11-821.03, and to bind the owner of the sending
property and every successor in interest to such property to the preservation
of those characteristics.
      6.   The County may require that the restrictive covenant permit entrance
onto the property by the County or third parties for purposes of monitoring or
documenting compliance with the terms of the restrictive covenant, but shall
not require the owner of the sending property to allow public access to the
parcel unless the owner consents to such provision.
      7.   If the County determines that restrictions on future development on
the sending property, and enforcement of those restrictions can be accomplished
as effectively through the use of plat notes as through a restrictive covenant,
the County may authorize the use of plat notes wherever a restrictive covenant
would otherwise be required by this chapter, provided that the area to be
restricted from development is platted as common area.
      8.   The restrictive covenant shall be non-revocable without the written
consent of at least four members of the board of supervisors.
   D.   Registration of development rights severed on sending properties. After
the sending property owner records the restrictive covenant severing
development rights on the sending property, the property owner shall register
the severance with the department, which shall maintain a register of all
development rights severed. The sending property owner shall present a copy of
the signed restrictive covenant and a map, which shall, at a minimum, be drawn
to scale and show the entire property and acreage from which development rights
have been severed, the area and acreage to be restricted, and the number of
development rights severed. If any owner of record for the sending property or
any lienholder of record on the sending property fails to sign the restrictive
covenant, the County shall not register the severance or issue a development
right certificate representing the development rights identified in the
restrictive covenant.
   E.   Issuance of development right certificate.
      1.   At the time a development right is registered with the County, the
department shall issue one numbered development rights certificate for each
development right severed.
      2.   The development right certificate shall contain a section
identifying the property where the development right is intended to be used,
the owner of the receiving property where the development right is intended to
be used, and any lienholders on that receiving property, but this section need
not be completed or signed at the time the development right certificate is
issued.
   F.   Restricted lands excluded from calculation of development potential.
Once a restrictive covenant has been recorded, any remaining development
potential on the lands shall be calculated without regard to lands covered by
the restrictive covenant. Land areas covered by the restrictive covenant may
not be aggregated with any other lands for purposes of calculating gross
development density possible on any remaining unrestricted lands. Lands covered
by restrictive covenants cannot be used in calculating requirements for uses
under the zoning code.
   G.   Increased development in receiving areas.
      1.   Development rights may be used to increase the number of residential
dwelling units on a receiving property above the maximum permitted based on the
zoning in which the receiving property is located, except as limited by the
provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Each development right purchased shall, if the development
application is approved, enable the construction of one (1) additional
residential dwelling unit.
   H.   Maximum increase in development in receiving areas. The potential
increase in development shall be limited to the smaller of the following:
      1.   The maximum amount of development permitted on the receiving
property by the adopted comprehensive plan; or
      2.   The maximum amount of development permitted on the receiving
property as a condition attached to a prior rezoning of the property; or
      3.   The maximum amount of development permitted pursuant to the
provisions of section
18.92.050(C) above.
      4.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections 1, 2, and 3 above, if
the owner of a receiving property requests an amendment to the comprehensive
plan applicable to the parcel in order to allow a higher level of development,
the board of supervisors may, in its discretion, approve, deny, or approve the
application with conditions limiting the increase in density through the use of
acquired development rights.
(Ord. 2008-2 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2007-7 § 1 (part), 2007)
18.92.070   Standard procedure for transfer.
   A.   Development rights shall only be transferred pursuant to the procedures
provided in this chapter, or to the optional procedures described in section
18.92.080 below. Application materials and forms required for these procedures
are set forth in the Pima County Transferable Development Rights Manual, which
is available from the department.
   B.   Written consent of sellers. Each of the owner(s) of the sending
property shall execute an instrument provided by Pima County which conveys an
interest in real property, and shall identify one or more development rights as
the property interest being transferred, and shall include a legal description
of the sending property and the number of development right(s) being
transferred.
   C.   Sale or transfer transactions
      1.   Registration of transfer. The owner or purchaser of a development
right shall present the signed instrument of transfer together with (1) a copy
of the signed restrictive covenant required by section
18.92.060(C), showing the recording information and (2) evidence of ownership
of the sending property, to the department, which shall maintain a register of
all development rights sold. If any owner of record for the sending property,
or any lienholder of record on the sending property, fails to sign the
instrument of transfer or the restrictive covenant or notice, the County shall
not register the sale representing the development rights identified in the
instrument of sale.
      2.   Third parties and intermediaries. The buyer of a development right
need not be the owner of a receiving property on which the development right
will be used. Persons may purchase development rights for resale to owners of
receiving properties, or in anticipation of the purchase of a receiving
property, or for future resale, or to retire them from use.
      3.   Registration of each sale required. Upon the issuance of a
development right certificate(s), that certificate shall represent the
development right(s) severed from the sending property. A buyer of a
development right(s) may sell or transfer that development right(s) to owners
of receiving properties, or to third parties, through the sale and transfer of
the development right certificate to the buyer. In order to track the purchase,
sale, transfer and use of development rights, each successive purchaser of a
development right certificate shall register the sale with the department as
described in this section. Failure to register the resale of a development
right certificate shall not invalidate the development rights associated with
the certificate.
   D.   Use on receiving property
      1.   Eligibility of receiving property. When an owner of a development
right(s) intends to use those development right(s) on a specific receiving
property, the owner shall notify the department, and the department shall
respond in writing within thirty (30) days to confirm whether the development
rights may be used on the proposed receiving property. At the same time, the
department shall review the register of development rights and confirm that the
numbered development right certificates to be submitted have not been
invalidated or replaced pursuant to subsection J below, and shall notify the
applicant if there is any question as to the validity of the certificates
proposed to be used on the receiving property. The Pima County Transferable
Development Rights Manual may establish requirements for submission of
information in order to determine eligibility for transfer.
      2.   Eligibility does not constitute development approval. The
department's response shall not constitute development approval for the
proposed development on the receiving property, and shall not obligate the
County to approve development using some or all of the development rights
requested by the owner. The proposed development using the transferred
development rights must obtain all required development approvals, and
conditions attached to those development approvals may prevent the use of all
of the development rights requested.
      3.   Must use subdivision plat or development plan process.
         a.   Acquired development rights may be used only through the
subdivision plat or development plan approval process. Building permits shall
not be issued for construction through the use of acquired development rights
on lots created through the lot split process unless a plat or development plan
is approved for the use of the development rights. As part of any approval of a
plat or development plan reflecting the use of acquired development rights, the
County may require that the owner of the receiving property waive its rights to
apply for lot splits on any lands included within the application.
         b.   Subdivision plats shall include a plat note prohibiting the
creation of additional lots without replatting the entire subdivision.
Development rights certificates for the additional lots must be submitted to
the department and the subdivision shall conform to the comprehensive plan.
         c.   Development plans shall include a note prohibiting the creation
of additional dwelling units without submitting a new development plan for the
entire development. Development rights certificates for the additional units
must be submitted to the department, the development plan shall conform to the
comprehensive plan, and the development plan shall be recorded.
      4.   Submission of application materials. The owner of the receiving
property shall submit all required applications for a plat or a development
plan for the receiving property, and shall indicate the numbers of the
development rights being used to increase the number of dwelling units above
the amount otherwise permitted on the property.
      5.   In addition to the application materials otherwise required, the
owner of the receiving property shall submit the development right certificate
for each development right proposed to be used in the development, with the
section identifying the owner(s) and lienholder(s) of the receiving property
completed and signed by both the owner(s) and lienholder(s).
      6.   Submission of copy of recorded restrictive covenant. In addition to
other materials required, the owner of the sending property shall submit a copy
of the recorded restrictive covenant required by section
18.92.060(C).
   E.   Notice. At the time an application for development including
transferred development rights is approved for a receiving property, the County
shall notify each owner of a property adjacent to the receiving property. The
notice shall identify the receiving property, the type of development approved
in the application and the amount of development being accomplished through the
use of transferred development rights.
   F.   Review and approval. The procedures for review and approval of an
application including the use of transferred development rights shall be the
same as those procedures that would apply if no transferred development rights
were being used. A rezoning of the receiving property shall not be required for
use of development rights consistent with the provisions of this chapter. In
the event that the County approves the proposed development, the documentation
of the approval shall include the numbers of the development right certificates
used to support the number of residential dwelling units in the development.
   G.   Re-platting or re-approval for additional development. If the owner of
a receiving property receives a plat or development plan approval including the
use of development rights, and the owner subsequently wishes to file an
application for a new plat or development approval to accommodate additional
development on the receiving property (within the limits established in this
chapter), the owner shall first provide written notice of the proposed
application to the owners of lands located within the receiving property
covered by the prior approval and who purchased their properties following the
prior approval, and shall submit evidence of such notice with the new
application.
   H.   Retirement of development right certificates. After all required
development approvals have been obtained, and the full number of development
rights used on the receiving property is known or upon the request of the owner
of a development right certificate, the County shall retire those development
right certificates by retaining those certificates and stamping them with the
word "retired", by indicating in the register of development rights that the
specific numbered development rights are no longer valid, and by identifying
any receiving property development on which they were used.
   I.   Return of unused development certificates. Any development right
certificates submitted with the application that are not approved for use on
the receiving property shall be returned to the applicant within thirty (30)
days of a final decision on the development application, and may be used or
transferred for use on another eligible receiving property. In addition, if an
applicant obtains approval of a plat or development plan incorporating
development rights, and the owner of the land covered by that plat or
development plan subsequently obtains approval for a revised plat or
development plan incorporating less development, the County shall return to the
applicant for such revised plat or development plan one development right for
each dwelling unit that was previously approved, but that will no longer be
developed under the revised approval.
   J.   Lost, destroyed, or stolen certificates. If a development right
certificate is lost, destroyed, or stolen, the person appearing in the County
register as the last owner of the development right certificate may apply to
the County for the issuance of a replacement certificate. Upon receipt of the
request, the County shall place a notice in a newspaper of general circulation
at least one (1) time before taking action on the request. The notice shall
inform the public of the numbers of the development right certificates alleged
to have been lost, destroyed, or stolen, and that such development right
certificates will be invalidated unless the department receives written
information contesting the loss, destruction, or theft of those development
right certificates within thirty (30) days after the date of the first
newspaper notice. If written notice contesting the loss, destruction, or theft
of the certificate(s) is received within such period, or the County receives
other information questioning the loss, destruction, or theft of the
certificate(s), the department shall refer the matter to the director of the
department for determination of the ownership of the development right
certificates involved. If no written notice is received within the required
time, and if the County does not otherwise receive information questioning the
loss, destruction, or theft of the development right certificate(s) within the
thirty (30) days, the County shall invalidate the development right certificate
(s) alleged to have been lost, destroyed, or stolen, through an entry in the
County's register, and shall issue replacement development right certificates
with different numbers to the person making the claim of loss, destruction, or
theft.
   K.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the severance
and transfer of development rights from a sending property to a receiving
property under common ownership or control.
   L.   Expiration of rights.
      1.   If this ordinance or the enabling statute is repealed, then the
rights associated by the development rights certificates shall be effective for
five (5) years after repeal under the terms of this ordinance.
      2.   The County shall notify registered development rights certificate
owners of the repeal.
(Ord. 2007-7 § 1 (part), 2007)
18.92.080   Optional methods for transfer of development rights.
   A.   In addition to the process described in section
18.92.070, development rights may be transferred from a sending property to a
receiving property by any of the following procedures.
      1.   Use of development agreements for transfers. At the option of the
owner of a sending property and/or a receiving property, development rights may
be transferred from a sending property to the receiving property in connection
with a development agreement related to the sending or receiving property. To
exercise this option, the owner of the sending and/or receiving property shall
submit to the County an application for development approval reflecting a
restriction on development (in the case of a sending property) or permitting
additional residential dwelling units or increased commercial, institutional,
or industrial gross floor area (in the case of a receiving property) together
with a development agreement offering to transfer or submit development right
certificates representing the amount of development being restricted or the
amount of additional development being requested. In the event the board of
supervisors approves the development agreement, development approvals related
to the additional development described in the development agreement shall not
become effective until the required development right certificates have been
submitted and retired. A development agreement may cover all or a portion of
the lands within a sending or receiving property, and may also include lands
outside of a sending or receiving area, provided that the provisions relevant
to transfer of development rights do not affect the lands outside the sending
or receiving area. A development agreement may not be used to achieve transfers
of development rights from any area that is not a sending property or transfers
of development rights to any area that is not a receiving property.
      2.   Amendment of existing development agreement. A development agreement
executed before the adoption of this chapter may be amended to include
provisions for the transfer of development rights, provided that the terms of
the development agreement as amended (a) addresses land in a mapped sending
area and/or a mapped receiving area, and (b) are consistent with A.R.S § 11-
821.03, and (c) are consistent with the terms of this chapter.
      3.   Simultaneous platting of adjacent receiving and sending properties
under common ownership. If the receiving and sending properties are owned by
the same entity, provision of necessary documentation identifying the areas to
be protected on the sending property may occur at the time of subdivision or
development plan review, provided that the property owner submits subdivision
plats or development plans for both the receiving and sending properties for
review at the same time, or a single plat or development plan for both
properties, and the plat or development plan for the sending property
identifies the areas to be preserved. Final approval of the subdivision plat or
development plan for the receiving property shall not occur until the
subdivision plat or development plan for the sending property is approved.
(Ord. 2007-7 § 1 (part), 2007)
18.92.090   Effect of transfer.
   A.   If a transfer of development rights is completed pursuant to this
chapter, all future land use decisions, such as rezonings, amendments or
updates to the comprehensive plan, specific plans, variances or other actions
that change the development potential of a sending property or receiving
property by the County shall be consistent with the intent of the transfer.
   B.   No development approvals issued for a sending property shall have the
effect of permitting development equivalent to or in replacement of any of the
development rights previously severed. If a land use decision to allow
additional development on the sending property is made following the severance
and transfer of development rights, additional development shall be permitted
only on those portions of the parcel not subject to the restrictive covenant
(s), and the amount of development possible on the property shall be reduced
below the amount that would otherwise be available by the amount of any
development rights previously severed from the property.
   C.   No land use decision made after the approval of a transfer of a
development right shall affect the owner's right to that transferred
development right. For example, if (a) a property is approved for six dwelling
units without the use of development rights and for seven dwelling units if a
development right is acquired, and (b) the owner has acquired a development
right and a development plan for seven dwelling units has been approved, but
(c) a later land use decision reduces potential development to three dwelling
units without development rights, then (d) the parcel shall still be permitted
one additional dwelling unit, for a total of four dwelling units, through the
use of the acquired development right.
(Ord. 2007-7 § 1 (part), 2007)
18.92.100   Amendment and appeal procedures.
   A.   Appeal of boundaries or calculation of development rights: Decisions of
the department regarding (1) the boundaries of any sending area or receiving
area, (2) the estimate or calculation of development rights available for
transfer from any sending property, (3) contiguity disputes, as noted in
section
18.92.050(B)(1)(c), or (4) the estimate or calculation of development rights
that may be used on a receiving property, may be appealed by the owner of any
property proposing to sever or use development rights to the board of
supervisors. The board of supervisors shall hear any such appeal at a public
hearing. Additional information and submittal requirements for appeals may be
found in the Pima County Transferable Development Rights Manual.
   B.   Reduction of required minimum densities: A reduction of the minimum
densities for projects using development rights as required by the
comprehensive plan may be approved by the board of supervisors if it is found
that the receiving property contains environmental constraints such that the
required minimum densities cannot be achieved. Applications for such reductions
must be submitted by the receiving property owner and must include the
information required by the Pima County Transferable Development Rights Manual.
Request for such reductions shall be heard at a public hearing.
(Ord. 2007-7 § 1 (part), 2007)
18.92.110   Delegation of authority.
   The department is hereby authorized to develop forms and materials necessary
to implement this chapter, including without limitation application forms, a
form of restrictive covenant to be used on sending properties, and a
Transferable Development Rights Manual that may contain material supplementing,
and consistent with, the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-7 § 1 (part), 2007)
18.92.120   Zoning maps.
   A.   Upon approval by the board of supervisors of any sending or receiving
areas, the Pima County zoning maps shall be amended as follows:
      1.   For areas approved as sending areas, the designation "TDR-SA" shall
be attached to the applicable zoning district. For example, if the underlying
zoning district is RH, then the zoning map shall read "RH (TDR-SA)."
      2.   For areas approved as receiving areas, the designation "TDR-RA"
shall be attached to the applicable zoning district. For example, if the
underlying zoning district is SR, then the zoning map shall read "SR (TDR-RA)."
   B.   For properties on which a restrictive covenant has been recorded in
accordance with this chapter: following the distribution of TDR certificates to
the property owner severing development rights, the Pima County zoning maps
shall be amended by attaching the designation "TDR-RC" to the applicable zoning
district on the portion of the property subject to the restrictive covenant.
For example, if the underlying zoning district on the land subject to the
restrictive covenant is RH, the zoning map shall read "RH (TDR-RC)."
(Ord. 2007-7 § 1 (part), 2007)
Chapter 18.93
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT VARIANCES, TEMPORARY USE PERMITS AND INTERPRETATIONS*
18.93.010   Purpose.
18.93.020   Establishment and jurisdiction of the board of adjustment.
18.93.030   Variances.
18.93.040   Temporary use permits.
18.93.050   Time limit for variances and temporary use permits.
18.93.060   Interpretations.
18.93.070   Appeal to superior court.
18.93.010   Purpose.
   This chapter establishes board of adjustment procedures for variances,
temporary use permits and interpretations.
(Ord. 1985-188 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.93.020   Establishment and jurisdiction of the board of adjustment.
   A.   Establishment: There are established five boards of adjustments to hear
and decide appeals for variances and interpretations of the code and to issue
temporary use permits in accordance with A.R.S. Section 11-807 and Section
18.101.050 of this code (Administrators).
   B.   Jurisdiction:
      1.   Each board has jurisdiction over the unincorporated area of the
supervisorial district in which established;
      2.   The applicable board shall act as the airport zoning board of
adjustment in accordance with A.R.S. Section 2-328.
(Ord. 1985-188 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.93.030   Variances.
   A.   Power.
      1.   The boards of adjustment may allow variances from a provision of
this code.
      2.   A variance from the requirements of the Davis-Monthan Air Force Base
Airport Land Use Overlay Zone 3, contained in Section
18.57.010(B)(3) through (B)(5), or 18.57.031, may not be granted unless the
board of adjustment makes a specific finding that the purpose of military
airport compatibility is preserved.
   B.   Standards. The board shall consider the following guidelines when
approving or denying a variance request:
      1.   The strict application of the provision would work an unnecessary
hardship;
      2.   The unnecessary hardship arises from a physical condition that is
unusual or peculiar to the property and is not generally caused to other
properties in the zone;
      3.   The unnecessary hardship does not arise from a condition created by
an action of the owner of the property;
      4.   The variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief;
      5.   The variance does not allow a use which is not permitted in the zone
by the code;
      6.   The variance is not granted solely to increase economic return from
the property;
      7.   The variance will not cause injury to or adversely affect the rights
of surrounding property owners and residents;
      8.   The variance is in harmony with the general intent and purposes of
the code and the provision from which the variance is requested;
      9.   The variance does not violate state law or other provisions of Pima
County ordinances;
      10.   The hardship must relate to some characteristic of the land for
which the variance is requested, and must not be solely based on the needs of
the owner;
      11.   If the variance is from a sign or advertising structure area
limitation, no reasonable use of the property can be made unless the variance
is granted;
      12.   If the variance is from a height limitation, no reasonable use of
the property can be made unless the variance is granted; and
      13.   If a variance is requested from any provision of Section
18.57.010(B)(3) through (B)(5), or 18.57.031, in addition to the standard
guidelines that the board of adjustment considers when approving or denying a
variance, the application shall be analyzed for:
         a.   Land use compatibility with Davis-Monthan Air Force Base
operations;
         b.   Proximity to the end of the runway;
         c.   Location in relationship to major flight paths;
         d.   Compliance with the intent of applicable Pima County
Comprehensive Plan Davis-Monthan Air Force Base Special Area Policies; and
         e.   Compliance with Arizona Revised Statutes.
   C.   Application.
      1.   Scope. A variance may be requested by the owner of the property by
submitting an application on a form prepared by the planning and development
services department.
      2.   The application shall include information to facilitate the board's
understanding of the variance request as follows:
         a.   A legal description of the property;
         b.   A list of all ownership interests in the property, by name and
title (e.g., individual, corporation, trust or limited partnership), in
accordance with A.R.S. Section 33-506;
         c.   A letter of authorization for any agent of the property owner;
         d.   Hearing fees, in accordance with the adopted fees schedule;
         e.   A sketch plan, in accordance with Section
18.91.030E (Rezoning Procedures);
         f.   A floor plan detail, when the request pertains to interior access
or use; and
         g.   A statement from the property owner of the present ability and
intent to apply for all necessary county permits for construction or use of the
property within nine months after granting of the variance.
      3.   The department may require additional information.
      4.   Incomplete applications shall not be processed.
      5.   Hearing notification maps shall be prepared only by the department.
   D.   Staff Review. The executive secretary shall:
      1.   Schedule a public hearing within forty-five work days of completed
application;
      2.   Prepare a written staff report prior to the hearing which contains
at a minimum:
         a.   Analysis of the impact of the variance on the property and
surrounding properties;
         b.   Any comments and proposed conditions of any county departments
and other public agencies;
         c.   A recommendation for decision.
   E.   Public Notice.
      1.   No less than fifteen days prior to a public hearing, notice shall be
given by:
         a.   Publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
area involved;
         b.   Posting of the subject property;
         c.   Mailing notice to all owners of property within 300 feet of the
subject property except that notice shall be expanded to include owners of
property within 1000 feet if the existing zoning of the subject property is:
IR, RH, GR-1, ML, SR, SR-2, SH, CR-1, MR, CPI, or CI-3.
         d.   Davis-Monthan Air Force Base will be notified of applications
within the boundaries of Airport Height Overlay Zone 3 or Airport Land Use
Overlay Zone 3; Tucson Airport Authority will be notified of applications
within the boundaries of Airport Height Overlay Zone 1 or 2 or Airport Land Use
Overlay Zone 1 or 2; and Pinal Airpark will be notified of applications within
the boundaries of Airport Height Overlay Zone 4 or Airport Land Use Overlay
Zone 4.
      2.   Unintentional failure to give notice shall not invalidate an action
of the board.
   F.   Hearing.
      1.   The board shall consider the variance at a public hearing, at which
all interested persons may be heard.
      2.   The appellant shall present information adequate to show:
         a.   The variance meets the standards of subsection B of this section;
and
         b.   Conditions proposed by the appellant are adequate to protect
surrounding properties from any increased visual impact, noise, light, odor or
other adverse effects.
      3.   The board may require that additional information be provided by the
appellant.
      4.   The board may continue the public hearing to a definite time, not to
exceed three months.
   G.   Conditions. The board may impose conditions on a variance that will:
      1.   Secure the intent and purposes of this code and the provision from
which the variance is granted and any other county ordinance; and
      2.   Provide adequately for the protection of the public interest and the
rights of surrounding property owners and residents.
   H.   Transmittal of Action. The department shall transmit a written copy of
the variance to the appellant, zoning inspector, planning and zoning commission
and board of supervisors.
   I.   Revocation. When any condition of a variance is violated, the variance
and all county permits issued pursuant to the variance shall be null and void.
(Ord. 2019-10 (part), 2019; Ord. 2008-118 § 5, 2008; Ord. 1991-31 § 1, 1991;
Ord. 1985-188 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.93.040   Temporary use permits.
   A.   Scope: The board of adjustment may issue a temporary use permit for a
building or premises in any zone for a use not therein permitted by this code
or for a permitted use which requires an approved development plan.
   B.   Application: A temporary use permit may be requested by the owner of
the property by submitting an application in accordance with Section
18.93.030C, except that the time period in Section
18.93.030C2g shall be thirty days.
   C.   Standards: A temporary use permit may be issued only after a finding by
the board that the temporary use:
      1.   Is of a true temporary nature;
      2.   Does not involve the erection of a substantial building;
      3.   Will not cause injury to or adversely affect the rights of adjacent
property owners or residents;
      4.   Is in harmony with the general intent and purposes of this code; and
      5.   Does not violate state law or other provisions of Pima County
ordinances.
   D.   Hearing: The temporary use permit shall be issued after a public
hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given in accordance with Section
18.93.030E.
   E.   Conditions: The board may impose such conditions as will safeguard the
public health, safety, convenience and general welfare.
(Ord. 2019-26 § 6, 2019: Ord. 1985-188 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.93.050   Time limit for variances and temporary use permits.
   A.   Time limit: Application for necessary permits for use of the property
and construction shall be made within nine months of the granting of a variance
and within thirty days of the issuance of a temporary use permit. The board of
adjustment may grant a different time limit on variances approved for lots or
parcels that are substandard in size because of circumstances beyond the
control of the property owner.
   B.   Revocation: Failure to apply for necessary permits within the time
limit shall render the variance or temporary use permit null and void.
   C.   Appeal: Appeal of a board action shall suspend the running of the time
limit during the period of appeal.
   D.   Time extension:
      1.   A new application for variance or temporary use permit shall be
required after expiration of the time limit, unless an extension is granted by
the board;
      2.   A request for a single three-month time extension may be made by
submitting a written request and applicable fees for a board of adjustment
public hearing.
(Ord. 1993-92 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1985-188 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.93.060   Interpretations.
   A.   Power: The board of adjustment may interpret the code on appeal by any
person who feels that there is error in interpretation or doubt as to the
meaning of any word, phrase or section when:
      1.   There is a dispute between the appellant and the zoning inspector or
other county official as to a decision or interpretation; or
      2.   The location of a zoning district boundary is in doubt (refer to
Section
18.05.030, Zones, Maps and Boundaries).
   B.   Application:
      1.   An interpretation may be requested by submitting an application on a
form prepared by the planning and development services department, with hearing
fees.
      2.   The application shall include:
         a.   The specific words requiring interpretation;
         b.   Citation of the disputed decision or interpretation of the zoning
inspector or other county official;
         c.   A statement of the interpretation proposed by the appellant; and
         d.   Citation of authority, if any, for the position of the appellant.
      3.   The department may require additional information.
      4.   Incomplete applications shall not be processed.
   C.   Staff review:
      1.   The zoning inspector or other county official shall prepare a
written response to the application, which shall contain a statement of the
interpretation used.
      2.   The response shall be submitted to the board, mailed to the
appellant and be made available to the public at least fifteen days prior to
the public hearing.
      3.   No further written statements shall be submitted to the board prior
to the public hearing.
   D.   Public notice: No less than fifteen days prior to a public hearing,
notice shall be given by:
      1.   Publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county; and
      2.   Mailing notice to the appellant.
   E.   Hearing:
      1.   The board shall hold a public hearing on the interpretation, at
which all interested persons may be heard.
      2.   Testimony and argument shall be limited to the provision in
question. Facts relating to specific applications of the provision in question
shall be considered as relevant only insofar as they are examples of the
general application of the provision throughout the county.
      3.   The board may require that additional information be provided.
      4.   The board may continue the public hearing to a definite time, not to
exceed three months.
   F.   Board action:
      1.   The board may act on the matter following the public hearing or
continue the matter for a maximum of three months;
      2.   If new information is presented within thirty days of the decision,
the board may rehear the matter;
      3.   The interpretation shall be made in writing;
      4.   Transmittal: The department shall transmit the action of the board
to the appellant, zoning inspector, other boards of adjustment, planning and
zoning commission and board of supervisors.
(Ord. 1985-188 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.93.070   Appeal to superior court.
   A.   Appeal from a decision of the board of adjustment: Any person aggrieved
by a decision of the board may make an appeal to superior court within thirty
days of the date of the action of the board, and the matter shall be heard in
like manner as appeals from courts of justices of the peace.
(Ord. 1985-188 § 1 (part), 1985)
Chapter 18.95
COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT*
18.95.010   Purpose and scope.
18.95.020   Compliance.
18.95.030   Enforcement.
18.95.040   Penalties and remedies.
18.95.010   Purpose and scope.
   A.   Purpose: This chapter provides:
      1.   The process of applying the provisions of this code to individual
land use proposals prior to the initiation of such development or uses, by the
evaluation of proposed development or uses by county staff for conformance with
this code;
      2.   For the enforcement of this code subsequent to the development or
use of property, if voluntary correction of a violation is not successful.
   B.   Scope:
      1.   Compliance describes the methods by which the provisions of this
code are met when a particular use of a property is intended.
      2.   Enforcement describes the actions taken by the county if users of
property do not follow the prescribed methods.
(Ord. 1985-188 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.95.020   Compliance.
   A.   Compliance mechanisms: Code compliance is sought through:
      1.   Review procedures for subdivision plats, development plans and other
plans;
      2.   A permitting system which will deny the issuance of a permit, if the
proposed activity conflicts with code requirements; and
      3.   Specific county officers and employees empowered to administer the
above methods of compliance.
   B.   Compliance review:
      1.   It shall be the duty of the zoning inspector and all departments,
officials and public employees vested with the duty or authority to issue
permits, to:
         a.   Determine compliance with the provisions of this code; and
         b.   Issue no permit in conflict with the provisions of this code.
      2.   Any permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this code shall
be null and void.
   C.   Validity of permit:
      1.   The issuance or granting of a building or use permit or approval of
plans or specifications under the authority of this code shall not be deemed or
construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the
provisions of this code or the amendments thereto, or of any other ordinance or
law;
      2.   No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel any of
the provisions of this code or any existing law shall be issued, and if issued
shall not be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorizes is
lawful and permitted;
      3.   A zoning permit shall be valid:
         a.   Concurrent with and subject to the validity of the applicable
permit required by the county building codes (Title 15), or
         b.   In perpetuity, upon establishment of the use or completion of
structures associated with the use, provided the use is not discontinued for
more than twelve months;
      4.   If no building permit is required for the use, the zoning use permit
or zoning construction permit (refer to Section
18.01.030E, General Provisions) shall be valid:
         a.   For one year after the date of issuance, or
         b.   In perpetuity, upon establishment of the use or completion of
structures associated with the use, provided the use is not discontinued for
more than twelve months.
(Ord. 1987-66 § 1, 1987; Ord. 1986-216 § 1, 1986; Ord. 1985-188 § 1 (part),
1985)
18.95.030   Enforcement.
   A.   Zoning inspection:
      1.   Responsibility: The chief zoning inspector is responsible for
investigating all complaints of suspected violations of this code;
      2.   Right of entry: When necessary to enforce this code, the chief
zoning inspector may, at any reasonable hour, enter any land or structure to
investigate a possible violation, provided that no structure shall be entered
in the absence of the owner or occupant without a written court order.
   B.   Zoning violation hearing:
      1.   The hearing officer shall hear and decide complaints alleging
violations of this code, as authorized by A.R.S. § 11-808 and Section
18.101.060 (Administrators);
      2.   The form and service of complaints, and the hearing procedures of
the officer, shall follow the zoning enforcement rules of procedure adopted by
the board of supervisors in accordance with Section
18.01.070 (General Provisions);
      3.   If the officer determines a zoning violation exists, civil penalties
may be imposed by the officer in accordance with Section
18.95.040A. Imposition of civil penalties shall not preclude persons listed in
Section
18.95.040B from pursuing remedies provided for in that subsection;
      4.   The erection, construction, reconstruction or alteration of any
structure, or the use of any property or structure, not in conformance with
this code constitutes a violation;
      5.   Violators of this code are subject to civil penalties or other legal
action for failure to comply with any provision of this code (refer to Section
18.95.040).
   C.   Mitigation Requirements:
      1.   The hearing officer's action on a grading or plant removal violation
may include a requirement to mitigate the damage resulting from the violation.
      2.   The hearing officer may, in writing, refer a determination of all or
part of the requirements for mitigation of a violation of the following zoning
code chapters or sections to the design review committee or Pima County plans
review subcommittee of the historical commission, as appropriate:
         a.    Section
18.09.040 Cluster development option.
         b.    
Chapter 18.59 GC Golf Course Zone.
         c.    
Chapter 18.61 Hillside Development Overlay Zone.
         d.    
Chapter 18.63 Historic Zone. Historic Zone mitigation issues may be referred to
the Pima County plans review subcommittee of the historical commission.
         e.   
Chapter 18.67 Buffer Overlay Zone.
         f.   
Chapter 18.72 Native Plant Preservation.
         g.   
Chapter 18.73 Landscaping, Buffering and Screening Standards.
         h.   
Chapter 18.81 Grading Standards.
         i.   
Chapter 18.90 Specific Plans.
      3.   The DRC's action, subject to review and approval by the hearing
officer, shall include a mitigation plan and program approved by the DCR and in
conformance with the requirements, if any, of the hearing officer's decision.
   D.   Appeals:
      1.   Any party to the zoning violation hearing may appeal the decision of
the officer to the board of supervisors subject to the provisions in the
following Section
18.95.030E.
      2.   The decision of the board of supervisors may be appealed to the
superior court in accordance with A.R.S. § 12-901 et seq.
   E.   Design Review Committee Review of an Appeal:
      1.   The design review committee shall hear and review appeals of a
hearing officer's decision regarding one or more zoning violations of the
development standards or development conditions of a chapter, section, or
provision listed in the following Sections
18.95.030.E.1.a. and b. The design review committee’s recommendations shall be
forwarded to the board of supervisors before the appeal is heard and acted on
by the board.
         a.   Environmentally or preservation focused zoning code chapters or
Sections:
            1)   Section
18.09.040 Cluster development option.
            2)   
Chapter 18.59 GC Golf Course Zone.
            3)   
Chapter 18.61 Hillside Development Overlay Zone.
            4)   
Chapter 18.72 Native Plant Preservation.
            5)   
Chapter 18.73 Landscaping, Buffering and Screening Standards.
            6)   
Chapter 18.81 Grading Standards.
            7)   
Chapter 18.90 Specific Plans.
         b.   Specific Plan Ordinances.
      2.   In addition to the requirements of this section, the design review
committee or historical commission shall establish rules of procedure,
submittal requirements, submittal deadlines, and review criteria to govern the
DRC's public hearing and review of an appeal.
      3.   The design review committee public hearing process shall include the
following:
         a.   A mailed notification of the hearing to all parties who received
notice of the violation hearing at which the hearing officer took action and
all other parties who attended the violation hearing;
         b.   An opportunity for property owners and residents within a minimum
of three hundred feet (300) of the boundaries of the violation to make comment
on the appeal;
         c.   The design review committee’s review of the appellant's appeal,
the staff report, and the circumstances and testimony presented at the hearing;
         d.   The design review committee’s action. A recommendation for denial
or approval of the appeal may include conditions but shall not recommend an
increase or decrease of civil penalties over those previously assessed by the
hearing officer;
         e.   The design review committee shall not continue a public hearing
or its review and action unless more information is needed which the petitioner
cannot provide at the public hearing.
   F.   Pima County Plans Review Subcommittee of the Historical Commission
Review of an Appeal:
      1.   The Pima County plans review subcommittee of the historical
commission shall hear appeals of a hearing officer's decision regarding one or
more zoning violations of the development standards or development conditions
of a chapter, section, or provision listed in the following Section
18.95.030(F)(1)(a). The Pima County plans review subcommittee of the historical
commission's recommendations shall be forwarded to the board of supervisors
before the appeal is heard and acted on by the board.
         a.   Environmentally or preservation focused zoning code chapters or
sections:
            1)   
Chapter 18.63 Historic Zone.
      2.   In addition to the requirements of this section, the Pima County
plans review subcommittee of the historical commission shall establish rules of
procedure, submittal requirements, submittal deadlines, and review criteria to
govern the public hearing and review of an appeal.
      3.   The Pima County plans review subcommittee of the historical
commission's public hearing process shall include the following:
         a.   A mailed notification of the hearing to all parties who received
notice of the violation hearing at which the hearing officer took action and
all other parties who attended the violation hearing;
         b.   An opportunity for property owners and residents within a minimum
of three hundred feet of the boundaries of the violation to make comment on the
appeal;
         c.   The Pima County plans review subcommittee of the historical
commission's review of the appellant's appeal, the staff report, and the
circumstances and testimony presented at the hearing;
         d.   The Pima County plans review subcommittee of the historical
commission's action. A recommendation for denial or approval of the appeal may
include conditions but shall not recommend an increase or decrease of civil
penalties over those previously assessed by the hearing officer;
         e.   The Pima County plans review subcommittee of the historical
commission shall not continue a public hearing or its review and action unless
more information is needed which the petitioner cannot provide at the public
hearing.
(Ord. 2025-4, 2025: Ord. 2000-52 § 3, 2000; Ord. 1985-188 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.95.040   Penalties and remedies.
   A.   Penalties:
      1.   Each day's continuance of a zoning violation shall be deemed a
separate offense;
      2.   The maximum penalty for each offense shall be:
         a.   Seven hundred fifty dollars for an individual; or
         b.   Ten thousand dollars for any corporation, association, labor
union or other legal entity.
   B.   Remedies:
      1.   All remedies provided in this code shall be cumulative and not
exclusive;
      2.   The imposition of penalties on any person under this code shall not
relieve such person from the responsibility of correcting prohibited conditions
or removing prohibited structures or improvements, and shall not prevent the
enforced correction or removal of such violations;
      3.   If any structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
maintained or used, or any land is used, in violation of this code, the board
of supervisors, the county attorney, the zoning inspector or any adjacent or
neighboring property owner who is specially damaged by the violation may
institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent, abate or remove the violation.
(Ord. 1985-188 § 1 (part), 1985)
Chapter 18.97
CONDITIONAL USE PROCEDURES
18.97.010   Purpose.
18.97.020   Definitions.
18.97.030   Procedures and requirements.
18.97.010   Purpose.
   Purpose. This chapter provides procedures and standards for the review and
approval of conditional uses, as designated within the zoning classifications
of this code. Conditional uses provide zoning flexibility, but, due to their
potentially adverse impacts, require the review processes established in this
chapter.
(Ord. 1985-141 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.97.020   Definitions.
   A.   Certain terms used in this chapter shall be defined, for the purpose of
this chapter only, as follows:
      1.   Affected property owner: Any owner of property located within the
required radius for written notification of public hearing.
      2.   Conditional use: A use which, due to its greater potential for
nuisance or hazard than other uses of the zone, has its establishment in a zone
conditional upon the procedures and standards of this chapter.
      3.   Hearing administrator: A county hearing officer, not being an
employee of the planning and development services department, as appointed by
the board of supervisors.
(Ord. 1986-127 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-141 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.97.030   Procedures and requirements.
   A.   Scope.
      1.   A conditional use may be requested by submitting a conditional use
permit application to the planning and development services department.
Issuance of the permit is subject to the requirements of this chapter and any
requirements of the zone in which the use is being requested;
      2.   Application for a permit may only be made by the property owner of
the subject property or an agent for the property owner.
   B.   Staff Consultation. The applicant is advised to consult with county
staff concerning potential requirements prior to submittal of the application.
   C.   Application.
      1.   The complete application shall include, at a minimum:
         a.   A legal description of the property,
         b.   A list, by name and title, of all ownership interest in the
property (e.g., individual, corporation, trust or limited partnership), in
accordance with A.R.S. § 33-506,
         c.   A letter of authorization for an agent,
         d.   Applicable permit fees, in accordance with the adopted
conditional permit fees schedule,
         e.   A preliminary development plan in accordance with Section
18.91.030 (Rezoning), which shall show compliance with all other requirements
of the zone in which the use is proposed to be located,
         f.   A floor plan detail, when the request pertains to interior access
or use;
         g.   A biological impact report, including a biological assessment
concerning endangered or threatened species, for Type 2 and Type 3 conditional
use permit requests.
      2.   Refer to written departmental policies for application specifics;
      3.   Incomplete applications shall not be processed;
      4.   Hearing notification maps shall be prepared only by the department.
   D.   Permit Hearing Procedure Types.
      1.   Scope: This subsection establishes the specific procedure types for
conditional use applications. The applicable permit procedure shall be
referenced after each conditional use in this code.
      2.   Type 1 procedure: Public hearing by the hearing administrator, with
a minimum notification area of three hundred feet from the subject property,
except that notice shall be expanded to include owners of property within one
thousand feet of the subject property if existing zoning of the subject
property is RH, GR-1, SR or SR-2.
      3.   Type 2 procedure: Public hearings by the hearing administrator and
board of supervisors, with a minimum notification area of three hundred feet
from the subject property, except that notice shall be expanded to include
owners of property within one thousand feet of the subject property if existing
zoning of the subject property is RH, GR-1, SR or SR-2.
      4.   Type 3 procedure: Public hearings by the planning and zoning
commission and board of supervisors, with a minimum notification area of three
hundred feet from the subject property, except that notice shall be expanded to
include owners of property within one thousand feet of the subject property if
existing zoning of the subject property is RH, GR-1, SR or SR-2.
   E.   Public Notice.
      1.   A minimum of fifteen days prior to a hearing, the planning and
development services department shall provide notice by:
         a.   Posting of the subject property to be considered at the hearing;
and
         b.   Mailing written notice to all property owners within the
applicable notification area;
      2.   Failure of notice: The unintentional failure to give written notice
of the unintentional omission of the name of a property owner shall not
invalidate an action taken at a hearing.
      3.   The applicant is responsible for written notice to the United States
Fish and Wildlife Service of the pending request. The applicant shall provide
staff with written proof of notice to the United States Fish and Wildlife
Service at least 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing.
   F.   Type 1 Permit Hearing.
      1.   Scope: Within thirty days of proper application, a public hearing
shall be held by the hearing administrator on the merits of the application.
      2.   Public notice: In accordance with Section
18.97.030E.
      3.   Hearing:
         a.   After proper public notice, the administrator shall hold a public
hearing on the application, at which all interested parties may appear and
shall be heard;
         b.   The administrator may continue a public hearing, for a definite
time not to exceed three months, on own initiative or at the request of the
applicant or affected property owners;
         c.   The administrator shall require that the petitioner present
information adequate to illustrate that the proposed use meets the following
standards:
            1)   It will not be in serious conflict with the objectives of the
general land use plan or the area plan in which situated,
            2)   It will provide safeguards for the protection of adjacent
developed property, or if the adjacent property is undeveloped, the legal
permitted uses of such property,
            3)   It has adequate accessibility to the county road network,
            4)   It has sufficient off-street parking and loading facilities,
that will be developed in accordance with county engineering standards,
            5)   It will meet county standards in terms of control of noise,
smoke, glare or heat, odors, vibrations, fly, ash, dust, fumes, vapors, gasses
and other forms of air pollution, liquids and solid wastes,
            6)   Hours of operation will not be detrimental to adjoining
residents,
            7)   Landscaping will be fully in conformance with zoning code
regulations;
         d.   The administrator may require that additional information be
presented.
      4.   Decision of the administrator: Approval of a conditional use permit
shall be subject to the preliminary development plan and any other reasonable
requirements deemed necessary by the administrator. The permit shall not be
effective until thirty days after the decision or when all requirements of
approval have been satisfied, whichever is later.
      5.   Findings: A report on the findings of the administrator and
conditions of the permit shall be available for public inspection within five
days of the administrator's decision.
      6.   Appeals:
         a.   Any appeal to the board of supervisors of the decision or
conditions imposed by the administrator shall be filed within thirty days by
the applicant or affected property owners;
         b.   A public hearing by the supervisors shall be required in
accordance with Section
18.97.030(G).
   G.   Type 2 Permit Hearing.
      1.   Scope: As required by the conditions of a use, a public hearing
shall be held by the board of supervisors after recommendation from the hearing
administrator;
      2.   Recommendation of the hearing administrator:
         a.   The hearing administrator shall conduct a public hearing in
accordance with Type 1 hearing procedures (Section
18.97.030(F)) and thereafter shall prepare a report for the supervisors;
         b.   The report of the administrator shall, at a minimum:
            1)   Classify the request as to its conformance with applicable
county land use plans,
            2)   Analyze the expected impact of the proposed development on the
site and surroundings including, but not limited to, the expected impact on
endangered and threatened species of plants and animals,
            3)   Contain a recommendation to the board of supervisors,
            4)   Include the comments and conditions, if any, of other affected
county departments and public agencies,
            5)   Include comments made at the public hearing;
         c.   The report shall be available for public inspection fifteen days
prior to the date of supervisor's public hearing;
      3.   Transmittal: Within thirty days after the public hearing, the
planning and development services department shall transmit the report and
recommendations of the administrator to the supervisors;
      4.   Hearing:
         a.   After proper public notice (refer to Section
18.97.030(E)), the supervisors shall hold a public hearing on the application,
at which all interested parties may appear and shall be heard;
         b.   The supervisors may continue a public hearing, for a definite
time not to exceed three months, on own initiative or at the request of the
applicant or affected property owners;
         c.   The supervisors may require that additional information be
presented;
      5.   Decision of the supervisors: Approval of a conditional use permit
shall be subject to the preliminary development plan and any other reasonable
requirements deemed necessary by the supervisors. The permit shall be effective
when all requirements of approval have been satisfied.
   H.   Type 3 Permit Hearing.
      1.   Scope: As required by the conditions of a use, a public hearing
shall be held by the board of supervisors after recommendation from the
planning and zoning commission;
      2.   Staff report by the hearing administrator:
         a.   The hearing administrator shall prepare for the commission a
report that shall, at a minimum:
            1)   Classify the request as to its conformance with applicable
county land use plans,
            2)   Analyze the expected impact of the proposed development on the
site and surroundings including, but not limited to, the expected impact on
endangered and threatened species of plants and animals,
            3)   Contain a recommendation to the commission,
            4)   Include the comments and conditions, if any, of other affected
county departments and public agencies;
         b.   The report shall be available for public inspection fifteen days
prior to the date of the commission public hearing;
      3.   Commission public hearing: The commission shall conduct a public
hearing in accordance with Section
18.97.030(F).
      4.   Transmittal: Within thirty days after the public hearing, the
planning and development services department shall transmit the report and
recommendations of the administrator and the planning and zoning commission to
the supervisors, who shall hold a public hearing in accordance with Section
18.97.030(G)(4).
      5.   Decision of the supervisors: In accordance with Section
18.97.030(G)(5).
   I.   Development Plan. The hearing administrator or the board of supervisors
may require the property owner to have an approved development plan in
accordance with
Chapter 18.71 (Development Plan) as a condition for issuance of the conditional
use permit if the hearing administrator or board of supervisors finds that the
requirement for a development plan would minimize adverse impacts of the
proposed development on property owners entitled to notice of the application
for the conditional use permit.
   J.   Time Limits and Time Extensions.
      1.   Time limit on conditional use approval:
         a.   Approval for a conditional use shall expire if a conditional use
permit is not obtained within nine months of the date of approval;
         b.   A new conditional use permit application is required after the
expiration of the initial approval, unless a time extension has been granted;
         c.   Appeal from the approval of the use shall suspend the running of
the time limit during the period of appeal;
      2.   Extension of approval time limit:
         a.   A property owner or the owner's authorized agent may request a
single twelve-month time extension for a conditional use approval. A written
time extension shall be submitted to the planning division on or before the
expiration date of the time limit. A fee equivalent to fifty percent of
conditional use permit application shall be paid in accordance with the
development services fee schedule.
         b.   The planning division shall prepare a report on the conditional
use permit time extension request in accordance with
Chapter 18.97.
         c.   A noticed public hearing by the hearing administrator is required
for time extensions except that Type III conditional use permit time extensions
must be heard by the board of supervisors. Notice shall be provided in
accordance with Section
18.97.030(E).
      3.   Time limit on conditional use permits:
         a.   A conditional use permit shall be valid for the duration of the
conditional use, provided the use remains in conformance with the terms of
approval;
         b.   If a conditional use is discontinued for more than twelve months,
the permit shall be deemed null and void, and reapplication for a new
conditional use permit shall be necessary.
(Ord. 2012-71 § 4, 2013; Ord. 2011-2 § 22, 2011; Ord. 2001-103 § 2, 2001; Ord.
1999-79 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1986-127 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1986-41 § 1
(part), 1986; Ord. 1985-141 § 1 (part), 1985)
Chapter 18.99
REVIEW COMMITTEES
18.99.010   Purpose.
18.99.020   Definitions.
18.99.030   Design review committee.
18.99.040   Technical review committee.
18.99.050   Aviation review committee.
18.99.010   Purpose.
   A.   Purpose. This chapter describes the committees that review various
aspects of development in the county, stating their composition, authority and
procedures, and the criteria used in evaluating development proposals.
(Ord. 1985-141 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.99.020   Definitions.
   A.   Certain terms used in this chapter shall be defined, for purposes of
this chapter only, as follows:
      1.   Affected homeowner's association: an association of homeowners which
is registered with the planning and development services department and
represents a residential area close to a proposed development.
(Ord. 1985-141 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.99.030   Design review committee.
   A.   Purpose. The review provided by this committee is intended to:
      1.   Protect the character and desirable living conditions of surrounding
areas through careful site planning that alleviates impacts of new development;
      2.   Encourage site planning and building design that establishes a
sensitive relationship both internally and between the elements of the site
plan and contextual features of scenic, environmental or cultural significance;
      3.   Preserve the visual amenity of the county for residents and
visitors, especially through the enhancement of roadway aesthetics;
      4.   Accomplish other goals for specific types of development, as
described in Sections
18.09.040 (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions; Cluster Development
Option),
18.49.010 (CPI Campus Park Industrial Zone; Purpose and Intent),
18.79.010 (Sign Standards; Purpose) and
18.79.100(B) (Sign Standards; Master sign program).
      5.   Review projects developing under the Mixed Use Option for
conformance to the Mixed Use Option Design Guidelines.
   B.   Establishment. The design review committee is established by the
adoption of this chapter and replaces the previously established RVC
architectural advisory, landscape architectural advisory, cluster review, and
CPI development review committees.
   C.   Composition. The following persons or their representatives shall be
members of the committee:
      1.   The development services director;
      2.   The director of the department of transportation;
      3.   The director of the flood control district;
      4.   The chief zoning inspector;
      5.   One architect appointed by the board of supervisors;
      6.   One landscape architect appointed by the board of supervisors;
      7.   One civil engineer or land planner appointed by the board of
supervisors;
      8.   One person experienced in residential and commercial property
development, appointed by the board of supervisors;
      9.   One person representing homeowners' associations in the community
at-large, appointed by the board of supervisors;
      10.   One person representing all affected homeowners' associations of a
specific development proposal, approved by such associations for review of that
proposal only; and
      11.   One person representing the Tucson-Pima Arts Council or the City of
Tucson’s director of art in public places, or representing the historical
commission, to only review and approve streetscape sculpture and furniture in
accordance with Section
18.73.030(B)(10) (Landscaping, Buffering and Screening Standards).
   D.   Transaction of Business.
      1.   Terms: Committee members appointed by the board of supervisors shall
be appointed for three-year terms, a maximum of two such terms may be served;
      2.   Meetings: The committee shall hold regular meetings once a month,
with additional meetings called, as needed, by the development services
director.
   E.   Powers and Duties. The committee shall serve as:
      1.   An advisory body providing procedural or development recommendations
to applicable decision making bodies;
      2.   A review body with the power to require revisions to specified
development proposals prior to review by the subdivision review committee;
      3.   The final voting body on development proposals in historic zones,
with the power to approve, approve with conditions, or deny plans for such
development;
      4.   A hearing body for appeals of decisions or requirements of the
landscape review representative concerning final landscape plans (refer to
Section
18.73.070 Landscaping Standards).
      5.    A final voting body on requests for the Master Sign Program as
provided in Section
18.79.100(B) with the power to approve, approve with conditions, or deny
requests.
   F.   Fees. Fees for specific types of design review shall be charged in
accordance with the adopted fees schedule.
   G.   Review Procedures, Submittals and Criteria:
      1.   Cluster development review: Refer to Section
18.09.040 (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions);
      2.   CPI development review: Refer to Section
18.49.050 (CPI Campus Park Industrial Zone);
      3.   RVC development review: Refer to Section
18.71.060 (Development Plan Standards);
      4.   Gateway Overlay Zone review; Refer to Section
18.78.030 (Development Standards) and 18.78.040 (Site Planning Review) ;
      5.   Master Sign program review: Refer to Section
18.79.100(B);
      6.   Commercial and other design review: Reserved.
   H.   Appeal of Design Review Committee Decision.
      1.   Cluster development: As directed in Section
18.09.040 (General Residential and Rural Zoning Provisions);
      2.   Large scale retail establishment and regional, neighborhood, and
small retail center.
         a.   The decision of the committee may be appealed to the board of
supervisors within twenty days of the committee's decision by the applicant or
any property owner within three hundred feet.
      3.   Master Sign Program Section
18.79.100(B). The decision of the committee may be appealed to the board of
supervisors within thirty days of the committee's decision by the applicant or
any property owner within three hundred feet.
(Ord. 2025-4, 2025: Ord. 2020-41, § 7, 2020; Ord. 2006-45 § 2, 2006; Ord. 2006-
30 § 3, 2006; Ord. 2003-32 § 3, 2003; Ord. 2001-165 § 1 (part), 2001;
Administrative amendment dated December 16, 1985; Ord. 1985-141 § 1 (part),
1985)
18.99.040   Technical review committee.
   A.   Purpose: The technical review committee shall hear and decide requests
for waivers or review of interpretations and provide recommendations for
amendments of
Chapter 18.81 (Grading Standards).
   B.   Establishment: This committee is established by the board of
supervisors.
   C.   Composition: The following persons or their representatives shall be
members of the committee:
      1.   The civil engineer member of the design review committee (Refer to
Section
18.99.030);
      2.   The landscape architect member of the design review committee; and
      3.   Three members appointed by the board of supervisors.
   D.   Transaction of Business:
      1.   Terms: Committee members shall be appointed by the supervisors for
three-year terms. A maximum of two such terms may be held.
      2.   Meetings: The committee shall hold meetings monthly or as needed.
All meetings shall be publicly noticed.
(Ord. 1986-187 § 1 (part), 1986)
18.99.050   Aviation review committee.
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to implement the requirements
of Section
18.57.040. The review provided is intended to ensure:
      1.   The safe design and operation of private airports; and
      2.   Compatibility between private airports and noise-sensitive land
uses.
   B.   Powers and Responsibilities:
      1.   Review: The committee shall review conditional use permit
applications for proposed airports and recommend approval, with or without
conditions, or denial to the board.
      2.   References: The committee shall refer to the design criteria
established in applicable FAA advisory circulars and federal aviation
regulations. These documents are filed with the Tucson Airport Authority.
   C.   Establishment: The aviation review committee is established by adoption
of
Chapter 18.57.
   D.   Membership: Committee membership includes a representative from the:
      1.   Planning and development services department;
      2.   Arizona Pilots Association;
      3.   Tucson Airport Authority;
      4.   Federal Aviation Administration; and the
      5.   Homeowners association(s) of the affected area.
   E.   Terms: Members shall be appointed by the board of supervisors for four-
year terms, except the homeowners' representative, who shall be appointed as
needed.
   F.   Meetings: The committee shall hold meetings as required by applications
for conditional use permits.
   G.   Fees: Fees for review shall be charged in accordance with the adopted
fees schedule.
(Ord. 1986-188 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. 1985-152 § 1 (part), 1985)
Chapter 18.101
ADMINISTRATORS
18.101.010   Purpose.
18.101.020   Board of supervisors.
18.101.030   Planning and zoning commission.
18.101.040   Planning and development services department.
18.101.050   Boards of adjustment.
18.101.060   Hearing officer.
18.101.070   Historical commission.
18.101.010   Purpose.
   A.   Purpose:
      1.   This chapter describes the responsibilities, powers and duties
exercised by the principal officers and agencies involved in the planning,
zoning and subdivision of land within Pima County;
      2.   The specific procedures by which these responsibilities, powers and
duties are exercised are found within the applicable chapters of this code and
in adopted written policies.
(Ord. 1985-188 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.101.020   Board of supervisors.
   A.   Scope: As a legislative body, the board of supervisors performs the
planning and zoning actions of this section, as authorized by A.R.S. Title 11,
Chapter 6.
   B.   Powers and duties:
      1.   Comprehensive plan: Upon recommendation by the planning and zoning
commission, the board of supervisors adopt and amend a comprehensive plan,
which establishes the goals of Pima County regarding future development of the
county, in accordance with
Chapter 18.89 (Comprehensive Plans);
      2.   Zoning regulations and districts: By ordinance, the board of
supervisors establish and amend the zoning regulations of this code in
accordance with Section
18.01.070 (General Provisions), and provide for zoning district changes and
amendments in accordance with
Chapter 18.91 (Rezoning Procedures);
      3.   Land use policies: The board of supervisors adopt, by resolution,
policies relating to land use issues and review procedures;
      4.   Subdivision and development plan regulations: The board of
supervisors adopt, by ordinance, regulations for the subdivision of land within
the county (refer to
Chapter 18.69, Subdivision Standards) and for development plans, which
establish the features of a development (refer to
Chapter 18.71, Development Plan Standards);
      5.   Appeals and special permits: The board of supervisors hear and
decide appeals and special permits to developmental or procedural requirements,
when authorized by this code;
      6.   Enforcement: The board of supervisors establish, by ordinance, rules
and procedures for the enforcement of this code by the zoning inspector;
      7.   Appointments: The board of supervisors appoint or ratify the members
of the following boards, commissions and committees:
         a.   Planning and zoning commission,
         b.   Boards of adjustment,
         c.   Historical commission,
         d.   Historic district zone advisory boards,
         e.   Design review committee,
         f.   Other committees, as necessary.
   C.   Clerk of the board of supervisors: The clerk of the board is
responsible for:
      1.   Preparing all minutes of supervisors' meetings;
      2.   Maintaining a file of documents relating to functions of the
supervisors;
      3.   The sale of copies of the zoning code.
(Ord. 2025-4, 2025: Ord. 1992-96 § 1 (part), 1992; Ord. 1985-188 § 1 (part),
1985)
18.101.030   Planning and zoning commission.
   A.   Scope: The planning and zoning commission primarily advises the board
of supervisors on planning and zoning policies, plans, amendments and
regulations, as authorized by A.R.S. Title 11, Chapter 6.
   B.   Powers and duties: The planning and zoning commission performs the
following duties:
      1.   Comprehensive plan:
         a.   The planning and zoning commission initiates and recommends to
the board of supervisors a comprehensive plan, which establishes the goals of
Pima County regarding future development of the county, in accordance with
Chapter 18.89 (Comprehensive Plan),
         b.   The planning and zoning commission reviews and provides
recommendations to the board of supervisors on all amendments to the
comprehensive plan, including concurrent plan amendments/rezonings, permitted
by Section
18.89.041;
      2.   Zoning code amendments: The planning and zoning commission initiates
and provides recommendations to the board of supervisors on amendments to this
code, in accordance with Section
18.01.070 (Code Amendment Procedures);
      3.   Specific plans: The planning and zoning commission provides
recommendations to the supervisors on a proposed specific plan;
      4.   Rezoning: The planning and zoning commission provides
recommendations to the board of supervisors on a proposed rezoning, with the
exception of rezonings that conform to a zoning plan, in accordance with
Chapter 18.91 (Rezoning Procedures);
      5.   Historic zones:
         a.   The planning and zoning commission initiates the designation of
property as a historic district zone or a historic landmark zone upon the
recommendation of the Pima County plans review subcommittee of the historical
commission (refer to Section
18.63.050),
         b.   The planning and zoning commission provides recommendations to
the board of supervisors on a proposed historic district zone or a historic
landmark zone, the associated preservation and development criteria, and
historic district advisory board, as applicable,
      6.   Infill overlay zones:
         a.   The commission initiates the designation of property as an infill
overlay zone (refer to Section
18.68.030); and,
         b.   The commission provides recommendations to the supervisors on a
proposed infill overlay zone and the associated development standards and
incentives, as applicable,
      7.   Subdivision and development plan regulations:
         a.   The planning and zoning commission hears appeals from the
subdivision and development review committee, in accordance with
Chapter 18.69 (Subdivision Standards),
         b.   The planning and zoning commission reviews development plans for
RVC zoning in accordance with Section
18.71.060 (Requirements and procedures for RVC zoning);
      8.   Other matters: The planning and zoning commission may initiate or
conduct special studies relating to planning and zoning matters, and may
consider requests for the same from the board of supervisors.
   C.   Composition: The commission comprises ten members, as follows:
      1.   Appointment: Two members shall be appointed from each of the five
supervisorial districts of the county by the supervisor representing the
district, and the members shall be residents of the district from which they
are appointed;
      2.   Terms: Appointments are for staggered terms of four years each, with
no limit on the number of terms;
      3. Vacancies: Vacancies shall be filled within a reasonable time period
by the supervisor of the district in which the vacancy has occurred, for the
unexpired term of that position;
      4. Removal: The supervisor of a district has the authority to remove a
commissioner from that district for neglect of duty, inefficiency, or
misconduct in office.
   D. Transaction of Business:
      1. The commission shall conduct its business in accordance with the
Arizona Revised Statutes, applicable Pima County regulations, and its own
adopted rules and regulations;
      2. The director of the planning and development services department shall
be the executive secretary of the commission.
   E. Effect of decisions: All commission recommendations, final actions and
findings of decisions will be transmitted to the supervisors, regardless of
vote.
(Ord. 2025-4, 2025: Ord. 2018-31 § 3, 2018; Ord. 2018-9 § 3, 2018; Ord. 2010-27
§ 1 (part), 2010; Ord. 2007-65 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1992-96 § 1 (part), 1992; Ord.
1987-64 § 1 (part), 1987; Ord. 1985-188 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.101.040   Planning and development services department.
   A.   Scope: The planning and development services department is the lead
agency for the administration of this code and serves as the lead professional
staff of the planning and zoning commission.
   B.   Powers and duties of the planning director: The planning director, with
the applicable staff, performs the following duties:
      1.   Supervision: The director supervises the various divisions of the
department;
      2.   Rezoning and specific plan compliance with the comprehensive plan.
The director determines rezoning and specific plan compliance with the
comprehensive plan;
      3.   Plans and regulations: The director develops and maintains the
comprehensive plan and the land use plans, policies and regulations for its
implementation;
      4.   Specific plans: The director administers and provides
recommendations to the commission on specific plan applications and coordinates
the administration of adopted specific plans by other county departments and
public agencies;
      5.   Rezoning: The director administers and provides recommendations to
the commission on the rezoning of property;
      6.   Subdivision and development plan regulations: The director reviews
and coordinates the processing of subdivision plats in accordance with
Chapter 18.69 (Subdivision Standards);
      7.   Boards, commissions and committees: The director provides
administrative assistance to the planning or zoning bodies appointed by the
board of supervisors (refer to Section
18.101.020(B)(8));
      8.   Other duties:
         a.   The director acts as the executive secretary of the commission
and, by representation, executive secretary of the boards of adjustment;
         b.   The director performs such other functions as may be necessary in
the administration of the department or as provided by the county manager.
   C.   Powers and duties of the chief zoning inspector: The chief zoning
inspector reports to the planning and development services director and, by
authority of A.R.S. § 11-808, performs the following duties:
      1.   Compliance review: The inspector reviews all permits for the use or
improvement of property prior to issuance by the county, in order to determine
if the proposed activity will be in compliance with this code;
      2.   Conditional uses: The inspector acts as the hearing administrator
for conditional uses, in accordance with
Chapter 18.97 (Conditional Use Permits);
      3.   Interpretation: The inspector interprets the provisions of this
code;
      4.   Enforcement: The inspector enforces the provisions of this code by
all means prescribed by law.
(Ord. 1992-96 § 1 (part), 1992; Ord. 1987-64 § 1 (part), 1987; Ord. 1985-188 §
1 (part), 1985)
18.101.050   Boards of adjustment.
   A.   Scope: The boards of adjustment hear and decide appeals for variances
and interpretations of this code and issue temporary use permits, in accordance
with A.R.S. § 11-807 and
Chapter 18.93 (Board of Adjustment Variances, Temporary Use Permits and
Interpretations).
      1.   Interpretation: The boards interpret this code on appeal when:
         a.   There is a dispute between the appellant and the zoning inspector
of the other county official as to a decision or interpretation, or
         b.   The location of a zoning district in doubt (refer to Section
18.05.030, Zones, Maps and Boundaries);
      2.   Variances: The boards may allow variances from a provision of this
code in accordance with Section
18.93.030 (Board of Adjustment Variances, Temporary Use Permits and
Interpretations);
      3.   Temporary use permits: The board may issue a temporary use permit in
accordance with Section
18.93.040, (Board of Adjustment Variances, Temporary Use Permits and
Interpretations);
      4.   Other duties: The applicable boards shall also act as the airport
zoning board of adjustment in accordance with A.R.S. § 2-328.
   [B. Reserved.]
   C.   Composition:
      1.   Appointment:
         a.   There is one board in each of the supervisorial districts of Pima
County,
         b.   Five members shall be appointed for each board. Each member shall
be a resident and taxpayer of the supervisorial district from which appointed,
         c.   Appointments to the boards shall be made by majority vote of the
board of supervisors;
      2.   Terms: Appointments shall be for staggered terms of four years each,
except that the initial members shall be appointed, by lot, for the following
terms:
         a.   One member for one year,
         b.   One member for two years,
         c.   One member for three years, and
         d.   Two members for four years;
      3.   Vacancies: Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired period of
that term within a reasonable time period, as provided for appointments;
      4.   Removal: The board of supervisors has the authority to remove, by
majority vote, any member for neglect of duty, inefficiency or misconduct in
office.
   D.   Transaction of business:
      1.   Each board shall conduct its business in accordance with the Arizona
Revised Statutes, applicable Pima County regulations, and its own adopted rules
and regulations;
      2.   The planning director or a representative from the planning and
zoning division shall be the executive secretary of each board.
(Ord. 2007-34 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1985-188 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.101.060   Hearing officer.
   A.   Scope: The hearing officer hears and decides zoning violation appeals,
as authorized by A.R.S. § 11-808(E).
   B.   Powers and duties: The officer performs the following duties (refer
also to Section
18.95.030, Compliance and Enforcement):
      1.   The officer hears and decides complaints alleging civil violations
of this code;
      2.   The officer administers oaths;
      3.   The officer issues subpoenas and summonses ordering appearance
before the officer;
      4.   The officer makes any other order necessary for the determination
and resolution of zoning violations.
   C.   Establishment:
      1.   Appointment: The officer shall be appointed by the board of
supervisors;
      2.   Qualifications:
         a.   The officer shall have training, experience or familiarity with
administrative hearings and this code,
         b.   The officer may be an employee of Pima County, except that the
officer shall not be a zoning inspector;
      3.   Annual review: The board of supervisors shall conduct an annual
review of the hearing officer;
      4.   Removal: The board of supervisors has the authority to remove the
officer, by majority vote, for neglect of duty, inefficiency or misconduct in
office.
   D.   Transaction of business: The officer shall follow the procedures set
forth in the zoning enforcement rules of procedures, as adopted and amended in
accordance with Section
18.01.070 (General Provisions).
(Ord. 1985-188 § 1 (part), 1985)
18.101.070 Historical Commission.
   A.   Purpose: Pima County is a Certified Local Government (CLG) in historic
preservation. Pima County, the City of Tucson, also a CLG, and the City of
South Tucson have entered into an intergovernmental agreement to establish a
joint Tucson-Pima County Historical Commission to preserve and protect the
historic character of the community by advising the respective governing bodies
concerning various existing historic districts, buildings, structures, sites,
human-created, or -designed landscapes or spaces in the community, and to
recommend which properties merit historic designation. This section applies
solely to the Pima County jurisdiction of the historical commission.
      1.   The purpose of this section is to implement the requirements of
Chapter 18.63 (Historic Zone) for properties within Pima County's jurisdiction.
The review provided by the historical commission is intended to ensure:
         a.   Accomplishment of other goals for specific types of development,
as described in Section 18.63.010 (Historic Zone; Purpose and Intent).
   B.   Establishment. The historical commission is established by the adoption
of this chapter.
   C.   References: The historical commission shall refer to the criteria
established in the Certification of Local Governments. National Historic
Preservation Act, P.L. No. 89-665, as amended; 54 U.S.C. §§ 300101, 302501-
302505; and 36 C.F.R. § 61.6(e).
   D.   Composition: The historical commission membership includes ten members
appointed by the board of supervisors as follows:
      1.   Five members, one appointed by each supervisor of the board of
supervisors.
      2.   Five members, appointed by a majority vote of the board of
supervisors, who are qualified professionals consisting of:
         a.   One architect;
         b.   One archaeologist;
         c.   One landscape architect or historic preservation planner;
         d.   One architectural historian; and
         e.   One person experienced in historic residential and commercial
property development.
      3.   The historical commission may, by vote, appoint up to two ex-officio
members to serve in an advisory capacity. Ex-officio members shall not have
voting rights but may participate in discussions and provide guidance on
matters within the commission's jurisdiction. Ex-officio members are not
subject to term requirements as described in
18.101.070E.
   E.   Terms.
      1.   Terms of members shall be coterminous with the terms of office of
the supervisor who appointed them, or until their successor is appointed;
      2.   Members may be removed with or without cause prior to the expiration
of their term by the supervisor who appointed them or by the supervisor's
successor in office;
      3.   Members shall be eligible for reappointment; but in no event may any
individual serve more than a total of eight continuous years. Once a member has
served eight years, he or she may not be reappointed until after a break in
service of at least one continuous year. If the historical commission is
dissolved and reconstituted, time previously spent in service shall count
towards the eight-year limitation.
      4.   The terms of all members appointed prior to December 30, 2024, shall
be considered to have an effective term date starting on January 1, 2025 for
the purpose of this subsection. All members will be subject to an eight-year
continuous service limitation, regardless of prior service.
      5.   A member who misses four consecutive meetings for any reason or who
fails to attend for any reason at least forty percent of the meetings called in
a calendar year is automatically and immediately removed as a member of the
historical commission.
      6.   No Pima County employee may serve on the historical commission
except in a nonvoting, ex-officio capacity.
      7.   Should an appointing supervisor fail to appoint a member within
thirty days after the expiration of the term of the member or thirty days after
a vacancy occurs, the appointment may be made by the board of supervisors.
      8.   Prior to the expiration of the term of members, or within thirty
days after a vacancy occurs, the appointing supervisor may request an extension
of time from the board of supervisors to make the appointment.
   F.   Meetings: The historical commission shall hold meetings monthly or as
needed, for a minimum of six meetings per year. All meetings shall be publicly
noticed.
   G.   Pima County Plans Review Subcommittee
      1.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to implement the
requirements of
Chapter 18.63 (Historic Zone) in reviews of historic zone and historic landmark
zone requests on properties within unincorporated Pima County.
      2.   Composition. The board of supervisors shall appoint at least three
County-appointed members of the historical commission to the Pima County plans
review subcommittee. The three members must be among the five appointed members
of the historical commission who are qualified professionals, as identified in
this code.
      3.   Terms. Members of the Pima County plans review subcommittee shall
serve four-year terms; a maximum of two such terms may be served on this
subcommittee of the historical commission.
      4.   Meetings. The plans review subcommittee shall hold meetings monthly
or as needed, for a minimum of six meetings per year.
      5.   Powers and Responsibility:
         a.   Historic district zone: The Pima County plans review subcommittee
of the historical commission shall review and recommend to the planning and
zoning commission the establishment of historic district zones and historic
landmark zones on properties located within unincorporated Pima County.
         b.   Historic zone development: The Pima County plans review
subcommittee of the historical commission shall review all development
proposals in historic district zones and historic landmark zones on properties
within unincorporated Pima County, and make recommendations to approve, approve
with conditions, or deny plans for such development; and, staff shall include
the Pima County plans review subcommittee of the historical commission's
recommendations in their staff report to the planning and zoning commission.
The historical commission's review may include:
            1)   Amenity landscaping; and
            2)   Landmark signs for exemption from sign code requirements in
Section
18.79.060F. (Landmark Sign).
            3)   Fees: Fees for review shall be charged in accordance with the
adopted fees schedule.
   H.   Appeal of Pima County plans review subcommittee of the Historical
Commission and Planning and Zoning Commission Decisions:
      1.   The decision of the Pima County plans review subcommittee of the
historical commission and the planning and zoning commission may be appealed to
the board of supervisors within thirty days of the planning and zoning
commission decision by:
         a.   The applicant; or
         b.   Any real property owner within the historic district zone or
landmark zone.
      2.   The board of supervisors shall uphold or reverse the Pima County
plans review subcommittee of the historical commission and the planning and
zoning commission decisions, and may add, subtract, or modify conditions of the
design plan approval.
(Ord. 2025-4, 2025)
Title 19 ROADWAY DEVELOPMENT FEE
Chapters: 
   
19.01 - General Provisions
   
19.02 - Procedures for Adoption and Updates
   
19.03 - Administrative Provisions
Chapter 19.01
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections: 
19.01.010   Title.
19.01.020   Legislative intent and purpose.
19.01.030   Definitions.
19.01.040   Applicability.
19.01.050   Authority.
19.01.060   Administration.
19.01.010   Title.
   This chapter shall be known as the "Pima County Roadway Development Impact
Fee Ordinance". (Ord. 2020-27 § 1 (part), 2020)
19.01.020   Legislative intent and purpose.
   A.   This chapter is adopted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety
and general welfare of the residents of Pima County by:
   1.   Requiring new development to pay its proportionate share of the costs
incurred by Pima County associated with providing necessary public services to
new development.
   2.   Setting forth standards and procedures for creating and assessing
development impact fees consistent with the requirements of A.R.S. § 11-1102,
including requirements that on or before January 1, 2021, the County replace
its development impact fee program with one pursuant to the requirements of
A.R.S. § 11-1102.
   3.   Setting forth procedures for administering the development impact fee
program, including mandatory offsets, credits, and refunds of development
impact fees. All development impact fee assessments, offsets, credits, or
refunds should be administered in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
   B.   This chapter shall not affect the County's zoning authority or its
authority to adopt or amend its general plan, provided that planning and zoning
activities may require amendments to the development impact fees provided in
Chapter 19.02. (Ord. 2020-27 § 1 (part), 2020)
19.01.030   Definitions.
   When used in this chapter, the terms below shall have the following meanings
unless the context indicates otherwise. Singular terms shall include their
plural. Other terms used in this chapter shall have the definitions set forth
in Title 18 (Zoning) of the Pima County Code.
   1.   Assisted living/congregate care: A residential land use that includes
any complex that provides centralized amenities (i.e. meals, assistance, care)
and/or some level of medical services or medical care for any number of
residents on a continuing basis. This includes nursing homes, group homes, and
other similar uses. See ITE land use category 253.
   2.   Attached residential/multi-family: A residential land use that includes
any apartment or townhome development, regardless of unit or building size. See
ITE land use category 220.
   3.   Building permit: The permit required for construction as determined
pursuant to Title 15 (Buildings and Construction) of the Pima County Code. For
the purposes of this chapter, the term "building permit" shall not include a
permit required for reconstruction of a structure if the reconstruction does
not reflect a change in the number of EDUs applicable to the development. If
the reconstruction increases the number of EDUs applicable to the development,
the development fee for roadways shall be based upon the amount of the
increase. For purposes of this chapter, the term "building permit" shall
include the permit or approval required from Pima County for the placement and
occupancy of a manufactured home as defined in Section
18.03.020(M)(1) of the Pima County Code, multi-sectional manufactured home as
defined in Section
18.03.020(M)(2) of the Pima County Code or factory-built building (modular) as
defined in Section
18.03.020(F)(1) of the Pima County Code.
   4.   Capital facility: An asset having a useful life of three or more years
that is a component of the necessary public services provided by the County. A
capital facility may include any associated purchase of real property,
architectural and engineering services leading to the design and construction
of facilities, improvements to existing facilities, and associated financing
and professional services. Whenever used herein, "infrastructure" shall have
the same meaning as "capital facilities."
   5.   Charter/private school: A land use that is an institution of learning
offering education for children, including some or all of the grades from
kindergarten through twelfth grade. See ITE land use categories 534, 536, and
537.
   6.   County: Pima County, Arizona.
   7.   Credit: A reduction in an assessed impact fee resulting from developer
contributions to, payments for, construction of, or dedications for capital
facilities included in an infrastructure improvements plan (or as otherwise
permitted by this chapter).
   8.   Credit Agreement: A written agreement between the County and a
developer or land owner that allocates credits to the development per Section
19.03.020 of this chapter. A credit agreement may be included as part of a
development agreement as detailed in Section
19.03.030 of this chapter.
   9.   Development agreement: An agreement prepared in accordance with A.R.S.
§ 11-1101 and Section
19.03.030 of this chapter, which may include provisions regarding impact fee
credits for a development and/or reimbursements to a developer for providing
capital facilities included in the infrastructure implementation plan.
   10.   Development: As defined in A.R.S. § 11-1102(V)(2), the subdivision of
land; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any structure that adds or increases the number of
service units; any use or extension of the use of land that increases the
number of service units.
   11.   Dwelling unit: A house, apartment, mobile home or trailer, group of
rooms, or single room occupied as a separate living quarters or, if vacant,
intended for occupancy as separate living quarters.
   12.   Equivalent demand unit (EDU): A standardized measure of demand that a
particular land use type places on each category of necessary public service,
in relation to the demand placed on the same necessary public service by a
detached single-family dwelling unit. The EDU is calculated by using data
specific to the service area in which the facility will be located and pursuant
to generally accepted engineering or planning standards for a particular
category of necessary public services or facility expansions.
   13.   Fee study: A written report that identified the methodology for
calculating the amount of each development impact fee, explains the
relationship between the development impact fee and the plan-based cost per
EDU, and which meets other requirements set forth in A.R.S. § 11-1102.
   14.   General office: A land use category that includes all offices except
medical- dental-veterinary offices. See ITE land use category 710.
   15.   High-traffic retail/services: A land use category that includes any
development which attracts higher traffic volumes than other general retail and
service developments, including but not limited to fast food restaurants,
coffee shops, gas stations, convenience stores, combination gas station/
convenience stores, and other similar high traffic generators. See ITE land use
categories 853, 930, and 934.
   16.   Hospital/clinic: A land use category that includes any hospital or
clinic, including veterinary hospitals and clinics, for the diagnosis, care,
observation, and/or treatment of two or more unrelated persons (or animals)
suffering from illness, injury, or deformity or for other professional care.
Clinics often have lab facilities, pharmacies, and a wider range of services
than a typical medical office. The term "hospital" and "clinic" shall not be
construed to include the office of a physician or practitioner. See ITE land
use categories 610 and 620.
   17.   Hotel/motel: A land use category that includes temporary lodging
facilities such as hotels, motels, and recreational vehicle parks. See ITE land
use categories 310 and 320.
   18.   Industrial: A land use category that includes any light, medium, or
heavy industrial use as well as manufacturing uses, warehouses, and self-
storage facilities (e.g., mini-warehouses). See ITE land use categories 110,
130, 140, 150, and 151.
   19.   Infrastructure improvements plan (IIP): A document or series of
documents that meet the requirements set forth in A.R.S. § 11-1102(F), and that
is adopted pursuant to Chapter 19.02 herein.
   20.   ITE land use categories: Land use categories found in the Institute of
Transportation Engineers' Trip Generation Manual (10th Edition, 2017).
   21.   Land use assumptions (LUA): Projections of changes in land use,
densities, intensities, and population for a service area over a period of at
least ten years, upon which an IIP is based.
   22.   Level of service: A quantitative and/or qualitative measure of a
necessary public service that is defined in terms of the relationship between
service capacity and service demand, accessibility, comfort or convenience of
use, or other similar measures or combinations of measures. Level of service
may be measured differently for different categories of necessary public
services or different subcategories within one public service category as
identified in the IIP.
   23.   Medical/dental/vet office: A land use category that includes any
medical, dental, or veterinarian office. See ITE land use category 720.
   24.   Mobile home park: A land use category that includes any mobile home
for which a building permit is required, either within a mobile home park or as
a stand-alone. See ITE land use category 240.
   25.   Necessary public service: As defined in A.R.S. § 11-1102(V)(7)(c), any
street facilities located in the service area that have a life expectancy of
three or more years and that are owned and operated by or on behalf of the
County. Street facilities include arterial or collector streets or roads that
have been designated on an officially adopted plan of the County, traffic
signals and rights-of-way and improvements thereon.
   26.   Public school: A public or institutional land use that is an
institution of learning offering education for all children, including some or
all of the grades from kindergarten through twelfth grade. See ITE land use
categories 520 and 530.
   27.   Qualified professional: As defined in A.R.S. § 11-1102(V)(8), a
professional engineer, surveyor, financial analyst, or planner providing
services within the scope of the person's license, education, or experience.
   28.   Recreational: A land use category that includes athletic clubs, health
or fitness clubs, racquet or tennis clubs, and other similar uses. See ITE land
use category 492 and related categories.
   29.   Retail: A land use category that consists of shopping facilities
including, but not limited to, big box stores, grocery stores, home improvement
stores or superstores, factory outlets, discount clubs or superstores,
nurseries, automobile sales, and other general commercial or retail facilities.
See ITE land use categories 820 and 823.
   30.   Senior housing: A residential land use category which is age-
restricted, including single family detached homes and attached or multi-family
units. See ITE land use category 251.
   31.   Service area: As defined in A.R.S. § 11-1102 (V)(9), any specified
area within the boundaries of a county in which development will be served by
necessary public services or facility expansions and within which a substantial
nexus exists between the necessary public services or facility expansions and
the development being served as prescribed in the IIP.
   32.   Service unit (see EDU): As defined in A.R.S. § 11-1102 (V)(10), a
standardized measure of consumption, use, generation or discharge attributable
to an individual unit of development calculated using data specific to the
service area in which the facility will be located and pursuant to generally
accepted engineering or planning standards for a particular category of
necessary public services or facility expansions.
   33.   Services: A land use category that includes any development that
provides a service, including but not limited to restaurants, auto-repair
centers, car washes, day cares, and other similar facilities. See ITE land use
categories 932 and 942.s
   34.   Single family detached residential: A residential land use category
that includes any single family detached home or housing development that is
not age-restricted. Mobile homes are not included. See ITE land use category
210.
   35.   Substantial nexus: A substantial nexus exists where the demand for
necessary public services that will be generated by an EDU can be reasonably
quantified in terms of the burden it will impose on an existing facility, the
need it will create for new or expanded facilities, or the benefit to the
development from those facilities. (Ord. 2020-27 § 1 (part), 2020)
19.01.040   Applicability.
   This chapter applies to all new development within any impact fee service
area for Pima County as defined in the adopted IIP. (Ord. 2020-27 § 1 (part),
2020)
19.01.050   Authority.
   A.   The County may assess and collect a development impact fee for costs
associated with providing necessary public services to a development, including
the costs of infrastructure, improvements, real property, engineering and
architectural services, financing and professional services required for the
preparation or revision of a development fee pursuant to this chapter,
including the relevant portion of the Infrastructure Improvements Plan (IIP).
Development impact fees shall be subject to the following requirements:
   1.   The County shall develop and adopt a fee report that evaluates and
defines the development impact fees to be charged in each service area based on
the IIP and the plan-based cost per EDU calculated pursuant to Section
19.02.020.
   2.   Development impact fees shall be assessed for all new residential or
non-residential development including but not limited to retail, office,
industrial, and school developments. The County may assess different fees for
specific categories of development based on the actual burdens and costs that
are associated with providing necessary public services to that category of
development. No development impact fee shall exceed the plan-based cost per EDU
for any category of development.
   3.   No development impact fees shall be charged, or credits issued, for any
facility that does not fall within one of the categories of necessary public
services for which development impact fees may be assessed as identified in
Section
19.02.020.
   4.   Costs for necessary public services made necessary by new development
shall be based on the same level of service provided to existing development in
the same service area. Development impact fees may not be used to provide a
higher level of service to existing development or to meet current safety,
efficiency, environmental, or other regulatory standards to the extent that
these are applied to existing facilities that are serving existing development.
   5.   Development impact fees may not be used to pay the County's
administrative, maintenance, or other operating costs. A separate fee per
Section
19.01.060(E) will be charged for these purposes.
   6.   Projected interest charges and other finance costs may be included in
determining the amount of the development fees only if the monies are used for
the payment of principal and interest on the portion of the bonds, notes, or
other obligations issued to finance construction of necessary public services
or facility expansions identified in the IIP.
   7.   Except for any fees included on interim fee schedules, all development
impact fees charged by the County must be included in a fee schedule prepared
pursuant to this chapter and included in the fee study.
   8.   All development impact fees shall meet the requirements of A.R.S. § 11-
1102.
   B.   The fee study shall summarize the costs of facilities necessary to
serve new development on a per EDU basis as defined and calculated in the IIP,
including all required offsets, and shall recommend a development impact fee
structure for adoption by the County. The actual impact fees to be assessed
shall be disclosed and adopted in the form of impact fee schedules. (Ord. 2020-
27 § 1 (part), 2020)
19.01.060   Administration.
   A.   The county administrator or persons or departments designated by the
county administrator shall administer the development impact fee program.
   B.   Impact fees shall be accounted for in separated funds that clearly
identify the service area in which the fee was assessed.
   C.   Impact fees and any earned interest shall be spent to provide necessary
roadway improvements in the same service area for which they were collected,
including costs to finance those facilities and other costs authorized by this
chapter and included in an approved IIP.
   D.   Impact fees collected after December 31, 2020 shall be spent as
authorized by this chapter within ten years of the date in which they were
collected.
   E.   A non-refundable $75 administrative charge is due when impact fees are
paid. The administrative charge is not an impact fee, and cannot be reduced by
any credits.
   F.   Impact fees shall be assessed and paid either (1) when the building
permit is issued or (2) at a later time if specified in a development agreement
previously approved by the Board of Supervisors, as outlined in Section
19.03.030.
   G.   Any action to collect impact fees shall be commenced within 2 years
after the obligation to pay the fees accrues. (Ord. 2020-27 § 1 (part), 2020)
Chapter 19.02
PROCEDURES FOR ADOPTION AND UPDATES
Sections: 
19.02.010   Ordinance.
19.02.020   Infrastructure improvements plan.
19.02.030   Adoption or amendment procedures.
19.02.040   Updating procedures.
19.02.010   Ordinance.
   A.   This chapter shall provide the framework for adoption and
implementation of the impact fee program, as well as provide the adopted fee
schedules for the assessment of impact fees.
   B.   Prior to assessment of a new or modified impact fee, the County shall
prepare land use assumptions (LUA) for all service areas within which impact
fees will be charged, an infrastructure improvements plan (IIP) and fee study.
(Ord. 2020-27 § 1 (part), 2020)
19.02.020   Infrastructure improvements plan.
   A.   The County shall prepare an infrastructure improvements plan (IIP) that
establishes the needed roadway capital improvements and is based on the LUA.
The IIP shall:
   1.   Define and provide a map of all service areas within which the County
will provide the necessary public services for which development impact fees
will be charged. Each service area shall be defined in a manner that
demonstrates a substantial nexus between the roadway facilities to be provided
in the service area and the development to be served by those facilities.
   2.   Identify and describe the LUA upon which the IIP is based for each
service area.
   3.   Analyze and identify the existing roadway level of service provided by
the County to existing development.
   4.   Identify the roadway level of service to be provided by the County
based on the relevant LUA and any established County roadway standards or
policies related to required levels of service.
   5.   Identify the existing capacity of the roadway facilities in each
service area, the utilization of those facilities by existing development, and
the available excess capacity of those facilities to serve new development
including any existing or planned commitments or agreements for the usage of
said capacity.
   6.   Estimate the total number of future EDUs within each service area based
on the County's LUA and projected new development in each service area.
   7.   Provide a summary table describing the level of service by relating the
required roadway facilities to EDUs in each service area and identifying the
applicable EDU factor associated with each category of development.
   8.   Analyze and identify the projected utilization of any available excess
capacity on the existing roadway facilities and all new or expanded facilities
that will be required to provide and maintain the planned level of service in
each service area as a result of the new projected EDUs in that service area
for a period not to exceed ten years.
   9.   Estimate the total cost of any available excess capacity and/or new or
expanded capital facilities that will be required to serve new EDUs, including
cost of land acquisition, improvements, engineering and architectural services,
studies leading to design, design, construction, financing, and administrative
costs. Total costs should not include costs for on-going operation and
maintenance of facilities, nor for the replacement of facilities to the extent
that replacement is needed to serve existing development.
   10.   Forecast the revenues from taxes, fees, assessments, or other sources
that will be available to fund the new or expanded facilities identified in the
IIP, which shall include estimated state-shared revenue, highway user revenue,
federal revenue, and property taxes.
   11.   Calculate required offsets as follows:
   a.   From the forecasted revenues, identify those sources of revenue that
are attributable to new development and will contribute to paying for the
capital costs of necessary public services.
   b.   For each source and amount of revenue identified, calculate the
relative contribution of each category of development to paying for the capital
costs of necessary public services in each service area.
   c.   Based on the relative contributions, calculate the total offset to be
provided to each category of development in each service area.
   d.   Convert the total offset to be provided to each category of development
in each service area into an offset amount per EDU by dividing the total offset
for each category of development by the number of EDUs associated with that
category of development.
   12.   Calculate the plan-based cost per EDU by determining the cost per EDU
to provide the necessary public services for the overall County.
   B.   The County may reserve capacity in an IIP to serve one or more planned
future developments, including capacity reserved through a development
agreement. All reservations of existing capacity must be disclosed in the IIP
at the time it is adopted. (Ord. 2020-27 § 1 (part), 2020)
19.02.030   Adoption or amendment procedures.
   A.   The County shall adopt or amend the LUA and IIP as follows:
   1.   The County shall conduct a public hearing on the draft IIP and LUA or
amendments at least 30 days before approving or disapproving the IIP. Notice of
the hearing shall be posted on the County's website, along with the draft IIP,
LUA, and any other documents used in preparation, a minimum of 60 days prior to
the hearing.
   2.   The County shall approve or disapprove the LUA and IIP or amendment
within 60 days after the public hearing and at least 30 days before the public
hearing on the fee study.
   3.   The County may update the IIP and/or LUA without a public hearing if
the proposed changes will not increase the level of service or cause an
increase in development fees by more than 5%. The county shall provide notice
of the amendment at least 30 days prior to adoption and post the proposed
amendments to its website.
   B.   The County shall adopt or amend the impact fee study as follows:
   1.   The County shall conduct a public hearing on the impact fee study at
least 30 days after the adoption or approval of the IIP and at least 30 days
before the scheduled date of adoption of the fees. The County must give at
least 30 days' advance notice of intention to assess new or increased impact
fees.
   2.   The County shall approve or disapprove the impact fee study within 60
days after the public hearing.
   3.   Adopted or amended fees shall become effective no sooner than 90 days
after adoption. (Ord. 2020-27 § 1 (part), 2020)
19.02.040   Updating procedures.
   A.   The County shall update the LUA, IIP and impact fee study at least
every five years from the most recent IIP adoption date. The County shall
evaluate the current LUA and, if it determines that changes to the LUA, IIP, or
fee study are needed, the procedures and public notice requirements of Section
19.02.020 shall apply.
   B.   If after evaluating the current LUA the County determines that no
changes to the LUA, IIP, or fee study are needed, the County may publish notice
of the determination which includes the following:
   1.   A statement that the County has determined no change to the LUA, IIP,
or fee study is necessary.
   2.   A description and map of the service area(s) in which an update has
been determined to be unnecessary.
   3.   A statement that by a specified date which is at least 60 days after
the publication of the first notice, a person may request to the County in
writing that the County update the LUA, IIP, or the fee study.
   4.   A statement identifying the person or entity to whom the written
request for an update should be sent. (Ord. 2020-27 § 1 (part), 2020)
Chapter 19.03
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
Sections: 
19.03.010   Adjustments to fees.
19.03.020   Fee credits and credit agreements.
19.03.030   Development agreements.
19.03.040   Fee waivers.
19.03.050   Appeals.
19.03.060   Refunds.
19.03.070   Oversight and reporting.
19.03.080   Intergovernmental agreements.
19.03.010   Adjustments to fees.
   Impact fees shall be assessed according to the adopted fee schedule provided
in Appendix A of this chapter, subject to any phased-in schedule approved by
the Board of Supervisors, and further subject to the following adjustments:
   A.   Impact fee rates in effect when the first building permit is issued
(for a residential development) or when the final permit is issued (for a
nonresidential development) shall be applied to all subsequent permits within
the development for a period of 24 months unless subsequent changes are made to
the approved plans that would increase the number of service units.
   If the number of service units does increase, the applicable increased rate
shall be applied to the additional service units. The 24 month period may not
be extended by a renewal of or amendment to the approved site plan or final
subdivision plat. On request, the County shall provide a written statement of
the applicable impact fee rate. If the County reduces the impact fee rate after
final approval of the plan or plat, the reduced fee rate shall apply to
subsequently issued permits.
   B.   Development impact fees shall not be assessed under the following
conditions:
   1.   If development impact fees were already paid for a development and the
permit that triggered the collection of the development impact fees has not
expired or been voided, no new fee shall be assessed. If the permit has expired
or is voided, the fees due shall be the difference between any fees paid and
those due at the time of reissue or renewal.
   2.   If a single-family residence is replacing the same that was built or
has been in existence prior to the first impact fee ordinance (February 26,
1996 or the date applicable to the adoption of impact fees for that previously
designated benefit area), no impact fee shall be assessed. The burden is placed
on the applicant to provide sufficient documentation to prove year of
construction or establishment.
   C.   If the building permit is for an expansion of an existing land use for
a property that has previously paid an impact fee, the impact fee shall be
assessed only for the area of expansion. If the applicant cannot prove that any
fees have been paid, the fees due shall be for the entire building subject to
the fee.
   D.   If a developer seeks a new building permit for a different type of land
use than the existing land use type with a higher fee rate, and the applicant
can prove that a fee has been paid for the previous use, the assessed fee shall
be the difference between the higher fee and the current fee for the existing
development. If the applicant cannot prove that any fees have previously been
paid, no reduction in fees shall be given. If the change is to a land use type
with a lower rate than the existing use, no refund or reimbursement shall be
issued.
   E.   A developer may request an alternative fee calculation based on their
projection that the actual burdens and costs associated with providing
necessary public services to that development will differ substantially from
the County's projected costs or will be substantially less than the amount
projected to be paid by development fees. The County Administrator or designee
shall review the request and shall make a determination as to the fee to be
assessed. The assessed fee shall have a substantial nexus to the burdens and
costs associated with the necessary public services or facility expansions. The
fee determination is appealable to the Board of Supervisors. (Ord. 2020-27 § 1
(part), 2020)
19.03.020   Fee credits and credit agreements.
   A.   Developers are entitled to credits towards the payment of impact fees
if the developer dedicates, constructs, or otherwise provides an eligible
offsite improvement for which the fee is assessed, subject to the following:
   1.   The improvements must be identified in an adopted IIP and fee report as
a facility for which an impact fee was assessed. If not included in the IIP,
the County must have required as a condition of approval the provision of the
improvements that will substitute for or otherwise reduce the need for other
similar facilities in the IIP. The County shall amend the IIP to include the
subject replacement facility and delete the facility that will be replaced.
   2.   The improvements must be located within the same service area as the
development.
   3.   Credits shall not be available for any facility provided by a developer
if the cost of the facility will be repaid to the developer by the County
through another agreement or mechanism.
   4.   The credit amount shall be the lessor of either the projected cost of
the eligible facility identified in the IIP or the actual costs incurred by the
developer in providing the eligible facility. A credit amount shall not exceed
the total sum of assessed impact fees.
   5.   It is the responsibility of the developer to request impact fee
credits, which may be part of a development agreement.
   B.   Credits shall only be issued pursuant to a credit agreement, subject to
the following:
   1.   The developer requesting the credit agreement shall provide all
information requested by the County to determine the value of the credit to be
applied.
   2.   The developer shall submit an application for a credit agreement within
one year of the date on which ownership or control of facility passes to the
County.
   3.   The developer shall submit a draft credit agreement to the County for
review in the form provided by the County. The draft agreement shall include,
at a minimum, the following:
   a.   A legal description and map showing the location of the development for
which the credits are being applied as well as the facility that has been or
will be provided.
   b.   An estimate of the total EDUs that will be developed within the
submitted development.
   c.   The physical attributes and related cost of the facility to be
provided.
   d.   Documentation showing the date of acceptance by the County if the
facility has already been provided.
   e.   The total amount of credits to be applied within the development and
the calculations used to develop the total amount of the credits.
   f.   The credits to be applied to each EDU within the development.
   4.   If the developer sells or relinquishes part of all of a development
that it owns or controls before the execution of a credit agreement or
development agreement, credits resulting from the eligible facility will only
be allocated to the development if the entity legally assigns such rights and
responsibilities to its successor.
   5.   If multiple entities jointly provide an eligible facility, all entities
must enter into a single credit agreement with the County, and any request for
credit allocation within the subject development must be made jointly.
   6.   Credits may only be reallocated from or within a subject development
with the County's approval of an amendment to an executed credit agreement if
the entity that executed the original agreement or its legal successor and the
entity that currently controls the subject development are parties to the
request for reallocation and the reallocation proposal does not change the
value of any credits already issued.
   7.   The County's determination of the credits to be allocated is final.
   8.   Upon execution of the credit agreement, credits shall be deemed
allocated to the development.
   9.   Any amendment to a previously approved credit agreement must be
initiated within two years of the County's final acceptance of the eligible
facility for which the amendment is requested.
   10.   Any credit agreement approved as part of a development agreement shall
be amended in accordance with the terms of the development agreement and
Section
19.03.030.
   11.   Credits shall only be issued when the eligible facility from which the
credits were derived has been accepted by the County or when adequate security
for the completion of the facility has been provided in accordance with all
terms of an executed development agreement.
   12.   Where credits have been issued, an impact fee due shall be reduced by
the credits stated in or calculated from the executed credit agreement. Where
credits have not yet been issued, the gross impact fee shall be paid in full,
and a refund of the credits shall be due when the development demonstrates
compliance with subparagraph
19.03.020(B)(11).
   13.   Once issued, credits may not be rescinded or reallocated to another
permit or parcel except that credits may be released for reuse on the same
development if a building permit for which the credits were issued has expired
or been voided and is otherwise eligible for a refund. (Ord. 2020-27 § 1
(part), 2020)
19.03.030   Development agreements.
   A.   Development agreements containing provisions regarding development
impact fees, development impact fee credits, or disbursement of revenues from
development impact fee accounts shall comply with the following:
   1.   A development agreement is required to authorize any of the following:
   a.   To issue credits before the County's acceptance of an eligible
facility.
   b.   To reimburse the developer of an eligible facility using funds from
development impact fee accounts.
   c.   To allocate different credit amounts per EDU to different parcels
within a development.
   d.   For a single family residential dwelling unit, to allow development
impact fees to be paid at a later time than the issuance of a building permit
as outlined in subparagraph
19.01.060(F).
   2.   All development agreements shall be prepared and executed in accordance
with A.R.S. § 11-1101 and any applicable requirements of the County code.
   3.   A development agreement may authorize the issuance of credits before
County acceptance of an eligible facility if the development agreement
specifically states the form and value of the security (i.e., bond, letter of
credit, etc.) to be provided to the County before the issuance of any credits.
The County shall determine the acceptable form and value of the security to be
provided.
   4.   If the credits are not to be allocated evenly, the development
agreement must specify how credits will be allocated amongst different parcels
on a per-EDU basis.
   5.   Funds reimbursed to developers from development impact fee accounts
must be utilized in accordance with applicable law and standard procedures for
the use of County funds in construction or acquisition of capital facilities.
   6.   A development agreement may provide for the deferral of payment of
development impact fees for a residential development provided that a
development impact fee may not be paid later than 15 days after the issuance of
the certificate of occupancy for that dwelling unit. The development agreement
shall provide for the value of any deferred development impact fees to be
supported by appropriate security.
   7.   Nothing in this section obligates the County to enter into any
development agreement or to authorize any type of credit agreement or
reimbursement plan permitted by this section. (Ord. 2020-27 § 1 (part), 2020)
19.03.040   Fee waivers.
   A.   If the County waives development impact fees for any development for
any reason, the County shall reimburse the appropriate development impact fee
account for the amount that was waived. (Ord. 2020-27 § 1 (part), 2020)
19.03.050   Appeals.
   A.   A development impact fee determination by the County may be appealed in
accordance with the following procedures:
   1.   An appeal shall be limited to disputes regarding the calculation of the
development impact fees for a specific development or permit and calculation of
EDUs for the development.
   2.   An appeal shall be initiated in a format prescribed by the County.
   3.   The County shall act upon the appeal within 30 calendar days of the
filing of the appeal, and shall notify the applicant of its decision in
writing.
   4.   The applicant may appeal the decision to the Board of Supervisors
within 14 calendar days of the County's decision.
   5.   The Board of Supervisors shall hear and act upon the appeal within 45
calendar days of receipt of the appeal, and shall notify the applicant of its
decision in writing.
   6.   The Board's decision regarding the appeal is final.
   7.   Building permits may be issued during the appeal process if the
applicant pays the full impact fee calculated by the County as of the time of
the appeal or provides the County with financial assurances in a form
acceptable to the County. Upon final decision of the appeal, the fee shall be
adjusted, and a refund paid if warranted. If the appeal is denied, and the
applicant has provided the County with financial assurances, the applicant
shall deliver the full amount of the impact fee to the County within 10 days of
the Board's final decision on the appeal. If the applicant fails to deliver the
full amount of the fees, the County may draw upon the financial assurance
instruments as necessary to recover the full amount of the impact fees due from
the applicant. (Ord. 2020-27 § 1 (part), 2020)
19.03.060   Refunds.
   A.   A refund or partial refund will be paid to any current owner of
property within the County who submits a written request to the County and
demonstrates that:
   1.   The permit that triggered the collection of the development impact fee
has expired or been voided before the commencement of the development for which
the permit was issued and the development impact fees have not been expended or
pledged for the repayment of financing or debt; or
   2.   The owner of the property or its predecessor paid a development impact
fee and one of the following conditions exits:
   a.   The facility designed to serve the property has been constructed, has
the capacity to serve the property and any development for which there is
reserved capacity, and the service which was to be provided by that facility
has not been provided to the property from that facility or from any other
infrastructure.
   b.   After collecting the fee to construct a facility the County fails to
complete construction of the facility within the time period identified in the
IIP, as it may be amended, and the corresponding service is otherwise
unavailable to the property from that facility or any other infrastructure.
   c.   Any part of a development impact fee is not spent within 10 years of
the County's receipt of the development impact fee.
   d.   The development impact fee was calculated and collected for the
construction of all or part of a specific facility serving the property and the
actual construction costs for the facility are less than the estimated costs by
10% or more. In such an event, the current owner of the property is entitled to
a refund for the difference between the amount of the development impact fee
charged for and attributable to such construction costs and the amount the
development impact fee would have been if the actual construction cost had been
included in the fee report. The refund shall only relate to construction costs
and shall not include any related design, administrative, or other costs.
   B.   A refund of a development impact fee shall include any interest
actually earned on the refunded portion of the fee by the County from the date
of collection to the date of refund. All refunds shall be paid to the record
owner of the property at the time the refund is issued.
   C.   If a development impact fee was paid by a government entity, any refund
shall be paid to that governmental entity. (Ord. 2020-27 § 1 (part), 2020)
19.03.070   Oversight and reporting.
   A.   The County shall file an annual report accounting for the collection
and use of the fees for each service area and shall post the report on its
website within 90 days of the end of each fiscal year. The report shall include
the following:
   1.   The amount assessed by the county for each type of development fee.
   2.   The balance of each fund maintained for each type of development fee
assessed at the beginning and end of the fiscal year.
   3.   The amount of interest or other earnings on the monies in each fund as
of the end of the fiscal year.
   4.   The amount of development impact fees used to repay:
   a.   Bonds issued by the County to pay the cost of a project in the IIP,
including the amount needed to repay debt service and the time frames in which
the debt service will be repaid.
   b.   Monies advanced by the County from funds other than impact fees to pay
the cost of any project in the IIP, including the funding source and the terms
under which the monies will be repaid to the County.
   5.   The amount of impact fees spent on and the physical location of each
project.
   6.   The amount of development fees monies spent for each purpose other than
a necessary public service or facility expansion that is the subject of a
development fees assessment.
   B.   The County shall provide a biennial, certified audit of the land use
assumptions, infrastructure improvements plan, and development impact fees,
which shall be conducted by qualified professional(s) who are not employees or
officials of the county and who did not prepare the IIP. The audit shall review
the progress of the IIP, collections and expenditures for each project in the
IIP, and evaluate any inequities in implementing the IIP or imposing the impact
fees. The County shall post the findings of the audit on the website and
conduct a public hearing within 60 days of public notice. (Ord. 2020-27 § 1
(part), 2020)
19.03.080   Intergovernmental agreements.
   A.   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 11-1103, the County may enter into an
intergovernmental agreement to accept or disburse development impact fees for
construction of a project contained in the IIP, including an agreement with a
city or special taxing district for the joint establishment of a needs
assessment, the adoption of an IIP, and the imposition, collection and
disbursement of development impact fees to implement a joint plan for
development. (Ord. 2020-27 § 1 (part), 2020)
Appendix A:  Roadway Development Impact Fee Schedule
Land Use Category Unit EDUs Raw Fee RTA Credit Final Fee
Land Use Category                  Unit    EDUs Raw Fee RTA Credit Final Fee
Residential
   Single Family Detached       Dwell.  1.00 $11,725 $71        $11,654
                                   Unit
   Attached Residential/ Multi- Dwell.  0.54 $6,361  $33        $6,328
Family                             Unit
   Senior Housing               Dwell.  0.32 $3,742  $71        $3,671
                                   Unit
   Assisted Living/Congregate CaDwell.  0.19 $2,245  $17        $2,228
                                   Unit
   Mobile Home Park             Dwell.  0.62 $7,234  $27        $7,207
                                   Unit
Commercial/Retail
   Hotel/Motel                  Rooms   0.51 $3,190  $21        $3,169
   Retail                       1000 sf 1.10 $6,938  $30        $6,908
   Services                     1000 sf 2.54 $16,059 $30        $16,029
   High-Traffic Retail/Services 1000 sf 5.30 $33,449 $45        $33,404
Industrial                         1000 sf 0.34 $2,150  $45        $2,105
Hospital/Clinic                    1000 sf 1.45 $9,168  $88        $9,080
Recreational                       1000 sf 1.88 $11,861 $40        $11,821
Office
   General Office               1000 sf 1.21 $7,634  $45        $7,589
   Medical/Dental/Vet Office    1000 sf 3.14 $19,796 $45        $19,751
Public Schools                     1000 sf 0.45 $2,825  $44        $2,781
Charter/Private Schools            1000 sf 1.09 $6,894  $44        $6,850
 
1.   Raw fees are the development fees before RTA credits are applied.
2.   RTA credits were calculated based on estimated construction costs. Details
of the calculations are in the IIP.
3.   Recommended fees are the raw fees after applying the RTA credits.
(Ord. 2025-16 § 1, 2025; Ord. 2020-27 § 1 (part), 2020)
Title 20 THE SMALL BUSINESS ENTERPRISE PARTICIPATION PROGRAM
Chapters: 
   
Chapter 20.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
Chapter 20.08 - DEFINITIONS
   
Chapter 20.12 - EQUAL OPPORTUNITY CLAUSE
   
Chapter 20.16 - GOODS AND GENERAL SERVICES
   
Chapter 20.20 - PROFESSIONAL SERVICES CONTRACTS
   
Chapter 20.24 - CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
   
Chapter 20.28 - ENFORCEMENT AND REPORTING
   
Chapter 20.32 - ELIGIBILITY, CERTIFICATION, GRADUATION, AND APPEAL PROCESS
   
Chapter 20.36 - MAINTENANCE AND RETENTION OF RECORDS
   
Chapter 20.40 - SEVERABILITY
   
Chapter 20.44 - RESERVED
Chapter 20.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections: 
20.04.010   Adoption of findings.
20.04.020   Declaration of policy.
20.04.030   Scope.
20.04.040   Individual contract or project goals for construction or A&E
contracts.
20.04.010   Adoption of findings.
   The Pima County board of supervisors has reviewed and adopted the factual
predicate established by the disparity study conducted by BBC Research &
Consulting, the findings report, transcripts, and exhibits produced as a result
of post-disparity study public hearings and other evidence of record.
   Upon completion of the updated disparity study conducted for the period from
January 1, 2002 through December 31, 2006, on October 7, 2008 the Board of
Supervisors reviewed and adopted the factual predicate established by the study
conducted by D. Wilson Consulting Group, LLC., dated September 22, 2008,
including Section 10.0 "Findings and Recommendations."
   Upon the passage of Proposition 107, which amends the Arizona Constitution
by adding Section 36 to Article II, Pima County's Minority, Woman and Small
Business Enterprise Program is hereby revised to a solely Race and Gender
Neutral Small Business Enterprise Program.
(Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 1997-44,
1997)
20.04.020   Declaration of policy.
   It is the policy of Pima County government to ensure full and equitable
economic opportunities to persons or businesses that compete for business with
Pima County government, including small business enterprises (SBE). The goal of
the race and gender neutral small business enterprise (SBE) program is to
expand employment opportunities and promote the local economy by fostering the
formation and growth of local small businesses and to encourage contracting
with all small local businesses.
(Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 1997-44,
1997)
20.04.030   Scope.
   The race and gender-neutral measures of this title shall be afforded only to
local, qualified and available SBEs.
(Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 1997-44,
1997)
20.04.040   Individual contract or project goals for construction or A&E
contracts.
   A.   When applicable, as described in the divisions of this title, the
procurement director shall add a requirement to the bid or proposal
instructions that a percentage of the dollar value of all work on such
contracts or projects shall be assigned, as a goal, to SBEs. The goal
percentage assigned to each such contract is flexible and will vary from
contract to contract, according to the availability of qualified and willing
SBEs. Where there is no SBE availability, or insufficient availability to
ensure competition, the procurement director will recommend that no goal be set
on an individual contract or project. Individual goals are subject to the good
faith and waiver provisions of this title. The procurement director shall
recommend the establishment of a methodology for the setting of individual
contract or project goals, which shall include but not be limited to the
following conditions:
      1.   The present availability of qualified SBE firms in the relevant
trade or line of business;
      2.   The ability of qualified SBE firms to readily expand capacity to
meet additional demand;
      3.   The adverse impact upon non-SBE firms;
      4.   A forecast of all eligible contracts to be awarded within the fiscal
year;
      5.   Review and analysis of the reports generated by the procurement
department.
   B.   These specific goals are to be clearly stated as part of the contract
specifications put out for bid.
   C.   Individual project or contract goals shall apply not only to the
initial contract award amounts, but also to subsequent contract modification
and change orders that serve to increase the dollar value of the initial
contract.
   D.   As an aid to the determination of individual contract or project goals,
the procurement director may consider the advice of a compliance officer, may
establish goals committees, and/or at his or her discretion, may recommend
contracting with an independent consultant.
(Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 1997-44,
1997)
Chapter 20.08
DEFINITIONS
Sections: 
20.08.010   Definitions.
20.08.010   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this title and policies related to the SBE program, the
following terms shall have the following meanings:
   A.   "Affiliate" shall mean any business enterprise which is affiliated with
the SBE or with the individual(s) upon which certification is based. Business
enterprises are affiliates of each other when:
      1.   One either directly or indirectly controls or has the power to
control the other;
      2.   A third business enterprise controls or has the power to control
both; or
      3.   An "identity of interest" between or among business enterprises
exists (including family relationships) such that affiliation may be found. In
determining whether affiliation exists, consideration shall be given to all
appropriate factors, including but not limited to common ownership, common
management, contractual relationships, and shared facilities.
   B.   "Bid" shall mean and include a quotation, proposal, solicitation or
offer by a bidder or contractor to perform or provide labor, materials,
supplies, or services to Pima County government for a price.
   C.   "Bidder" shall mean any business that submits a quotation, bid, or
proposal to provide labor, materials, supplies or services to Pima County
government.
   D.   "Business enterprise" shall mean a corporation, partnership,
individual, sole proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture,
professional association, or any other legal entity, operated for profit that
is properly licensed and/or otherwise authorized to do business.
   E.   "Certification" shall mean completion by a business enterprise of an
application procedure to be developed and maintained by the procurement
director, and formal authorization by the procurement director to participate
as an SBE.
   F.   "Certified SBE" shall mean: an SBE which meets the requirements of this
title, and has been granted status as a certified small business enterprise by
the procurement director.
   G.   "Commercially useful function" shall mean: the performance of real and
actual services in the discharge of any contractual endeavor. An SBE
subcontractor is considered to perform a commercially useful function when it
is responsible for the execution of a distinct element of work under a contract
and carries out its responsibilities by actually performing, managing and
supervising the work involved with its own resources. In determining whether an
SBE subcontractor is performing a commercially useful function, factors
including but not limited to the following will be considered:
      1.   The amount of work subcontracted;
      2.   Whether the amount the SBE is to be paid is commensurate with the
work it will actually perform;
      3.   Whether the business will perform work in the trade area where
experience and expertise has been demonstrated and for which it is seeking to
be or has been certified;
      4.   Whether the business actually performs, manages and supervises the
work for which it has been contracted to perform;
      5.   Whether the business purchases goods and/or services from a non-SBE
and simply resells goods to the county, county contractor, or other person
doing business with the county for the purpose of allowing those goods to be
counted towards fulfillment of SBE utilization goals; and
      6.   Standard industry practices.
   H.   "Controlled" for purposes of determining whether a business is a an SBE
shall mean: the small business owner(s) shall possess and exercise the legal
authority and power to manage business assets, good will and daily operations
in the primary trade area for which certification is sought apart from
administrative functions and they shall actively and continuously exercise this
managerial authority and power in determining the policies of and directing the
day-to-day operations of, the business. If the owners who are not a small
business owner are disproportionately responsible for the operation of the
business, then the business is not controlled by a small business owner.
   I.   "County" shall mean Pima County government.
   J.   "Eligible contract" shall mean any contract for goods and services
unless otherwise precluded by law; except that eligible contract does not mean
sole source contracts, petty cash purchases, emergency purchases, contracts for
professional services, contracts for architectural and engineering services,
construction projects, or contracts for noncompetitive purchases, including
business with hospitals, insurance companies, churches, governments,
professional associations, publishing companies, and utilities.
   K.   "Eligible project" means any construction contract undertaken by the
county unless otherwise precluded by law. Eligible project does not include any
construction project in which the estimated contract value is below the bid
threshold determined by A.R.S. § 41- 2535 or any construction project that
requires a disadvantaged business enterprise or other goal pursuant to federal
law.
   L.   "Fixed office" shall mean a fixed and established place where work is
carried on of a clerical, administrative, professional or production nature
directly pertaining to the business being certified. A temporary location, or
movable property, or one that is established to oversee a county project does
not qualify as an office.
   M.   "Joint venture" shall mean: an association of two or more persons,
partnerships, corporations or any combination of these entities, established to
carry on a single business activity limited in scope and duration to a specific
contract with the county. The degree to which a joint venture may satisfy
relevant SBE participation goals cannot exceed the proportionate interest held
by the SBE as a member of the joint venture as demonstrated in the written
agreement establishing the joint venture. Further, SBE economic interest in the
joint venture shall be based on sharing of real economic interest in the joint
venture and shall include proportionate control over management, interest in
capital acquired by the joint venture, and participation in the joint venture's
profit or loss.
   N.   "Local" shall mean that the principal place of business of the
enterprise is physically located within the Tucson Metropolitan Statistical
Area (MSA) (corresponding with the geographic boundaries of Pima County), with
a fixed office, as defined by this title, located within the Tucson MSA. Post
office box numbers shall not suffice to establish an enterprise as a local
business. Residential addresses are rebuttably presumed not to establish the
requirements of this provision.
   O.   "Owned" for purposes of determining whether a business is an SBE shall
mean that: (1) the small business owner(s) as the context requires, shall
possess an ownership interest of at least fifty-one percent of the business;
(2) this ownership shall be real and continuing, and shall go beyond mere
indicia of ownership of the business reflected in ownership documents; and (3)
the small business owner(s) shall enjoy the customary incidents of ownership
and shall share in the risks and profits commensurate with their ownership
interests, as demonstrated by an examination of the substance, rather than the
form, of ownership arrangements.
   P.   "Race/gender neutral measure or activity or program" is one that is, or
can be, used to assist all small businesses.
   Q.   "Small business" shall mean a business whose annual gross receipts are
less than or equal to the gross receipts size standard adopted by the county
for purposes of qualifying for SBE certification.
   R.   "Small business enterprise (SBE)" means a small business that is
eligible for certification, is certified by the county or a qualifying
certification entity, is an independent and continuing business for profit,
performs a commercially useful function, meets the Small Business
Administration (SBA) size and gross income limit standard and is owned and
controlled by one or more persons each of whose personal net worth does not
exceed the limits established by the SBA.
(Ord. 2017-28 § 1, 2017; Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1
(part), 2009: Ord. 1997-44, 1997)
Chapter 20.12
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY CLAUSE
Sections: 
20.12.010   Equal opportunity clause.
20.12.010   Equal opportunity clause.
   A.   All eligible contracts, contracts for professional services and the
services of architects and engineers, and contracts resulting from eligible
projects entered into by Pima County government shall incorporate an equal
opportunity clause. The requirements contained in this clause will be
considered by the procurement director in determining whether a contractor is
in compliance with this article. The clause shall read as follows:
   Equal Opportunity Clause:
      1.   The contractor shall not discriminate against any employee because
of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or disability. The
contractor will take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed,
and that employees are treated during employment without regard to their race,
color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or disability. Such action shall
include, but not be limited to, the following: employment up-grading, demotion,
or termination; rates of pay or other forms of compensation; and selection for
training.
      2.   The contractor agrees to post in conspicuous places, available to
employees and applicants for employment, notices summarizing the provisions of
this equal opportunity clause.
      3.   The contractor shall, in all solicitations or advertisements for
employees placed by or on behalf of the contractor, state that the contractor
is an equal opportunity employer.
      4.   The contractor understands that it is the policy of Pima County
government to ensure full and equitable economic opportunities to persons or
businesses that compete for business with Pima County government.
      5.   The contractor shall permit access to any relevant and pertinent
reports and documents by the procurement director for the sole purpose of
verifying compliance with this title and its related policy and regulations.
All such materials provided to the county by the contractor shall be kept
confidential to the extent possible.
      6.   The contractor shall not obstruct or hinder the county in the
fulfillment of duties and responsibilities imposed by this title and its
related policy and regulations.
      7.   The contractor and each subcontractor shall include a summary of
this equal opportunity clause in every subcontract. The contractor will take
such action with respect to any subcontractor as is necessary as a means of
enforcing the provisions of the equal opportunity clause.
   B.   The inclusion of this clause may be waived by the procurement director
where it is appropriate due to a similar clause requirement by state or federal
law.
(Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 1997-44,
1997)
Chapter 20.16
GOODS AND GENERAL SERVICES
Sections: 
20.16.010   Declaration of specific measures adopted.
20.16.010   Declaration of specific measures adopted.
   A.   The county may allocate up to a five percent competitive bid incentive
to available SBEs who bid on eligible contracts in the amount of five hundred
thousand dollars or less. If the cost of the bid incentive reaches thirty-five
thousand dollars during any fiscal year, the county administrator shall notify
the county board of supervisors so that the board may consider whether or not
to continue the incentive during the remainder of that fiscal year. Notice of
any bid incentive shall appear in county solicitation documents.
      1.   Bid Incentive Percentage. Unless otherwise indicated, all eligible
contracts shall be subject to the bid incentives of this article. In
determining the lowest responsive and responsible bid on all eligible
contracts, the bid submitted by a certified SBE shall be adjusted by reducing
the bid price(s) of such business by up to five percent. This adjustment shall
be solely for the purpose of establishing the apparent low bidder. The actual
value of the contract awarded shall be the amount of the actual bid submitted
by the SBE.
      2.   Bid Incentive for Joint Ventures. A joint venture shall receive a
bid incentive for an eligible contract in accordance with this section if SBE
participation equals or exceeds thirty-five percent of the joint venture. The
non-SBE partner must be responsible for a clearly defined portion of the work
to be performed and shared in the joint venture's ownership, control,
management responsibilities, risks and profits. The portion of the SBE joint
venture's work shall be set forth in detail separately from the work to be
performed by the non-SBE joint venture partner. The SBE joint venture's portion
of the contract must be assigned a commercially reasonable dollar value. The
bidder shall permit the county to review all records pertaining to joint
venture agreements before and after the contract award, to the extent
reasonably necessary to assess compliance with this title.
   B.   The county may reserve up to ten percent of the solicitation of all
goods, supplies and general services procurements for competition exclusively
among certified SBEs. For these procurements, there shall be no bid incentive.
Before the county may reserve goods, supplies and general services procurements
for competition exclusively among certified SBEs, the county shall consider the
availability of certified SBEs who are qualified, willing and able to provide
materials or services in connection with the particular procurement.
   C.   Exemptions from bid incentive requirements on eligible contracts. The
applicable bid incentive shall not apply to the following contracts with the
county:
      1.   Contracts that exceed five hundred thousand dollars in total annual
value;
      2.   Contracts with nonprofit agencies;
      3.   Contracts for the provision of services that are paid for directly
by citizens of the county and not from county funds;
      4.   Contracts, if any, reserved for competition exclusively between
SBEs.
(Ord. 2017-28 § 1, 2017; Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1
(part), 2009: Ord. 2003-63, 2003; Ord. 1997-44, 1997)
Chapter 20.20
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES CONTRACTS
20.20.010   Declaration of specific measures adopted.
20.20.010   Declaration of specific measures adopted.
   A.   SBE Participation Assigned Weight in the Evaluation Criteria. In
selecting architects and engineers and other professional services, not
including the medical and legal fields, the county will:
      1.   Develop a consistent method of evaluating and selecting professional
services contractors across county departments; and
      2.   Award points (up to ten percent of the available points) as part of
the evaluation criteria for the participation of certified SBEs and joint
ventures of SBE and non-SBE firms, and/or equal opportunity compliance.
         a.   A&E professional service participation points will be awarded for
any certified local SBE;
         b.   Non-A&E professional service participation points will be awarded
for any certified local SBE when the procurement department procures the
professional services.
      3.   Make county guidelines available to firms in advance of submitting
proposals.
   B.   Waiver. The award of points as part of professional service evaluation
criteria is a narrowly tailored, flexible, and responsive measure, which allows
for waiver upon approval of the procurement director when less restrictive,
equally effective remedial measures are available and utilized.
(Ord. 2017-28 § 3, 2017: Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1
(part), 2009: Ord. 2003-63, 2003; Ord. 1997-44, 1997)
Chapter 20.24
CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
20.24.010   Declaration of specific measures adopted.
20.24.020   Compliance with individual project subcontracting goals.
20.24.030   Good faith efforts and waiver.
20.24.010   Declaration of specific measures adopted.
   A.   Individual Project Subcontracting Goals. The procurement director will
review each eligible project for potential SBE subcontracting participation.
Where there is sufficient availability of qualified and willing SBEs, the
procurement director will recommend individual project subcontracting goals for
approval and enforcement.
   B.   Any construction project procurement which does not exceed the bid
threshold determined by A.R.S. § 41-2535 may be restricted, if practicable, to
small businesses as defined in rules adopted by the procurement director.
   C.   Procurement requirements shall not be artificially divided or
fragmented so as to constitute a purchase under this section and to circumvent
the source selection procedures required by A.R.S. Title 34 or the Pima County
Procurement Code or be artificially combined to circumvent this section.
   D.   For construction projects that require a disadvantaged business
enterprise or other goal pursuant to federal law, the county shall follow the
requirements of the relevant federal or state agency.
(Ord. 2017-28 § 4, 2017; Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1
(part), 2009: Ord. 1997-44, 1997)
20.24.020   Compliance with individual project subcontracting goals.
   A.   Procedure.
      1.   When the county has established subcontracting goals for a project,
such goals will be published in the project specifications and the call for
bids.
      2.   All bidders are required to submit a subcontractor equity packet
with their bid packet. The subcontractor equity packet will contain either:
         a.   The information necessary to show that the prime contractor will
comply with the subcontracting goals, including a complete listing of SBE
subcontractors to be used and the proposed SBE dollar percentage of each
subcontract; or
         b.   A request for waiver of the goals.
      3.   SBE prime contractors may count their own participation towards
fulfillment of the project's subcontracting goals.
   B.   Subcontractor Equity Packets. Each bidder shall submit a subcontractor
equity packet which includes the names, addresses, and contact persons of the
SBEs to be used on the project; the type of work or services to be performed;
the value of the commercially useful function to be performed by the SBEs; the
percentage of the value of the commercially useful function to be performed by
the SBEs as compared to the total contract amount; a verified statement from
the bidder that the dollar amount of work to be performed by named SBEs was
furnished to the bidder prior to bid opening; documentation reflecting the
bidder's equal opportunity employment practices; and other relevant information
as required. Project goals may be met in the following ways, unless otherwise
specified:
      1.   The bidder may use a certified SBE or SBEs as subcontractors, and
the value of the commercially useful function to be performed by such SBE(s)
shall count toward satisfaction of the applicable goal. The named SBE
subcontractor(s) may enter into second tier subcontracts, consistent with
industry practices; however, if the named SBE subcontracts work to a non-SBE in
proportions outside standard industry practice, the SBE shall be presumed not
to be performing a commercially useful function; or
      2.   The bidder may contract with a certified SBE supplier(s) and obtain
credit towards participation goals as follows:
         a.   If the SBE supplier manufactures the goods supplied, then the
total dollar amount of the subcontract is credited towards the established SBE
goal; or
         b.   If the SBE supplier is a wholesaler warehousing the goods
supplied, or is a manufacturer's representative, then the total contract amount
is credited towards the established SBE goal; however, only twenty-five percent
of the project SBE goal may be met in this manner; or
      3.   The bidder may engage in a joint venture to satisfy the established
SBE goal. The degree of SBE participation credited towards the goal will be
determined according to a consistent methodology developed by the procurement
director.
(Ord. 2017-28 § 4, 2017; Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1
(part), 2009: Ord. 1997-44, 1997)
20.24.030   Good faith efforts and waiver.
   A.   Individual Waiver of Project Subcontracting Goals. If a bidder has not
met the established individual project subcontracting goals, the procurement
director may waive such goals if there is a timely request for waiver and
sufficient demonstration that good faith efforts were made to meet the goal.
The kinds of efforts, as well as the quantity and intensity of effort to meet
established goals, will be considered. The statement of good faith efforts
submitted with the subcontracting equity packet may contain any information the
bidder deems relevant and must include each of the following:
      1.   Verification of advertisements soliciting bids from SBEs for three
consecutive days in an approved publication or copies of written notifications
sent to all SBEs currently certified with the county within identified
subcontracting categories, that interest in the subcontract is solicited. Such
advertisements or notices must expressly describe a given project and state
that SBE participation is sought; incidental reference to the project or
listing of the bidder as a plan holder is not sufficient. Such advertisements
or notices shall be published or sent so that there is adequate time to respond
prior to bid opening.
      2.   Verification that the procurement department was contacted in order
to obtain assistance in identifying available qualified SBEs.
      3.   Verification of efforts to subcontract, consistent with industry
practice, with SBEs that the bidder has contacted or who have contacted the
bidder, including the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all SBEs
contacted and date of contact; a description of efforts made to subcontract; a
description of the information provided to the SBEs regarding plans and
specifications, and if attempts to subcontract actually occurred, the dates and
places of such process and a description of the outcome.
      4.   Verification that the bidder gave SBEs necessary access to and
adequate time to review all necessary plans, drawings, specifications, and
other documents, as well as adequate time to prepare subcontract bids and/or
negotiate joint venture agreements.
      5.   Verification that, reasonably consistent with industry practice or
the bidder's past practices on similar projects, the bidder made efforts to
attract SBEs in order to achieve the project goals, including consideration of
dividing the work into economically feasible units.
      6.   A statement describing the reasons why the bidder and SBE did not
succeed in reaching a subcontracting or joint venture agreement for each SBE
which contacted the bidder or which the bidder contacted.
      7.   Verification that the bidder rejected available SBEs because they
submitted bids which were unreasonably high, or they were not qualified. Such
verification shall include a statement of the amounts of all bids received from
potential subcontractors and all relevant dates.
   B.   The county may waive a project goal, at least in part, if the SBE
subcontractor quotes received by the contractor in one trade exceed the quote
(s) of the lowest non-SBE competing for the same work by the lesser of fifteen
percent or two hundred fifty thousand dollars and no other trade area is
available to meet the established SBE goal. A contractor may not compare self-
performed costs against an SBE subcontractor quote as justification for the
rejection of a bid.
   C.   General Waiver or Reduction of Project Goal. The procurement director
may waive or reduce the established project goal where it is determined that
SBE availability is less than projected upon establishing the goal. In such
circumstances, the procurement director will certify that SBEs are in fact not
available to provide the needed labor and materials at competitive prices.
(Ord. 2017-28 § 4, 2017; Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1
(part), 2009: Ord. 1997-44, 1997)
Chapter 20.28
ENFORCEMENT AND REPORTING
Sections: 
20.28.010   Powers and duties.
20.28.020   Determination of non-responsiveness and opportunity to clarify.
20.28.030   Reporting and maintenance of records by contractors.
20.28.040   Compliance by county departments required.
20.28.050   Continued compliance for the duration of the project.
20.28.060   Investigations of compliance, burden of proof, and findings of
noncompliance.
20.28.070   Sanctions upon a finding of noncompliance by a contractor.
20.28.080   Nonretaliation.
20.28.010   Powers and duties.
   A.   In addition to all powers and duties described in this title, the
county administrator has the authority and duty to recommend the implementation
of all new policies and establish procedures, and recommend changes in existing
policies and make changes to existing procedures which are necessary to
effectuate the provisions of this title and which comply with existing state
and federal law.
   B.   In addition to all powers and duties described in this title, the
procurement director has the authority and duty to recommend procedures to the
county administrator, and monitor, report, and conduct all necessary
investigations to effectuate the provisions of this title. The procurement
director shall have access to all relevant information. Further, the
procurement director shall receive notice of and have the opportunity to speak
at all prebid, preproposal, and preconstruction meetings held by the
departments and divisions of Pima County. The procurement director has the
authority to delegate his or her duties.
(Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1 (part), 2009)
20.28.020   Determination of non-responsiveness and opportunity to clarify.
   A.   The county, after investigation and recommendation by the procurement
director, shall declare a bid nonresponsive if the bidder fails to meet SBE
subcontracting goals or if the bidder fails to make sufficient good faith
efforts which would lead to the waiver of applicable goals.
   B.   Upon receiving notice of a potential determination of non-
responsiveness, a bidder may request a hearing in accordance with procedures
developed consistent with this title for the purpose of clarifying aspects of
the bidder's subcontractor's equity packet.
(Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 1997-44,
1997)
20.28.030   Reporting and maintenance of records by contractors.
   Unless otherwise specified in the solicitation, contractors awarded
construction contracts without an SBE goal shall submit a participation report
which summarizes the number and dollar amount of all subcontract awards during
the contract term, which includes the names of and dollar value for all
subcontracts. The contractors must submit the reports through the procurement
director no later than one month after the contract has been awarded and with
the final payment request. If the awarded contract completion time is over one
year, the contractor shall submit a participation report annually through the
procurement director until the completion of the project.
   Contractors awarded contracts incorporating goals must submit a monthly
participation report to the procurement director, which summarizes the number
and dollar amounts of subcontract awards made during the term of the contract.
The contractor must submit the report to the procurement department on the last
day of each month following the award of the eligible contract or project.
   Consultants with A&E contracts must submit a participation report which
summarizes the number and dollar amount of all subcontract awards through the
procurement director no later than one month after the contract has been
awarded and annually throughout the life of the contract.
(Ord. 2017-28 § 5, 2017; Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1
(part), 2009: Ord. 1997-44, 1997)
20.28.040   Compliance by county departments required.
   Whenever the county administrator finds after investigation by the
procurement director that a contract awarding department or division of Pima
County government has willfully failed to comply with the provisions of this
title, a written finding of noncompliance shall be issued. The county
administrator has the authority and duty to take steps necessary to ensure
compliance.
(Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 1997-44,
1997)
20.28.050   Continued compliance for the duration of the project.
   A contractor who has been awarded a contract based upon a given level of SBE
participation must remain in compliance for the duration of the project and
shall not:
   A.   Terminate or fail to utilize a certified SBE which was originally
listed at bid opening, without substituting another certified SBE, and giving
notice of such substitution to the procurement director, to perform the same or
county approved alternate commercially useful function and dollar amount, or
without showing good faith attempts to replace such SBE;
   B.   Fail to allow an SBE to perform the commercially useful function, the
value of which was originally counted for SBE in awarding the contract;
   C.   Unilaterally modify or eliminate all or a portion of the scope of work
attributable to an SBE upon which the contract was awarded; or
   D.   Submit false or misleading documentation, or interfere or fail to
cooperate with any monitoring or investigations carried out by the procurement
director.
(Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 1997-44,
1997)
20.28.060   Investigations of compliance, burden of proof, and findings of
noncompliance.
   A.   The procurement department is empowered to:
      1.   Receive and investigate complaints and allegations by SBEs, third
parties, or county personnel; and
      2.   Initiate its own investigations regarding compliance with the
requirements and obligations of this title.
   B.   In the event that the procurement department conducts an investigation,
upon written notice of such investigation the affected party:
      1.   Must cooperate fully with the investigation;
      2.   Has the burden of proving its compliance with the requirements of
this title.
   C.   When a compliance review by the procurement department indicates
grounds for finding that a contractor awarded any covered contract, or a
subcontractor and subcontract thereunder, is not in compliance with applicable
terms of this title:
      1.   The procurement director will give the contractor written notice of
non-compliance, which includes written notice to correct deficiencies within a
reasonable time period;
      2.   Then, if the contractor who has received a written notice from the
procurement director to correct deficiencies fails to comply with requirements
within the time allowed, the procurement department will issue a finding of
noncompliance to the county administrator for enforcement of sanctions.
(Ord. 2017-28 § 5, 2017; Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1
(part), 2009: Ord. 1997-44, 1997)
20.28.070   Sanctions upon a finding of noncompliance by a contractor.
   The county administrator shall have the authority to impose any or all of
the following sanctions on parties found by the procurement director to be in
noncompliance with the terms of this title:
   A.   Withholding from the contractor in violation ten percent of all future
payments on the project until it is determined that the contractor is in
compliance;
   B.   Withholding from the contractor in violation all future payments on the
project until it is determined that the contractor is in compliance;
   C.   Subjecting the contractor to the terms of suspension and debarment
provisions of the Pima County code.
(Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 1997-44,
1997)
20.28.080   Nonretaliation.
   This title prohibits retaliation against anyone who participates or has
participated in the hearing or study process related to the establishment of
the SBE program, or against anyone who initiates or assists in investigations
brought under this title. Such parties will not be adversely affected in the
terms or conditions of conducting business. Any employee of Pima County who
engages in retaliatory action will be subject to discipline, up to and
including termination. Any contractor who engages in retaliatory action shall
be subject to the sanctions of this title, up to and including debarment.
(Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 2003-63,
2003; Ord. 1997-44, 1997)
Chapter 20.32
ELIGIBILITY, CERTIFICATION, GRADUATION, AND APPEAL PROCESS
Sections: 
20.32.010   Declaration of purpose.
20.32.020   Administrative provisions.
20.32.030   Eligibility.
20.32.040   Certification.
20.32.050   Graduation.
20.32.060   Interviews, investigations, site visits, monitoring.
20.32.070   Appeal process.
20.32.080   Noninterference.
20.32.010   Declaration of purpose.
   The SBE program within the procurement department establishes certification
and related provisions of the Pima County small business enterprise (SBE)
program.
(Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1 (part), 2009)
20.32.020   Administrative provisions.
   The procurement department has the following authority and duties:
   A.   The authority to accept the certification of another qualifying
certification entity.
   B.   Administration and enforcement of SBE certification.
   C.   The development and recommendation of written guidelines to effectuate
this chapter.
   D.   Certification of enterprises, including contractors, subcontractors,
professional or other service providers, vendors, or suppliers as bona fide
SBEs, in accordance with the standards set forth.
   E.   The development and upkeep of a database and directory of certified
SBEs to be maintained as public record.
   F.   The maintenance of statistical data on the availability of SBEs.
   G.   The monitoring and reporting of county utilization of SBEs.
   H.   Notification, as provided within this division, of an affected party by
certified mail that it has the right to appeal:
      1.   A denial of eligibility, certification, or recertification as an
SBE.
      2.   The enforcement of the decertification or graduation provisions.
   I.   Notification to the affected county department of any lapse in
certification, denial of recertification, decertification, or graduation of a
previously certified SBE.
(Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 2000-24 §
3, 2000; Ord. 1997-44, 1997)
20.32.030   Eligibility.
   In addition to the standards encompassed by the certification requirements,
SBEs are subject to eligibility standards, including:
   A.   The Pima County SBE program is limited in its effective scope to the
jurisdictional boundaries of Pima County. An SBE:
      1.   Shall establish that it is a local enterprise as defined by this
title and is an active participant in the Pima County marketplace.
   B.   An SBE may not be certified until after the satisfaction of all of the
following:
      1.   Formation of the business enterprise;
      2.   Commencement of sustained business activity with revenues generated
in the trade or profession described on the certification application; and
      3.   Commencement of small business ownership, management, and control of
daily business operations.
   C.   No enterprise shall be eligible to be certified as an SBE if ownership
and/or control of the enterprise is held by a current employee of Pima County.
(Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 1997-44,
1997)
20.32.040   Certification.
   A.   The procurement director shall develop and implement a procedure for
the certification of bona fide SBEs in order to effectuate the purposes of the
Pima County SBE program. This procedure shall provide that the procurement
director may issue county certification to eligible SBEs with current
certification from the small business administration, state and local
governments, and entities that certify SBEs in accordance with an established
SBE program. Criteria for certification shall include, but is not limited to,
the following considerations:
      1.   Ownership: small business owner(s)shall be deemed to be owner(s) of
all or a portion of a business enterprise if they:
         a.   Own, in his or her own name(s), at least fifty-one percent in the
enterprise;
         b.   Acquired the interest in an arms-length transaction;
         c.   Acquired the interest with his or her own financial resources or
has put his or her own financial resources at risk in the operation of the
enterprise.
      2.   Control and management: a small business owner shall be deemed to
manage and control daily business operations only if such management and
control is real, substantial, and continuing, that is:
         a.   The small business owner shall possess the power to direct and
cause the direction of the management and policies of the business enterprise
and to make day-to-day as well as major decisions on matters of management,
policy, and operations;
         b.   The business enterprise shall not be subject to any formal or
informal restrictions which limit the customary discretion of the small
business owners;
         c.   Management and control is demonstrated by a showing of at least
one of the following factors:
            1)   The small business owners hold the professional license relied
upon by the enterprise;
            2)   The small business owners have substantial experience in the
trade or industry which would be necessary to the primary decision maker of the
enterprise; or
            3)   The small business owners regularly make decisions, hold
themselves out to the public, and sign important documents and financial
instruments in a manner which is indicative of primary management and control
of daily business operations.
      3.   In cases where the management of an SBE is contracted out to
individuals other than the owner, those persons who have the ultimate power to
hire and fire the managers can, for the purpose of this article, be considered
as controlling the business.
      4.   All securities which constitute ownership or control of an entity
for purposes of establishing it as an SBE must be held directly by a small
business owner. No securities held in trust or by any guardian for a minor
shall be considered held by a small business owner in determining the ownership
or control of a corporation.
      5.   Ownership and control shall be measured as though not subject to the
community property interest of a spouse.
   B.   The procurement department shall grant certification to an approved SBE
for a period of one year or until the certification accepted under Section
20.32.040(A) expires, whichever time period is shorter.
      1.   Following initial certification, an SBE which desires to renew its
certification shall, thirty days prior to each annual anniversary of the
certification, submit a renewal application which shall update and affirm all
requirements for recertification. Timely renewal, if approved, shall be
effective on the date of the annual anniversary of the certification.
      2.   A certification shall terminate automatically and without notice
upon the failure of the business enterprise to renew certification.
      3.   If an SBE is denied certification on the basis of information
submitted, the enterprise can appeal the denial as described below, but cannot
reapply for certification for a period of six months from the date of notice of
denial.
   C.   The procurement department may decertify a business that it finds is no
longer a bona fide SBE.
      1.   Grounds for decertification include, but are not limited to:
         a.   The enterprise has changed to the extent that it no longer meets
initial certification requirements;
         b.   The enterprise fails to submit information requested by the
procurement director or fails to cooperate with the investigation process.
         c.   There is a change in ownership such that the enterprise fails to
qualify for certification in one or more categories.
      2.   If an SBE is decertified, the enterprise can appeal the denial as
described below but cannot reapply for certification for a period of one year
from the date of notice of decertification.
(Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 2000-24 §
3, 2000; Ord. 1997-44, 1997)
20.32.050   Graduation.
   A.   A certified and otherwise eligible SBE achieving gross receipts that
exceed the small business administration size standards in its respective
industry or whose personal net worth exceeds seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars, shall be presumed to have reached a competitive status in the
marketplace. Upon achievement of such status, said firms shall be deemed to
have graduated from the program and shall thereafter be ineligible for
utilization to fulfill enforceable SBE participation goals.
   B.   Graduation criteria which reflects local market conditions shall be
established according to methodology developed and recommended by the
procurement director.
   C.   If an SBE has an affiliate in a different standard industry code (SIC)
major group, the annual receipt level which shall be used as the graduation
criteria shall be the highest annual receipt level applicable to the SBE
affiliate. If an SBE or any affiliate performs work in more than one SIC major
group, the annual receipt level which shall be used as the graduation criteria
shall be the highest annual receipt level applicable to the SBE affiliate.
   D.   Graduation of an SBE shall not affect the contribution made by the SBE
toward satisfaction of a project goal if the work was bid or proposed to be
performed by the SBE prior to the date of graduation.
   E.   The graduation criteria shall be deemed to apply to the small business
owners upon whom eligibility for certification is based and all affiliates. No
business enterprise shall be certified based upon one or more small business
owners who owned or who was an affiliate of an SBE which has become ineligible
for renewed certification due to achievement of graduation criteria.
   F.   A graduated SBE may not subsequently reenter the program unless, after
the expiration of two calendar years, the firm demonstrates:
      1.   That its annual gross receipts have declined to levels below those
as set forth by specific graduation criteria; and
      2.   That during said two calendar years, it was unable to meaningfully
participate in Pima County contracting or procurement, or in the public and
private sectors of the larger local economy despite its good faith efforts to
do so.
(Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 1997-44,
1997)
20.32.060   Interviews, investigations, site visits, monitoring.
   The procurement director may require personal interviews with all persons
upon whom eligibility, certification, and graduation decisions are based.
Additional, non-SBE bidders involved in joint venture relationships shall allow
the procurement director to have access to all records pertaining to the joint
venture agreements to the extent reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with
this title. The procurement director is empowered to interview other such
persons and conduct on-site visits and investigations as may be appropriate to
ensure continued compliance with program requirements.
(Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 1997-44,
1997)
20.32.070   Appeal process.
   A.   Upon denial by the administrator of the procurement director of
eligibility, certification, or recertification, or upon decertification, or
graduation, the administrator shall notify the affected party in writing by
registered mail, setting forth the reasons for the decision.
   B.   Any enterprise that has been denied certification status as described
above may appeal by filing a Pima County SBE program appeal of denial form with
the procurement department within ten working days of receipt of notice of
denial.
   C.   Within five working days of receipt of the appeal of denial form, the
procurement director shall forward the notice to a hearing officer.
   D.   The hearing officer shall:
      1.   Set the hearing date within twenty working days of receipt of
appeal;
      2.   Give notice by certified mail to all affected parties, which
provides the following information:
         a.   The time, place, and date of the hearing,
         b.   The identity of the parties, and
         c.   A copy of the "appeal of denial" form which sets out the charges
with particularity;
      3.   Conduct a fair and impartial hearing;
      4.   Produce a written decision on the appeal which affirms, alters, or
reverses the denial at issue; and
      5.   Give notice of the decision by certified mail sent within seven
working days of the close of the hearing.
(Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 1997-44,
1997)
20.32.080   Noninterference.
   The process of determining and appealing eligibility, certification,
recertification, decertification, or graduation of the SBE status of
enterprises shall not be subject to interference, influence, or coercion of any
sort by parties including departmental and elected officials.
(Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 1997-44,
1997)
Chapter 20.36
MAINTENANCE AND RETENTION OF RECORDS
Sections: 
20.36.010   Maintenance and retention of records.
20.36.010   Maintenance and retention of records.
   For purposes of monitoring, analysis, and future disparity studies, all
county departments shall maintain and retain complete and accurate records
relating to procurement from contracting and sub-contracting with all
construction and A&E firms.
(Ord. 2011-15 § 1 (part), 2011: Ord. 2009-47 § 1 (part), 2009: Ord. 1997-44,
1997)
Chapter 20.40
SEVERABILITY
Sections: 
20.40.010   Severability.
20.40.010   Severability.
   The provisions of the title are declared to be separate and severable. The
invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, or division, or the
invalidity of the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall not
affect the validity of the remainder of this title, or the validity of its
application to other persons or circumstances.
(Ord. 1997-44, 1997)
Chapter 20.44
RESERVED [1] 
   FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-28, § 6, adopted September 5, 2017, repealed
Chapter 20.44, § 20.44.010, which pertained to a sunset date and derived from
Ord. No. 1997-44, 1997. (Back)
Title 21 PUBLIC LANDS AND FACILITIES
   
Chapter 21.01 - COUNTY LANDS AND FACILITIES REGULATIONS(RESERVED)
   
Chapter 21.02 - FLOOD CONTROL DISTRICT LANDS AND FACILITIES REGULATIONS
Chapter 21.01
COUNTY LANDS AND FACILITIES REGULATIONS
(RESERVED)
Chapter 21.02
FLOOD CONTROL DISTRICT LANDS AND FACILITIES REGULATIONS
21.02.010   Severability.
21.02.020   Definitions.
21.02.030   Facility Impact Permit Requirements.
21.02.040   Permit—Exemptions.
21.02.050   Application Submittal Requirement—Type of Use.
21.02.060   General Permit Conditions—Type of Impact.
21.02.070   Special Conditions.
21.02.080   Inspections.
21.02.090   Insurance Requirement.
21.02.100   Posting of Bond.
21.02.110   Liability and Project Site Requirements.
21.02.120   In Lieu Fee Program—Standards.
21.02.130   Fees.
21.02.140   Violation—Penalty.
21.02.010 Severability.
   A.   This title and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be
severable. Should any section of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
Ordinance as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared
to be unconstitutional or invalid.
   B.   Where this title conflicts with or overlaps with any other ordinance or
regulation, easement, covenant or deed restriction, whichever imposes the more
stringent restriction shall prevail.
(Ord. 2018-FC1 § 1 (part), 2018)
21.02.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   A.   "Applicant" means any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, or any agent of any such person or group, or the State of Arizona
or a political subdivision of the State, proposing an activity that will impact
a District Facility. When permit applications are for public capital
improvement projects, the applicant is the jurisdiction, agency or public
utility responsible for the capital improvement. The responsible party shall be
considered the applicant even if a contractor is hired to perform the actual
work.
   B.   "cfs" means cubic feet per second.
   C.   "Chief Engineer" means the Pima County Regional Flood Control District
Chief Engineer appointed by the Pima County Flood Control District Board of
Directors.
   D.   "District" means the Pima County Regional Flood Control District.
   E.   "District Facility" means any of the following (i) any land owned by
the District, or in which the District has a real property interest, (ii)
District Structures, and (iii) any and all lands, drainage ways and structures
for which the District has maintenance responsibility. A map identifying
District Facilities shall be kept by the Chief Engineer and shall be made
available to all interested parties.
   F.   "District Structures" — District Structures means conveyances
constructed or maintained by the District, such as (i) channels or storm
drains, (iii) structures for flood control such as soil cement bank protection,
levees, grade controls, detention and recharge basins, and (iii) associated
improvements such as river parks, access roads, etc.
   G.   "District Lands" means property owned by the District or in which the
District has a Real Property Interest, but for which District Structures are
not present, including restoration areas and properties that have been
dedicated to the District, purchased by the District, or in which the District
has a Real Property Interest.
   H.   "Drainage Way" means a designated area to convey and manage flood
waters whether on property owned in fee title by the District, property in
which the District has a Real Property Interest, or property maintained by the
District. Drainage ways may be either natural or constructed.
   I.   "Facility Impact Permit" means a permit issued by the District which
authorizes an impact, either temporary or permanent, to a District Facility for
a proposed third party use.
   J.   "In Lieu Fee Program" means a program approved by the Board of
Directors of the Flood Control District and by the United States Army Corps of
Engineers to install mitigation projects on District Lands in order to provide
mitigation credits for sale to public and private parties under the Clean Water
Act Section 404 permit program. (Ord. 2020-FC1, § 1 (part), 2020; Ord. 2018-FC1
§ 1 (part), 2018)
21.02.030 Facility Impact Permit Requirements.
   A.   Scope. These rules and regulations are implemented by the District for
the purpose of managing impacts of third party uses to a District Facility and
shall prevail over and supersede any previous District policy or procedure in
conflict therewith. A map of District Facilities shall be kept by the Chief
Engineer and shall be made available to all interested parties.
   B.   Written Authorization Required. Pursuant to ARS § 48-3615(D), there is
strict liability for damages by any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, or any agent of any such person or group, or the State of Arizona
or a political subdivision of the State, who damages or interferes with a
facility that is owned, operated or otherwise under the jurisdiction of the
District without written authorization.
   C.   Issuance of Permit. Any District Facility that the Chief Engineer has
determined to be available for secondary or temporary uses, in addition to the
District's primary use, may be permitted for use by any person in accordance
with the rules and regulations contained herein, as follows:
      1.   Upon finding that the proposed disturbance or impact does not
otherwise interfere with the health, safety and welfare of the general public,
the Chief Engineer may issue a Facility Impact Permit, specifying that all such
work shall be done in the manner specified in this Chapter.
      2.   A use allowed by a Facility Impact Permit shall not conflict or
interfere with the drainage or conservation values of the District Facility,
except as specified in the approved permit.
   D.   Real Property Interest Required. Applicant may not proceed with any use
permitted pursuant to this Chapter until Applicant has obtained a real property
interest in the affected real property allowing the intended access and use.
For property where the District has the legal right to grant all requested
access and use, a permit issued under this chapter that explicitly grants the
requested access and use will satisfy the real property interest requirement.
The interest must be current. Expired or superseded interests are not
acceptable demonstrations of property interest.
   E.   Application. All Applicants shall obtain written permission from the
Chief Engineer by applying for a Facility Impact Permit on a form provided by
the District.
(Ord. 2018-FC1 § 1 (part), 2018)
21.02.040 Permit—Exemptions.
   A.   A Facility Impact Permit shall not be required for any authorized use,
improvement, or disturbance to a District Facility that existed prior to the
adoption of these regulations. Routine maintenance associated with existing
uses and improvements will not require a permit. At the time of replacement,
expansion, upgrade of an existing use or improvement, or repairs associated
with damage due to flooding, erosion, or channel migration, a Facility Impact
Permit is required. Emergency repairs of utilities to restore service do not
require a Facility Impact Permit. However, more permanent repairs to the
utility may require a Facility Impact Permit.
   B.   A Facility Impact Permit shall not be required for passive uses that
cause minimal disturbance, as determined by the Chief Engineer, such as hiking,
horseback riding, etc. that are compatible with the natural environment. The
creation of new disturbances for these activities is not exempt.
   C.   A Facility Impact Permit shall not be required for projects authorized
and funded in whole or in part by the District.
(Ord. 2018-FC1 § 1 (part), 2018)
21.02.050 Application Submittal Requirement—Type of Use.
The type, duration and location of a proposed impact will determine the amount
of information needed to support an application for a Facility Impact Permit.
Use categories and submittal requirements are described as follows:
   A.   Tier 1 — Temporary impact with minimal disturbance of District
Facilities. This use is temporary with minimal disturbance, including temporary
ingress/egress to another parcel using existing roads, access for purposes of
survey, non-invasive cultural or biological surveys or scientific research
projects, land stewardship activities such as removal of invasive species by
hand or chemical methods, installing native plants by hand or hand placement of
rock structures to mitigate erosion, or other similar uses. The submittal
requirements for a Tier 1 impact include:
      1.   Project description. The application shall include the name and
contact number of the proposed user, the scope of use, site plan, and a
timeframe or schedule of the proposed activities.
      2.   Insurance. As required, pursuant to
21.02.090.
      3.   Permit Fees. There is no fee for a Tier 1 Facility Impact Permit.
      4.   Where special circumstances necessitate more detailed information,
the applicant shall furnish any other information deemed necessary for review
of public safety and floodplain management requirements, as determined by the
Chief Engineer.
   B.   Tier 2 — Long-term or permanent impact with minimal disturbance of
District Facilities. Examples of this type of use would include permanent
ingress/egress to another parcel, large-scale ecosystem restoration, removal of
invasive species using heavy equipment, or other similar uses. The submittal
requirements for a Tier 2 impact include:
      1.   Project description. The application shall include the name and
contact number of the proposed user, the scope of use, a site plan and
timeframe or schedule of proposed activities.
      2.   Mitigation. The application shall include a plan for restoring any
areas temporarily impacted to pre-disturbance conditions, as necessary.
      3.   Insurance. As required, pursuant to
21.02.090.
      4.   Permit Fees. There is no fee for a Tier 2 Facility Impact Permit;
however applicant shall pay for all costs associated with establishment of a
license agreement or permanent easement.
      5.   Where special circumstances necessitate more detailed information,
the applicant shall furnish any other information deemed necessary for review
of public safety and floodplain management requirements, as determined by the
Chief Engineer.
   C.   Tier 3 — Limited disturbance of District Facilities. Examples of this
type of impact include utility line or private storm drain construction that
impact unimproved minor watercourses (less than 2,000 cfs), or the temporary
stockpiling of material on District Lands. The submittal requirements for a
Tier 3 impact include:
      1.   Project description. The application shall include the name and
contact number of the proposed user, the scope of use, and a site plan. The
following additional information is required for utilities and storm drains:
         a.   A complete set of construction drawings that show construction in
compliance with District standards and specifications. Initial concept plans
may be submitted to the District to avoid major revisions to final construction
drawings.
         b.   A discussion regarding alternatives that avoid impacting District
Lands,
         c.   A description of the methods used to minimize the impact, if not
avoidable.
         d.   An assessment of the need for permits required pursuant to
Section 402 or 404 of the Clean Water Act and Section 408 of the Rivers and
Harbors Act. Provide a copy of these documents and a Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan, if applicable.
         e.   The plan for mitigation of any disturbance, if required.
      2.   Mitigation. The application shall include a plan for restoring any
areas temporarily impacted to pre-disturbance conditions, as necessary.
      3.   Insurance. As required, pursuant to
21.02.090.
      4.   Permit Fees. The fee shall be determined pursuant to
21.02.120 which covers the cost of application review, permit issuance, and
inspections. Additional costs associated with establishment of a license
agreement or permanent easement, if necessary, may also be required.
      5.   Posting of Bond — A bond shall be posted pursuant to
21.02.100.
      6.   Where special circumstances necessitate more detailed information,
the applicant shall furnish any other information deemed necessary for review
of public safety and floodplain management requirements, as determined by the
Chief Engineer.
   D.   Tier 4 — Disturbance of a District Facility. Examples of this type of
impact include any impact to a District Facility associated with a major
watercourse with base flood peak discharges greater than 2,000 cfs, any impact
to a District Structure, including planting or paving, the construction or
modification of any District Structures, or significant disturbance of District
Lands. The submittal requirements for a Tier 4 impact include:
      1.   Project description. The application shall include the name and
contact number of the proposed user, the scope of use, and a site plan. The
following additional information is required:
         a.   A complete set of construction drawings that show construction in
compliance with District standards and specifications,
         b.   A discussion regarding alternatives that avoid impacting the
District Facility,
         c.   A description of the methods used to minimize the impact, if not
avoidable.
         d.   An assessment of the need for permits required pursuant to
Section 402 or 404 of the Clean Water Act and Section 408 of the Rivers and
Harbors Act. Provide a copy of these documents and a Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan, if applicable.
         e.   The plan for mitigation of any disturbance, if required.
      2.   Mitigation. The application shall include a plan for restoring any
areas temporarily impacted to pre-disturbance conditions, as necessary.
      3.   Insurance. As required, pursuant to
21.02.090.
      4.   Permit Fees. The fee shall be determined pursuant to
21.02.120 which covers the cost of application review, permit issuance, and
inspections. Additional costs associated with establishment of a license
agreement or permanent easement, if necessary, may also be required.
      5.   Posting of Bond — A bond shall be posted pursuant to
21.02.100.
      6.   Where special circumstances necessitate more detailed information,
the applicant shall furnish any other information deemed necessary for review
of public safety and floodplain management requirements, as determined by the
Chief Engineer.
(Ord. 2018-FC1 § 1 (part), 2018)
21.02.060 General Permit Conditions—Type of Impact.
The following minimum conditions shall apply based on the type of disturbance
or impact proposed. The Chief Engineer may provide additional specific
conditions, as needed to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the general
public and the use, functionality, and integrity of the District Facility:
   A.   Tier 1 impacts are temporary and minimal. As such, the following
conditions apply:
      1.   Intentional ground disturbance or construction activity, including
earthmoving, road grading, blading, leveling, or vegetation removal are
prohibited. Invasive species removal as described in Section
21.02.050.A is exempt from this prohibition. Temporal impacts, such as creation
of tire tracks, is considered incidental to the activity unless determined by
the inspector to be excessive.
      2.   Vegetation trimming may be allowed if required to meet the intent of
the proposed impact.
      3.   Any disturbance identified during the final inspection shall be
mitigated by the permittee.
   B.   Tier 2 impacts are permanent but minimal. As such the following
conditions apply:
      1.   Unpermitted ground disturbance or construction activity, including
earthmoving, road grading, blading, leveling, or vegetation removal are
prohibited. Invasive species removal as described in Section
21.02.050.B is exempt from this prohibition. Temporal impacts, such as creation
of tire tracks, is considered incidental to the activity unless determined by
the inspector to be excessive.
      2.   Vegetation trimming may be allowed if required to meet the intent of
the proposed impact.
      3.   Any disturbance identified during either the initial or periodic
inspection shall be mitigated by the permittee.
   C.   Tier 3 impacts are on minor watercourses, District Lands, natural
drainage ways, and are limited in extent. As such, the following conditions
apply:
      1.   The proposed impact shall be constructed in accordance with the
Facility Impact Permit and the associated construction plans. Any deviation
from the plan that impacts the District Facility shall require written
authorization by the District prior to construction.
      2.   The permittee shall call the District for inspection at the
milestones identified on the Facility Impact Permit.
      3.   The applicant shall comply with the provisions of Section
21.02.110.
      4.   As-built plans of the authorized activity shall be submitted to the
District within 30 days of project completion, which may include material
certifications and engineer of record inspection documentation.
   D.   Tier 4 impacts are on any major watercourses, any impact to District
Structures, and include construction of structures that the District will
maintain. As such, the following conditions apply:
      1.   The proposed impact shall be constructed in accordance with the
Facility Impact Permit and the associated construction plans. Any deviation
from the plan that impacts the District Facility shall require written
authorization by the District prior to construction.
      2.   The permittee shall call the District for inspection at the
milestones identified on the Facility Impact Permit.
      3.   The Applicant shall comply with provisions of Section
21.02.110.
      4.   As-built plans of the authorized activity shall be submitted to the
District within 30 days of project completion, which may include material
certifications and engineer of record inspection documentation.
(Ord. 2018-FC1 § 1 (part), 2018)
21.02.070 Special Conditions.
Depending on the type and complexity of a proposed impact on a District
Facility, the following special conditions may be included on the Facility
Impact Permit:
   A.   Pre-construction meetings.
   B.   Special mix designs.
   C.   Shop drawings.
   D.   Third party materials testing.
   E.   Material certifications.
   F.   Specific inspection milestones, including final walkthrough inspection.
(Ord. 2018-FC1 § 1 (part), 2018)
21.02.080 Inspections.
The District may perform inspections at any time without prior notification. In
order to ensure compliance with the Facility Impact Permit, the on-going
protection of the health, safety and welfare of the general public, and to
verify that additional or unauthorized damage or interference to the District
Facility has not occurred, the District shall perform an inspection at the
following milestones:
   A.   Tier 1 impacts. Within 30 days after completion of the proposed use of
the property, the District shall perform a final inspection.
   B.   Tier 2 impacts. The District shall perform an inspection within 30 days
after initial establishment of the impact, and periodically thereafter.
   C.   Tier 3 impacts. The District shall perform inspections pursuant to the
milestones established in the Facility Impact Permit. It is the responsibility
of the permittee to request inspections upon reaching each milestone. The
District shall perform a final inspection upon completion of construction in
order to verify compliance with terms and conditions of the permit.
   D.   Tier 4 impacts. The District shall perform inspections pursuant to the
milestones established in the Facility Impact Permit. It is the responsibility
of the permittee to request inspections upon reaching each milestone. The
District shall perform a final inspection upon completion of construction in
order to verify compliance with terms and conditions of the permit.
(Ord. 2018-FC1 § 1 (part), 2018)
21.02.090 Insurance Requirement.
Insurance requirements shall be determined by the Pima County Department of
Finance and Risk Management, Risk Management Division. No evidence of liability
insurance is necessary for federal, state, county, or municipal agencies,
political subdivision or other public service corporation with a net worth of
more than $1,000,000 as reflected on its most current balance sheet.
(Ord. 2018-FC1 § 1 (part), 2018)
21.02.100 Posting of Bond.
An applicant may at the time of application for a Facility Impact Permit, be
required to post a performance bond for one hundred percent of the cost of the
work impacting the District Facility. A cash bond or its equivalent, equal in
value to one hundred percent of the work impacting the District Facility, may
be substituted for a performance bond. This bond or its substitute will be held
until the work has been completed and has been accepted by the District. An
applicant may be exempted from posting bond with the approval of the Chief
Engineer. Posting bond is not required for activities covered by an assurance
agreement required pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes Section 11-821(C).
(Ord. 2018-FC1 § 1 (part), 2018)
21.02.110 Liability and Project Site Requirements.
   A.   The permittee assumes the responsibility and all liability for any
injury or damage to any person or property caused by or arising from the impact
authorized by the Facility Impact Permit. The permittee shall indemnify, defend
and hold harmless the District and Pima County, its officers, departments,
employees and agents from and against any and all suits, actions, legal or
administrative proceedings, claims, demands or damages of any kind or nature
arising out of the exercise of the permit which are attributed to any act or
omission of the applicant, its agents, employees or anyone acting under its
direction, control or on its behalf. In the event suit shall be brought and the
District or Pima County is named as a defendant, all costs for counsel, either
house counsel or retained counsel, and any other court costs associated with
defending itself shall be paid by the applicant.
   B.   Where work is performed in a drainage way, drainage easement or
designated floodplain, the permittee shall not at any time obstruct or diminish
in any manner the ability of the drainage way, drainage easement or designated
floodplain to convey or pass stormwater except as allowed in the Facility
Impact Permit. All existing District Structures damaged or removed shall be
replaced immediately to the satisfaction of the Chief Engineer or authorized
representative at no cost to the District or Pima County.
   C.   All work shall occur in a manner that is least destructive to existing
public improvements and natural resources and shall be completed in the
shortest possible timeframe, at no cost to the District, as directed by the
Chief Engineer or authorized representative. Permittee shall notify the
District representative noted on the Facility Impact Permit at least forty-
eight hours prior to starting work. Once the work has begun it shall continue
in a timely manner until completion with no significant gaps in the time
between execution of the various phases of the work. In the case of an
emergency requiring immediate work impacting a District Facility, the permittee
shall make a diligent effort to contact the District prior to commencement of
work. Such emergency work shall be halted upon issuance of a stop work order by
the Chief Engineer. Emergency work shall not continue beyond twenty-four hours
during the normal workweek or the next full work day following a weekend or
holiday without the issuance of a written permit.
   D.   If the work performed or materials used by the permittee for repair or
reconstruction of a District Facility under the Facility Impact Permit fails to
pass final inspection, the permittee shall remove defective improvements and
replace with improvements that meet specifications under the approved plan
within the timeframe specified by written notice from the Chief Engineer or
authorized representative. Facilities such as utilities that are abandoned or
found to be defective may remain in place, at the discretion of the Chief
Engineer.
   E.   The permittee shall not allow any condition to exist in connection with
the exercise of the permit which would be a hazard or source of danger to the
general public. If the work presents or becomes a hazard to the general public,
the District may take immediate corrective action to protect public health and
safety or as otherwise allowed by law. The District may bill the permittee for
the full cost incurred for such corrective action.
   F.   The permittee shall be responsible for verifying the location of all
underground utilities in accordance with the Blue Stake laws prior to the
commencement of any excavation and shall protect said utilities from damage.
   G.   All work shall be accomplished in accordance with applicable
requirements of the Pima County Code, including Floodplain Management
Ordinance, Grading Ordinance, Channel Design Standards Manual, and any other
applicable engineering details, standards or specifications of the District and
Pima County. With the exception of plans prepared by public service
corporations that are subject to federal and state regulations concerning
safety and design, all work shall be performed in accordance with plans
prepared by a professional engineer.
   H.   The permittee or his representative shall keep a copy of the Facility
Impact Permit and make it available to the District upon request.
   I.   If at any time, the District Facility, or any portion thereof, occupied
and used by the permittee in accordance with the Facility Impact Permit is
needed or required by the District or County, the permittee, upon receipt of
notice shall, at no cost to the District or County, remove, relocate, or
abandon in place all property belonging to the permittee, unless other
arrangements are agreed to by the Chief Engineer.
   J.   In the event the applicant does not repair the District Facility to the
conditions set forth by the Chief Engineer or authorized representative after a
thirty-day notice of any deficiencies, the applicant by the acceptance of a
permit agrees to be responsible for all costs of completing such repair, and in
the event suit is necessary, agrees to be responsible for all costs of
collection including but not limited to court costs and attorney's fees.
   K.   Applicant is placed on notice that the District may not own the
particular property or property rights for which the permit is issued.
Applicant assumes all liability resulting from any defect to the title of the
land and no warranty of title to the underlying land is expressed or implied.
(Ord. 2018-FC1 § 1 (part), 2018)
21.02.120 In Lieu Fee Program — Standards.
   For all In-Lieu Fee (ILF) Program mitigation projects the following standard
shall apply:
   A.   A Development Plan, which details the mitigation elements of a project,
shall be prepared by the District approved by the Board and the U.S. Army Corps
of the Engineers (USACE);
   B.   Assign a compensatory mitigation credit fee for each Development Plan,
pursuant to Section
21.02.130.
   C.   Detailed accounting records will be maintained by the District in the
USACE's electronic database of each and every ILF transaction identifying the
credits sold and monies accepted for each specific permit issued by the USACE.
   D.   In accordance with the Compensatory Mitigation Rule, 2008, §332.8(i)
(1), the District will submit to the USACE District Engineer the following
information:
      1.   All income received, disbursements, and interest earned by the ILF
Program account;
      2.   A listing of all USACE's permits for which ILF Program funds were
accepted including the permit numbers, the service area in which the authorized
impacts are located, the amount of authorized impact, the amount of required
compensatory mitigation, the amount paid to the ILF Program, and the date the
funds were received from the permittee;
      3.   A description of the ILF Program expenditures from the account
including any costs associated with land acquisition, planning, construction,
monitoring, maintenance, adaptive management and program administration; and
      4.   The balance of any advance credits and release credits at the end of
the report period for each designated service area. (Ord. 2020-FC1, § 1 (part),
2020)
21.02.130 Fees.
   A.   For Facility Impact Permits, the charges will include the permit fee,
any additional fees for meeting the conditions of the permit such as inspection
and material testing, as well as any fines applied to the applicant due to
violations of the permit requirements.
   B.   For compensatory mitigation projects, the District will develop a
credit fee based on costs to plan, design, construct and maintain the
compensatory mitigation as approved in the Development Plan.
   C.   Permit fees, fines, and mitigation credit fees shall be set forth by a
fee schedule approved by the Board of Directors for the Flood Control District
and amended from time to time. A copy of the fee schedule is on file at the
District's office and website. (Ord. 2020-FC1, § 1 (part), 2020; Ord. 2018-FC1
§ 1 (part), 2018)
21.02.140   Violation—Penalty.
   A.   Any person, contractor, utility company or corporation violating any of
the provisions of this chapter are subject to civil penalties or other legal
action as provided by pertinent state statutes, including but not limited to
ARS Section 48-3615.01. The procedures set forth in Sections
16.64.020 and
16.64.070 of the Pima County Code also apply to notice and abatement of
violations of this chapter.
   B.   In addition to any penalties that occur during the compliance
enforcement process, any impact that has occurred prior to issuance of a
Facility Impact Permit, except as provided for emergency work in
21.02.110.C, shall require payment of double the permit fee. (Ord. 2020-FC1, §
1 (part), 2020; Ord. 2018-FC1 § 1 (part), 2018)
STATUTORY REFERENCES
FOR
ARIZONA COUNTIES
   The statutory references listed below refer the code user to state statutes
applicable to Arizona counties. They are up to date through legislation adopted
by the 53rd Legislature, Second Regular Session (2017).
General Provisions 
   Boundaries and county seats
   A.R.S. § 11-101 et seq.
   County powers generally
   Arizona Const. art. XII and A.R.S. § 11-201
   County seal
   A.R.S. § 11-251(22)
   County jails
   A.R.S. § 11-251(7) and (8)
   Deferred prosecution programs
   A.R.S. § 11-361 et seq.
   Elections
   A.R.S. title 16
   Election districts and precincts
   A.R.S. § 11-251(2) and (3)
   Administration and Personnel
Board of supervisors generally 
   A.R.S. § 11-211 et seq.
   Powers and duties of board of supervisors
   A.R.S. § 11-251 et seq.
   Public meetings
   A.R.S. § 38-431 et seq.
   County records
   A.R.S. § 11-251.03
   Clerk of board of supervisors
   A.R.S. § 11-241
   County offices
   Arizona Const. art. XII, §§ 3 and 4
   County employee merit system
   A.R.S. § 11-351 et seq.
   County officers generally
   A.R.S. § 11-401 et seq.
   Bonds of officers
   A.R.S. § 11-253
   Filling vacancies
   A.R.S. § 11-251(16)
   Sheriff
   A.R.S. § 11-441 et seq.
   Recorder
   A.R.S. § 11-461 et seq.
   Treasurer
   A.R.S. § 11-491 et seq.
   School superintendent
   A.R.S. §§ 11-511, 15-301 et seq.
   County attorney
   A.R.S. § 11-531 et seq.
   Assessor
   A.R.S. § 11-541 et seq.
   Clerk of superior court
   A.R.S. § 12-281 et seq.
   County engineer
   A.R.S. § 11-561 et seq.
   County forest fire wardens
   A.R.S. § 11-571 et seq.
   County public defenders
   A.R.S. § 11-581 et seq.
   County medical examiner
   A.R.S. § 11-591 et seq.
   County planning and zoning commission
   A.R.S. § 11-802 et seq.
   Emergency management
   A.R.S. § 26-301 et seq.
   Employee benefits, property loss and liability claim coverage
   A.R.S. § 11-981
Revenue and Finance 
   County charges, specific funds and warrants for current expenses
   A.R.S. § 11-601 et seq.
   Claims and warrants
   A.R.S. § 11-621 et seq.
   Lease-purchase agreements
   A.R.S. § 11-651 et seq.
   Audits
   A.R.S. § 11-663 et seq.
   County improvement districts
   A.R.S. § 48-901 et seq.
   Uniform federal tax lien registration act
   A.R.S. § 33-1031 et seq.
   Relocation assistance
   A.R.S. § 11-961 et seq.
   Property tax authorization
   A.R.S. § 11-251(12)
   Powers of the board of supervisors relating to revenue and finance
   A.R.S. § 11-251(10)—(13)
   Taxation generally
   A.R.S. title 42
Business Licenses and Regulations 
   Alcoholic beverages
   A.R.S. title 4
Animals 
   Generally
   A.R.S. §§ 3-1201 et seq., 11-251(47) and 11-1001 et seq.
   Impounded animals
   A.R.S. § 11-1021 et seq.
Health and Safety 
   Powers and duties of the board of supervisors relating to public health
   A.R.S. § 11-251(5), (17), (26), (27), (30), (31), (32), (37), (39) and (52)
   Air quality
   A.R.S. § 11-871 et seq.
   Medical facilities and care of indigents
   A.R.S. § 11-291 et seq.
   Burial of indigent veterans and spouses thereof
   A.R.S. § 11-311
   Fireworks
   A.R.S. § 36-1601 et seq.
Public Peace, Morals and Welfare 
   Police powers of board of supervisors
   A.R.S. § 11-251(31)
   Rewards for information on crimes
   A.R.S. § 11-251(25)
   State criminal code
   A.R.S. title 13
   Curfew
   A.R.S. § 11-251(40)
Vehicles and Traffic 
   State vehicle code
   A.R.S. title 28
   Powers of local authorities
   A.R.S. §§ 28-626 and 28-627
   Off-road vehicles
   A.R.S. § 11-251(43)
Roads, Highways and Public Places 
   Improvement districts
   A.R.S. § 48-901 et seq.
   Public parks
   A.R.S. § 11-931 et seq.
   Powers of the board relating to roads, bridges and public places
   A.R.S. § 11-251(4), (23), (24), (28), (29), (41), (43), (44), (45), (46),
(48), (54) and (58)
Public Services 
   Public buildings
   A.R.S. § 11-271 et seq.
   Industrial pursuits bond issues
   A.R.S. § 11-281 et seq.
   Public libraries
   A.R.S. § 11-901 et seq.
   Public parks
   A.R.S. § 11-931 et seq.
   Relocation assistance
   A.R.S. § 11-961 et seq.
   Improvement districts
   A.R.S. § 48-901 et seq.
   Aviation fields
   A.R.S. § 11-251(23)
   County fairs
   A.R.S. § 11-251(24)
Buildings and Construction 
   Building codes
   A.R.S. § 11-861 et seq.
   Building permits
   A.R.S. § 11-321 et seq.
Subdivisions 
   Subdivision regulations
   A.R.S. § 11-821 et seq.
Planning and Zoning 
   Administration and enforcement
   A.R.S. § 11-801 et seq.
   County planning and zoning
   A.R.S. § 11-821 et seq.
   Private Property Rights Protection Act
   A.R.S. § 12-1131 et seq.
CROSS-REFERENCE TABLE
   This table provides users with the legislative history and the current
disposition of the sections in the Pima County, Arizona, prior county code.
Thus, prior code Section
11.08.010 was derived from and currently appears in this code in Section
2.04.010. The legislative history information was derived from the Pima County
Code, adopted by the Pima County Board of Supervisors, containing enactments
through June 30, 1984.
Prior Code §      Ordinance History                      Herein
11.04.010                                                  Not codified
11.04.020                                                  Not codified
11.08.010                                                  2.04.010
11.08.020                                                  2.04.020
11.08.030                                                  2.04.030
11.08.040(A)                                               2.04.040
11.08.040(B)                                               2.04.050
11.08.040(C)                                               2.04.060
11.08.040(D)                                               2.04.070
11.08.040(E)                                               2.04.080
11.08.040(F)                                               2.04.090
11.12.010(A)                                               2.12.010
11.12.010(B)                                               2.12.020
11.12.010(C)                                               2.12.030
11.12.010(D)                                               2.12.040
11.12.010(E)                                               2.12.050
11.12.020                                                  2.12.060
Title 13:
Rule 101            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 102            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 103            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 111            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 112            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 113            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 121            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 122            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 123            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 131            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 132            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 133            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 134            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 135            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 136            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 137            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 141            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 142            Ord. 1979-93; Ord. 1981-12             17.04
Rule 143            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 144            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 145            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 146            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 147            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 151            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 161            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 162            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 163            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 164            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 165            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 166            Ord. 1983-196                          17.04
Rule 171            Ord. 1979-93; Ords. 1981-12, 1982-91,  17.04
                    1983-196
Rule 172            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 173            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 174            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 175            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 181            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 182            Ord. 1979-93                           17.04
Rule 183            Repealed by Ord. 1983-196
Rule 201            Ord. 1979-93                           17.08
Rule 202            Ord. 1979-93; Ord. 1983-196            17.08
Rule 203            Ord. 1979-93                           17.08
Rule 204            Ord. 1979-93; Ord. 1981-12             17.08
Rule 205            Ord. 1979-93                           17.08
Rule 211            Ord. 1979-93                           17.08
Rule 212            Ord. 1979-93                           17.08
Rule 213            Ord. 1979-93                           17.08
Rule 214            Ord. 1979-93                           17.08
Rule 215            Ord. 1979-93                           17.08
Rule 221            Ord. 1979-93                           17.08
Rule 222            Ord. 1979-93                           17.08
Rule 223            Ord. 1979-93                           17.08
Rule 224            Ord. 1979-93                           17.08
Rule 225            Ord. 1979-93                           17.08
Rule 226            Ord. 1979-93                           17.08
Rule 231            Ord. 1979-93                           17.08
Rule 232            Ord. 1979-93                           17.08
Rule 233            Ord. 1979-93                           17.08
Rule 241            Ord. 1979-93                           17.08
Rule 242            Ord. 1979-93; Ords. 1981-12, 1983-196  17.08
Rule 243            Ord. 1979-93; Ords, 1981-12, 1983-196  17.08
Rule 244            Ord. 1979-93; Ords. 1981-12, 1983-196  17.08
Rule 245            Ord. 1979-93; Ord. 1983-196            17.08
Rule 246            Ord. 1979-93                           17.08
Rule 247            Ord. 1979-93                           17.08
Rule 248            Ord. 1979-93; Ord. 1983-196            17.08
Rule 251            Ord. 1979-93                           17.08
Rule 252            Ord. 1979-93                           17.08
Rule 261            Ord. 1981-12; Ord. 1983-196            17.08
Table 204           Ord. 1979-93                           17.08
Table 242           Ord. 1979-93                           17.08
Table 243           Ord. 1979-93; Ords. 1981-12, 1983-196  17.08
Table 244-A         Ord. 1979-93; Ords. 1981-12, 1983-196  17.08
Table 244-B         Ord. 1979-93; Ords. 1981-12, 1983-196  17.08
Table 244-C         Ord. 1979-93                           17.08
Rule 301            Ord. 1979-93                           17.12
Rule 302            Ord. 1979-93                           17.12
Rule 311            Repealed by Ord. 1983-196
Rule 312            Ord. 1979-93                           17.12
Rule 313            Ord. 1979-93                           17.12
Rule 314            Ord. 1979-93                           17.12
Rule 315            Ord. 1979-93                           17.12
Rule 316            Ord. 1979-93                           17.12
Rule 317            Ord. 1979-93; Ord. 1983-196            17.12
Rule 318            Ord. 1979-93                           17.12
Rule 321            Ord. 1979-93                           17.12
Rule 322            Ord. 1979-93                           17.12
Rule 331            Ord. 1979-93                           17.12
Rule 332            Ord. 1979-93; Ord. 1983-196            17.12
Rule 341            Ord. 1979-93                           17.12
Rule 342            Ord. 1979-93; Ord. 1983-196            17.12
Rule 343            Ord. 1979-93                           17.12
Rule 344            Ord. 1979-93                           17.12
Rule 345            Ord. 1982-91                           17.12
Rule 351            Ord. 1983-196                          17.12
Rule 361            Ord. 1983-196                          17.12
Rule 371            Ord. 1983-196                          17.12
Rule 372            Ord. 1983-196                          17.12
Rule 373            Ord. 1983-196                          17.12
Rule 381            Ord. 1983-196                          17.12
Rule 391            Ord. 1983-196                          17.12
Table 321           Ord. 1983-196                          17.12
Table 332           Ord. 1983-196                          17.12
Chapter IV          Repealed by Ord. 1983-196
Rule 501            Ord. 1979-93; Ord. 1983-196            17.20
Rule 502            Ord. 1979-93                           17.20
Rule 503            Ord. 1979-93                           17.20
Rule 504            Repealed by Ord. 1983-196
Rule 505            Ord. 1979-93                           17.20
Rule 506            Ord. 1979-93; Ord. 1983-196            17.20
Rule 507            Ord. 1979-93                           17.20
Rule 511            Ord. 1979-93                           17.20
Rule 512            Ord. 1979-93                           17.20
Rule 601            Repealed by 1983-196
Rule 611            Ord. 1979-93; Ord. 1981-12             17.20
Rule 612            Ord. 1979-93                           17.24
Rule 621            Ord. 1979-93                           17.24
Rule 622            Ord. 1979-93                           17.24
Rule 623            Ord. 1979-93                           17.24
Rule 624            Ord. 1979-93                           17.24
Rule 625            Ord. 1983-196                          17.24
Rule 631            Ord. 1979-93                           17.24
Rule 641            Ord. 1979-93                           17.24
Table 625           Ord. 1983-196                          17.24
Rule 701            Ord. 1979-93                           17.28
Rule 702            Ord. 1979-93                           17.28
Rule 703            Ord. 1979-93                           17.28
Rule 704            Ord. 1979-93                           17.28
Rule 705            Ord. 1979-93                           17.28
Rule 706            Ord. 1979-93; Ord. 1981-12             17.28
Rule 711            Ord. 1979-93                           17.28
Rule 712            Ord. 1979-93                           17.28
Rule 713            Ord. 1979-93                           17.28
Rule 714            Ord. 1979-93                           17.28
Rule 721            Ord. 1979-93                           17.28
Rule 722            Ord. 1979-93                           17.28
Table 714           Ord. 1979-93                           17.28
Rule 801            Ord. 1979-93                           17.32
Rule 802            Ord. 1979-93                           17.32
Rule 803            Ord. 1979-93                           17.32
Rule 804            Ord. 1979-93                           17.32
Rule 811            Ord. 1979-93                           17.32
Rule 821            Ord. 1979-93                           17.32
Rule 822            Ord. 1979-93                           17.32
Rule 823            Ord. 1979-93                           17.32
Table 802           Ord. 1979-93                           17.32
Rule 804            Ord. 1979-93                           17.32
Reg. 91             Repealed by Ord. 1983-196
Rule 921            Ord. 1979-93                           17.36
Rule 922            Repealed by Ord. 1983-196
Rule 923            Repealed by Ord. 1983-196
Rule 924            Repealed by Ord. 1983-196
Reg. 93             Repealed by Ord. 1983-196
15.04.010           Ord. 1981-186, 9-15-81                 6.04.010
15.04.020           Ord. 1981-186, 9-15-81                 6.04.020
15.04.030           Ord. 1981-186, 9-15-81, repealing Ord. 6.04.030
                    1979-38, 2-19-79
15.04.040           Ord. 1981-186, 9-15-81, repealing Ord. 6.04.040
                    1979-38, 2-19-79
15.04.050           Ord. 1981-186, 9-15-81, repealing Ord. 6.04.050
                    1979-38, 2-19-79
15.04.060           Ord. 1979-76, 6-26-79                  6.04.060
15.04.070(A)        Ord. 1979-163, 11-5-79, amending Ord.  6.04.070
                    1979-76, 6-26-79
15.04.070(B)        Ord. 1979-76, 6-26-79                  Repealed by 1989-159
15.04.080           Resolution 1980-33, 3-11-80            6.04.090
                    Ord. 1979-76, 6-26-79, amended in
15.04.090           Board of Supervisors Study Session, 1- 6.04.100
                    13-81
17.04.010           Ord. 1983-73, 5-17-83                  Not codified
17.04.020           Ord. 1983-73, 5-17-83                  Not codified
17.04.030           Ord. 1983-73, 5-17-83                  Not codified
17.04.040           Ord. 1983-73, 5-17-83                  Not codified
17.04.050           Ord. 1983-73, 5-17-83                  Not codified
17.08.010                                                  Not codified
17.08.020                                                  Not codified
17.12.010                                                  Not codified
17.12.020                                                  Not codified
17.16.010           Ord. 1983-31, 8-2-83                   Not codified
17.16.020           Ord. 1983-31, 8-2-83                   Not codified
17.20.010           Ord. 1982-16, 1-19-82                  Not codified
17.20.020           Ord. 1982-16, 1-19-82                  Not codified
17.24.010           Ord. 1981-115, 6-16-81                 Not codified
17.24.020           Ord. 1981-115, 6-16-81                 Not codified
17.24.030           Ord. 1981-115, 6-16-81                 Not codified
17.24.040           Ord. 1981-115, 6-16-81                 Not codified
17.24.050           Ord. 1981-115, 6-16-81                 Not codified
17.24.060           Ord. 1981-115, 6-16-81                 Not codified
17.24.070           Ord. 1981-115, 6-16-81                 Not codified
17.24.080           Ord. 1981-115, 6-16-81                 Not codified
17.24.090           Ord. 1981-115, 6-16-81                 Not codified
17.28.010           Ord. 1983-130, 8-2-83; Ord. 1982-46,   Not codified
                    12-7-81
17.28.020           Ord. 1983-130, 8-2-83; Ord. 1982-46,   Not codified
                    12-7-81
Chapter 17.32      Ord. 1983-130, 8-2-83                  Not codified
17.40.010           Ord. 1983-16                           Not codified
17.40.020           Ord. 1983-16                           Not codified
17.40.030           Ord. 1983-16                           Not codified
19.04.010           Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.010
19.04.020           Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.020
19.04.030           Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.030
19.04.040           Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.040
19.04.050           Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.050
19.04.060           Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.060
19.04.070           Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.070
19.08.010(A)        Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.080
19.08.010(B)(part)  Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.080
19.08.010(B)(1)     Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.090
19.08.010(B)(2)     Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.100
19.08.010(B)(3)     Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.110
19.08.010(B)(4)     Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.120
19.08.010(B)(5)     Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.130
19.08.010(B)(6)     Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.140
19.08.010(B)(7)     Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.150
19.08.010(B)(8)     Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.160
19.08.010(B)(9)     Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.170
19.08.010(B)(10)    Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.180
19.08.010(B)(11)    Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.190
19.08.020           Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.200
19.08.030(A)        Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.210
19.08.030(B)        Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.220
19.08.030(C)        Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.230
19.08.030(D)        Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.240
19.08.030(E)        Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.250
19.08.040           Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.260
19.08.050(A)        Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.270
19.08.050(B)        Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.280
19.12.010(A)        Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.290
19.12.010(B)        Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.300
19.12.020(A)        Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.310
19.12.020(B)        Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.320
19.12.020(C)        Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  Not codified
19.12.020(D)        Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.330
19.12.030           Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.340
19.12.040           Ord. 1981-64, 4-21-81                  5.04.350
21.04.010           Ord. 1974-86, Articles I, II, III,     Not codified
                    Sections 101 - 301, 12-16-74
21.04.020           Ord. 1974-86, Articles I, II, III,     Not codified
                    Sections 101 - 301, 12-16-74
21.04.030           Ord. 1974-86, Articles I, II, III,     Not codified
                    Sections 101 -301, 12-16-74
21.08.010           Ord. 1974-86, Articles IV, V, VI,      Not codified
                    Sections 401, 501, 604, 12-16-74
21.08.020           Ord. 1974-86, Articles IV, V, VI,      Not codified
                    Sections 401, 501, 604, 12-16-74
21.08.030           Ord. 1974-86, Articles IV, V, VI,      Not codified
                    Sections 401, 501, 604, 12-16-74
21.12.010           Ord. 1974-86, Articles VII & VIII,     Not codified
                    Sections 701 - 705, 12-16-74
21.12.020           Ord. 1974-86, Articles VII & VIII,     Not codified
                    Sections 701 - 705, 12-16-74
21.12.030           Ord. 1974-86, Articles VII & VIII,     Not codified
                    Sections 701 - 705, 12-16-74
21.12.040           Ord. 1974-86, Articles VII & VIII,     Not codified
                    Sections 701 - 705, 12-16-74
21.12.050           Ord. 1974-86, Articles VII & VIII,     Not codified
                    Sections 701 - 705, 12-16-74
21.16.010           Ord. 1974-86, Article IX, Section 902, Not codified
                    12-16-74
21.16.020           Ord. 1974-86, Article IX, Section 902, Not codified
                    12-16-74
21.20.010           Ord. 1974-86, Articles X, XI, XII      Not codified
                    Sections 1001 - 1201, 12-16-74
21.20.020           Ord. 1974-86, Articles X, XI, XII      Not codified
                    Sections 1001 - 1201, 12-16-74
21.20.030           Ord. 1974-86, Articles X, XI, XII,     Not codified
                    Sections 1001 - 1201, 12-16-74
21.20.040           Ord. 1974-86, Articles X, XI, XII,     Not codified
                    Sections 1001 - 1201, 12-16-74
21.24.010           Ord. 1974-86, Article XIII, Sections   Not codified
                    1301 - 1306, 12-16-74
21.24.020           Ord. 1974-86, Article XIII, Sections   Not codified
                    1301 - 1306, 12-16-74
21.24.030           Ord. 1974-86, Article XIII, Sections   Not codified
                    1301 - 1306, 12-16-74
21.24.040           Ord. 1974-86, Article XIII, Sections   Not codified
                    1301 - 1306, 12-16-74
21.24.050           Ord. 1974-86, Article XIII, Sections   Not codified
                    1301 - 1306, 12-16-74
21.24.060           Ord. 1974-86, Article XIII, Sections   Not codified
                    1301 - 1306, 12-16-74
21.28.010           Ord. 1974-86, Article XIV, Sections    Not codified
                    1401 - 1403, 12-16-74
21.28.020           Ord. 1974-86, Article XIV, Sections    Not codified
                    1401 - 1403, 12-16-74
21.28.030           Ord. 1974-86, Article XIV, Sections    Not codified
                    1401 - 1403, 12-16-74
21.32.010           Ord. 1974-86, Article XV, Sections     Not codified
                    1501 - 1503, 12-16-74
21.32.020           Ord. 1974-86, Article XV, Sections     Not codified
                    1501 - 1503, 12-16-74
21.32.030           Ord. 1974-86, Article XV, Sections     Not codified
                    1501 - 1503, 12-16-74
21.36.010           Ord. 1974-86, Article XVI, Sections    Not codified
                    1601 - 1603, 12-16-74
21.36.020           Ord. 1974-86, Article XVI, Sections    Not codified
                    1601 - 1603, 12-16-74
21.36.030           Ord. 1974-86, Article XVI, Sections    Not codified
                    1601 - 1603, 12-16-74
21.40.010           Ord. 1974-87, Article XVII, Section    17.44
                    1701 - 1705, 12-16-74
21.40.020           Ord. 1974-87, Article XVII, Section    17.44
                    1701 - 1705, 12-16-74
21.40.030           Ord. 1974-87, Article XVII, Section    17.44
                    1701 - 1705, 12-16-74
21.40.040           Ord. 1974-87, Article XVII, Section    17.44
                    1701 - 1705, 12-16-74
21.40.050           Ord. 1974-87, Article XVII, Section    17.44
                    1701 - 1705, 12-16-74
21.44.010           Ord. 1974-86, Article XVIII, Section   17.44
                    1801, 12-16-74
21.44.020           Ord. 1974-86, Article XVIII, Section   17.44
                    1801, 12-16-74
23.04.010(A)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.04.010
23.04.010(B)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.04.020
23.04.010(C)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.04.030
23.04.020(A)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.04.040
23.04.020(B)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.04.050
23.04.020(C)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.04.060
23.04.020(D)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.04.070
23.04.020(E)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.04.080
23.04.020(F)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.04.090
23.04.020(G)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.04.100
23.04.020(H)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.04.110
23.04.020(I)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.04.120
23.04.020(J)                                               8.04.125
23.04.030           Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.04.130
23.04.040           Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.04.140
23.04.050           Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.04.150
23.04.060—23.04.09Reserved
23.04.100           Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.04.160
23.08.010(A)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.010
23.08.010(B)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.020
23.08.010(C)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 Not codified
23.08.010(D)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.030
23.08.020(A)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.040
23.08.020(B)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.050
23.08.020(C)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.060
23.08.020(D)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.070
23.08.020(E)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.080
23.08.020(F)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.090
23.08.020(G)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.100
23.08.020(H)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.110
23.08.020(I)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.120
23.08.020(J)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.130
23.08.020(K)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.140
23.08.020(L)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.150
23.08.020(M)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.160
23.08.020(N)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.170
23.08.020(O)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.180
23.08.020(P)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.190
23.08.020(Q)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.200
23.08.020(R)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.210
23.08.020(S)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.220
23.08.020(T)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.230
23.08.020(U)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.240
23.08.020(V)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.250
23.08.020(W)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.260
23.08.020(X)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.270
23.08.020(Y)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.280
23.08.020(Z)        Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.290
23.08.030           Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.300
23.08.040           Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.310
23.08.050           Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.320, 8.08.330
23.08.060           Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.340
23.08.070           Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.350, 8.08.360
23.08.080           Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.370
23.08.090           Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.380
23.08.100           Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.390
23.08.110           Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.400
23.08.120           Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.410
23.08.130           Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.420
23.08.140           Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.430
23.08.150           Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 Not codified
23.08.160           Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.440
23.08.170           Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.450
23.08.180           Reserved
23.08.190           Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.460
23.08.200           Ord. 1978-118, 9-25-78                 8.08.470
23.16.010           Ord. 1979-23, 2-20-79                  8.40.010, 8.40.020
23.16.020           Ord. 1979-23, 2-20-79                  8.40.030
23.20.010(A)        Ord. 1979-24, 2-20-79                  8.16.010
23.20.010(B)        Ord. 1979-24, 2-20-79                  8.16.020
23.20.010(C)        Ord. 1979-24, 2-20-79                  8.16.030
23.20.010(D)        Ord. 1979-24, 2-20-79                  8.16.040
23.20.010(E)        Ord. 1979-24, 2-20-79                  8.16.050
23.20.010(F)        Ord. 1979-24, 2-20-79                  8.16.060
23.20.010(G)        Ord. 1979-24, 2-20-79                  8.16.070
23.20.020           Ord. 1979-24, 2-20-79                  8.16.080
23.20.030           Ord. 1979-24, 2-20-79                  8.16.090
23.20.040           Ord. 1979-24, 2-20-79                  8.16.100
23.20.050           Ord. 1979-24, 2-20-79                  8.16.110
23.20.060           Ord. 1979-24, 2-20-79                  8.16.120
23.20.070           Ord. 1979-24, 2-20-79                  8.16.130
23.20.080           Ord. 1979-24, 2-20-79                  8.16.140
23.20.090           Ord. 1979-24, 2-20-79                  8.16.150
23.20.100           Ord. 1979-24, 2-20-79                  8.16.160
23.20.110           Ord. 1979-24, 2-20-79                  8.16.170
23.24.010           Ord. 1979-64, 5-7-79                   8.24.010
23.24.020           Ord. 1979-64, 5-7-79                   8.24.020
23.24.030           Ord. 1979-64, 5-7-79                   8.24.030
23.24.040           Ord. 1979-64, 5-7-79                   8.24.040
23.24.050           Ord. 1979-64, 5-7-79                   8.24.050
23.24.060           Ord. 1979-64, 5-7-79                   8.24.060
23.24.070           Ord. 1979-64, 5-7-79                   8.24.070
23.28.010(A)        Ord. 1980-94, 5-27-80                  8.20.010
23.28.010(B)        Ord. 1980-94, 5-27-80                  8.20.020
23.28.010(C)        Ord. 1980-94, 5-27-80                  8.20.030
23.28.010(D)        Ord. 1980-94, 5-27-80                  8.20.040
23.28.010(E)        Ord. 1980-94, 5-27-80                  8.20.050
23.28.010(F)        Ord. 1980-94, 5-27-80                  8.20.060
23.28.010(G)        Ord. 1980-94, 5-27-80                  8.20.070
23.28.010(H)        Ord. 1980-94, 5-27-80                  8.20.080
23.28.020           Ord. 1980-94, 5-27-80                  8.20.090
23.28.030           Ord. 1980-94, 5-27-80                  8.20.100
23.28.040           Ord. 1980-94, 5-27-80                  8.20.110
23.28.050           Ord. 1980-94, 5-27-80                  8.20.120
23.28.060           Ord. 1980-94, 5-27-80                  8.20.130
23.28.070           Ord. 1980-94, 5-27-80                  8.20.140
23.28.080           Ord. 1980-94, 5-27-80                  8.20.150
23.28.090           Ord. 1980-94, 5-27-80                  8.20.160
23.28.100           Ord. 1980-94, 5-27-80                  8.20.170
23.28.110           Ord. 1980-94, 5-27-80                  8.20.180, 8.20.190
23.28.120           Ord. 1980-94, 5-27-80                  8.20.200
23.28.130           Ord. 1980-94, 5-27-80                  8.20.210
23.32.010(A)        Ord. 1970-42, 10-20-70                 8.12.010
23.32.010(B)        Ord. 1970-42, 10-20-70                 8.12.020
23.32.010(C)        Ord. 1970-42, 10-20-70                 8.12.030
23.32.020(A)        Ord. 1970-42, 10-20-70                 8.28.010
23.32.020(B)        Ord. 1970-42, 10-20-70                 8.28.020
23.32.020(C)        Ord. 1970-42, 10-20-70                 8.28.030
23.32.020(D)        Ord. 1970-42, 10-20-70                 8.28.040
23.32.020(E)        Ord. 1970-42, 10-20-70                 8.28.050
23.32.020(F)        Ord. 1970-42, 10-20-70                 8.28.060
23.32.020(G)        Ord. 1970-42, 10-20-70                 8.28.070
23.32.020(H)        Ord. 1970-42, 10-20-70                 8.28.080
23.32.020(I)        Ord. 1970-42, 10-20-70                 8.28.090
23.32.020(J)        Ord. 1970-42, 10-20-70                 8.28.100
23.32.020(K)        Ord. 1970-42, 10-20-70                 8.28.110
23.32.020(L)        Ord. 1970-42, 10-20-70                 8.28.120
23.32.020(M)        Ord. 1970-42, 10-20-70                 8.28.130
23.32.020(N)        Ord. 1970-42, 10-20-70                 8.28.140
23.32.020(O)        Ord. 1970-42, 10-20-70                 8.28.150
23.32.020(P)        Ord. 1970-42, 10-20-70                 8.28.160
                    Ord. 1981-242, 12-22-81; Ord. 1980-
23.36.010(A)        106, 6-2-80; Ord. 1980-105, 6-2-80;    8.44.010
                    Ord. 1977-60, 6-20-77; Ord. 1962-16,
                    4-2-62
                    Ord. 1981-242, 12-22-81; Ord. 1980-
23.36.010(B)        106, 6-2-80; Ord. 1980-105, 6-2-80;    8.44.020
                    Ord. 1977-60, 6-20-77; Ord. 1962-16,
                    4-2-62
23.26.020(A)        Ord. 1962-16, 4-2-62                   8.44.030
23.36.020(B)        Ord. 1962-16, 4-2-62                   8.44.040
23.36.020(C)        Ord. 1962-16, 4-2-62                   8.44.050
23.36.020(D)        Ord. 1962-16, 4-2-62                   8.44.060
23.36.030(A)        Ord. 1962-16, 4-2-62                   Repealed by 1991-137
23.36.030(B)        Ord. 1962-16, 4-2-62                   Repealed by 1991-137
23.36.030(C)        Ord. 1962-16, 4-2-62                   Repealed by 1991-137
23.36.030(D)        Ord. 1962-16, 4-2-62                   Repealed by 1991-137
23.36.030(E)        Ord. 1962-16, 4-2-62                   Repealed by 1991-137
23.36.030(F)        Ord. 1962-16, 4-2-62                   Repealed by 1991-137
23.36.040(A)        Ord. 1980-95, 1-8-80                   Repealed by 1991-137
23.36.040(B)        Ord. 1980-95, 1-8-80                   Repealed by 1991-137
23.36.040(C)        Ord. 1980-95, 1-8-80                   Repealed by 1991-137
23.36.040(D)        Ord. 1980-95, 1-8-80                   Repealed by 1991-137
23.36.040(E)        Ord. 1980-95, 1-8-80                   Repealed by 1991-137
23.36.040(F)        Ord. 1980-95, 1-8-80                   Repealed by 1991-137
23.36.040(G)        Ord. 1980-95, 1-8-80                   Repealed by 1991-137
23.36.040(H)        Ord. 1980-95, 1-8-80                   Repealed by 1991-137
23.36.040(I)        Ord. 1980-95, 1-8-80                   Repealed by 1991-137
23.36.040(J)        Ord. 1980-95, 1-8-80                   Repealed by 1991-137
23.36.040(K)        Ord. 1980-95, 1-8-80                   Repealed by 1991-137
23.36.040(L)        Ord. 1980-95, 1-8-80                   Repealed by 1991-137
23.36.040(M)        Ord. 1980-95, 1-8-80                   Repealed by 1991-137
23.36.040(N)—(R)  Reserved
23.36.040(S)        Ord. 1980-95, 1-8-80                   Repealed by 1991-137
23.40.010           Ord. 1983-49, 4-12-83                  Repealed by 1991-137
23.40.020           Ord. 1983-49, 4-12-83                  Repealed by 1991-137
23.40.030           Ord. 1983-49, 4-12-83                  Repealed by 1991-137
23.40.040           Reserved
23.40.050           Ord. 1983-49, 4-12-83                  Repealed by 1991-137
23.40.060           Ord. 1983-49, 4-12-83                  Not codified
23.40.070           Ord. 1983-49, 4-12-83                  Not codified
23.44.010           Ord. 1984-29, 3-6-84                   Repealed by 1991-137
23.44.020           Ord. 1984-29, 3-6-84                   Repealed by 1991-137
23.44.030           Ord. 1984-29, 3-6-84                   Repealed by 1991-137
23.44.040           Ord. 1984-29, 3-6-84                   Repealed by 1991-137
23.44.050           Ord. 1984-29, 3-6-84                   Not codified
23.60.010(A)                                               8.32.010
23.60.010(B)                                               8.32.020
23.60.010(C)                                               8.32.030
23.60.010(D)                                               8.32.040
23.60.010(E)                                               8.32.050
23.60.010(F)                                               8.32.060
23.60.010(G)                                               8.32.070
23.60.010(H)                                               8.32.080
23.60.010(I)                                               8.32.090
23.60.010(J)                                               8.32.100
23.60.010(K)                                               8.32.110
23.60.010(L)                                               8.32.120
23.60.010(M)                                               8.32.130
23.60.010(N)                                               8.32.140
23.60.010(O)                                               8.32.150
23.60.010(P)                                               8.32.160
23.60.010(Q)                                               8.32.170
23.60.010(R)                                               8.32.180
23.60.020                                                  8.32.190
23.60.030                                                  8.32.200
23.60.040                                                  8.32.210
23.60.050                                                  8.32.220
23.60.060                                                  8.32.230
23.60.070                                                  8.32.240
23.60.080                                                  8.32.250
23.60.090                                                  8.32.260—8.32.280
25.04.010           Res. 1980-55, 5-5-80                   Not codified
25.04.020           Res. 1980-55, 5-5-80                   Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.030           Res. 1980-55, 5-5-80                   Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.040           Res. 1980-55, 5-5-80                   Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.050           Res. 1980-55, 5-5-80                   Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.060           Res. 1980-55, 5-5-80                   Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.070           Res. 1981-170, 10-5-81, amending Res.  Repealed by 1991-2
                    1980-55, 5-5-80
25.04.080(A)                                               Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.080(B)        Res. 1981-170, 10-5-81, amending Res.  Repealed by 1991-2
                    1980-55, 5-5-80
25.04.080(C)        Res. 1981-170, 10-5-81, amending Res.  Repealed by 1991-2
                    1980-55, 5-5-80
25.04.080(D)                                               Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.080(E)        Res. 1980-138, 6-24-80, amending Res.  Repealed by 1991-2
                    1980-55, 5-5-80
25.04.090(A)        Res. 1981-170, 10-5-81, amending Res.  Repealed by 1991-2
                    1980-55, 5-5-80
25.04.090(B)        Res. 1981-170, 10-5-81                 Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.090(C)        Res. 1981-170, 10-5-81                 Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.090(D)        Res. 1981-170, 10-5-81                 Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.090(E)        Res. 1981-170, 10-5-81                 Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.090(F)        Res. 1981-170, 10-5-81                 Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.090(G)        Res. 1981-170, 10-5-81                 Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.090(H)        Res. 1981-170, 10-5-81                 Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.090(I)        Res. 1981-170, 10-5-81                 Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.090(J)        Res. 1981-170, 10-5-81                 Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.090(K)        Res. 1981-170, 10-5-81                 Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.090(L)        Res. 1981-170, 10-5-81                 Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.090(M)        Res. 1981-170, 10-5-81                 Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.100(part)     Res. 1980-55, 5-5-80                   Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.100(A)        Res. 1980-55, 5-5-80                   Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.100(B)        Res. 1980-55, 5-5-80                   Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.100(C)        Res. 1980-55, 5-5-80                   Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.100(D)        Res. 1980-55, 5-5-80                   Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.100(E)        Res. 1980-55, 5-5-80                   Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.100(F)        Res. 1980-55, 5-5-80                   Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.100(G)        Res. 1980-55, 5-5-80                   Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.110           Res. 1980-55, 5-5-80                   Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.120           Res. 1981-170, 10-5-81, effective 11-  Repealed by 1991-2
                    5-81, amending Res. 1980-55, 5-5-80
25.04.130           Res. 1980-55, 5-5-80                   Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.140           Res. 1980-55, 5-5-80                   Repealed by 1991-2
25.04.150           Res. 1980-55, 5-5-80                   Repealed by 1991-2
27.04.010           Ord. 1958-20, I, 5-19-58               Not codified
27.04.020           Ord. 1958-20, II, 5-19-58              Not codified
27.04.030           Ord. 1958-20, III, 5-19-58             Not codified
27.04.040           Ord. 1958-20, IV, 5-19-58              Not codified
27.04.050           Ord. 1958-20, V, 5-19-58               Not codified
27.08.010           Res. 1979-166, 11-20-79; Board of      Not codified
                    Supervisors Study Session 9-20-79
29.04.010                                                  2.24.010
29.04.020                                                  2.24.020
29.04.030                                                  2.24.030
29.04.040                                                  2.24.040
29.04.050                                                  2.24.050
29.04.060                                                  2.24.060
29.04.070                                                  2.24.070
29.04.080                                                  2.24.080
29.04.090                                                  2.24.090
29.04.100                                                  Not codified
33.04.010                                                  Not codified
33.04.020(A)                                               3.04.010
33.04.020(B)                                               3.04.020
33.04.020(C)                                               3.04.030
33.04.020(D)                                               3.04.040
33.04.030(A)                                               3.04.050
33.04.030(B)                                               3.04.060
33.04.030(C)                                               3.04.070
33.04.030(D)                                               3.04.080
33.04.030(E)                                               3.04.090
33.04.030(F)                                               3.04.100
33.04.030(G)                                               3.04.110
33.04.030(H)                                               3.04.120
33.04.030(I)                                               3.04.130
33.04.040                                                  3.04.140
33.08.010                                                  2.28.010
33.08.020           Resolution 1979-100, 8-6-79; amended   2.28.020
                    by Resolution 1979-170, 12-3-79
35.04.010                                                  10.04.010
35.04.020                                                  10.04.020
35.04.030                                                  10.04.030
35.04.040                                                  10.04.040
35.04.050                                                  10.04.050
35.04.060                                                  10.04.060
35.08.010                                                  10.24.010
35.08.020                                                  10.24.020
35.08.030                                                  10.24.030
35.08.040                                                  10.24.040
35.12.010                                                  10.16.010
35.12.020                                                  10.16.020
35.12.030                                                  10.16.030
35.12.040                                                  10.16.040
35.16.010                                                  10.20.010
35.16.020                                                  10.20.020
35.16.030                                                  10.20.030
35.16.040                                                  10.20.040
35.20.010                                                  10.12.010
35.20.020                                                  10.12.020
35.20.030                                                  10.12.030
35.20.040                                                  10.12.040
35.24.010                                                  10.28.010
35.24.020                                                  10.28.020
35.24.030                                                  10.28.030
35.24.040                                                  10.28.040
35.28.010                                                  10.08.010
35.28.020                                                  10.08.020
35.28.030                                                  10.08.030
35.28.040                                                  10.08.040
35.32.010                                                  10.40.010
35.32.020                                                  10.40.020
35.32.030                                                  10.40.030
35.32.040                                                  10.40.040
35.32.050                                                  Not codified
35.32.060                                                  10.40.050
35.32.070                                                  10.40.060
35.36.010                                                  10.32.010
35.36.020                                                  10.32.020
35.36.030                                                  10.32.030
35.36.040                                                  10.32.040
35.40.010                                                  10.36.010
35.40.020                                                  10.36.020
35.40.030                                                  10.36.030
35.40.040                                                  10.36.040
35.40.050                                                  10.36.050
35.44.010                                                  Repealed by 1987-130
35.44.020                                                  Repealed by 1987-130
35.44.030                                                  Repealed by 1987-130
35.44.040                                                  Repealed by 1987-130
35.44.050                                                  Repealed by 1987-130
35.44.060                                                  Repealed by 1987-130
35.44.070                                                  Repealed by 1987-130
35.44.080                                                  Repealed by 1987-130
35.44.100                                                  Repealed by 1987-130
35.44.110                                                  Repealed by 1987-130
35.44.120                                                  Repealed by 1987-130
35.48.010                                                  10.44.010
35.48.020                                                  10.44.020
35.48.030                                                  10.44.030
35.48.040                                                  10.44.040
35.48.050                                                  10.44.050
37.04.010           Ord. 1974-75, 12-2-75                  10.48.010
37.04.020           Ord. 1974-75, 12-2-75                  10.48.020
37.04.030           Ord. 1974-75, 12-2-75                  10.48.030
37.04.040           Ord. 1974-75, 12-2-75                  10.48.040
37.04.050           Ord. 1974-75, 12-2-75                  10.48.050
37.04.060           Ord. 1974-75, 12-2-75                  10.48.060
37.04.070           Ord. 1974-75, 12-2-75                  10.48.070
37.04.080           Ord. 1974-75, 12-2-75                  10.48.080
37.04.090           Ord. 1974-75, 12-2-75                  10.48.090
37.04.100           Ord. 1974-75, 12-2-75                  10.48.100
37.08.010           Ord. 1975-62, 8-4-75; Exhibit "A";     10.48.110
                    amending Ord. 1974-79, 12-2-79
37.08.020           Ord. 1975-62, 8-4-75; Exhibit "A";     10.48.120
                    amending Ord. 1974-76, 12-2-74
                    Ord. 1977-82, 8-1-77; Exhibit "A";
37.08.030           amending Ords. 1975-61, 8-4-75 and     10.48.130
                    1974-80, 12-2-74
37.08.040           Ord. 1975-47, 6-2-75; Exhibit "A"      10.48.140
37.08.050           Ord. 1975-60, 8-4-75; Exhibit "A";     10.48.150
                    amending 1974-77, 12-2-74; Exhibit "A"
37.08.060           Ord. 1974-78, 121-2-74                 10.48.160
37.08.070           Ord. 1976-31, 4-5-76; Exhibit "A";     10.48.170
                    amending 1974-81, 12-1-74; Exhibit "A"
37.08.080           Ord. 1974-82, 12-2-74; Exhibit "A"     10.48.180
39.04.010           Ord. 1982-19, 2-1-82                   Repealed by 1991-28
39.04.020           Ord. 1982-19, 2-1-82                   Repealed by 1991-28
39.04.030           Ord. 1982-19, 2-1-82                   Repealed by 1991-28
39.04.040           Ord. 1982-19, 2-1-82                   Repealed by 1991-28
39.04.050           Ord. 1982-19, 2-1-82                   Repealed by 1991-28
39.08.010(A)        Ord. 1980-106, 6-2-80                  13.20.010
39.08.010(B)        Ord. 1981-142, 12-22-81; Ord. 1980-    13.20.020
                    106, 6-2-80
39.08.020           Ord. 1981-142, 12-22-81; Ord. 1980-    13.20.030
                    106, 6-2-80
39.08.030           Ord. 1981-142, 12-22-81; Ord. 1980-    13.20.040
                    106, 6-2-80
39.08.040           Ord. 1981-142, 12-22-81; Ord. 1980-    13.20.050
                    106, 6-2-80
39.08.050           Ord. 1980-106, 6-2-80                  13.20.060
39.08.060           Ord. 1980-106, 6-2-80                  13.20.070
39.12.010           Ord. 1984-12; Ord. 1983-8; Ord. 1981-  12.34.010, 13.24.020
                    243; Ord. 1980-105
39.12.020           Ord. 1984-12; Ord. 1983-8; Ord. 1981-  13.24.030
                    243; Ord. 1980-105
39.12.030           Ord. 1984-12; Ord. 1983-8; Ord. 1981-  13.24.040
                    243; Ord. 1980-105
39.12.040           Ord. 1984-12; Ord. 1983-8; Ord. 1981-  13.24.050
                    243; Ord. 1980-105
39.12.050           Ord. 1984-12; Ord. 1983-8; Ord. 1981-  13.24.060
                    243; Ord. 1980-105
39.12.060           Ord. 1984-12; Ord. 1983-8; Ord. 1981-  13.24.070
                    243; Ord. 1980-105
39.12.070           Ord. 1984-12; Ord. 1983-8; Ord. 1981-  13.24.080
                    243; Ord. 1980-105
39.12.080           Ord. 1984-12; Ord. 1983-8; Ord. 1981-  13.24.090
                    243; Ord. 1980-105
39.12.090           Ord. 1984-12; Ord. 1983-8; Ord. 1981-  13.24.100
                    243; Ord. 1980-105
39.12.100           Ord. 1984-12; Ord. 1983-8; Ord. 1981-  13.24.110
                    243; Ord. 1980-105
39.12.110           Ord. 1984-12; Ord. 1983-8; Ord. 1981-  13.24.120
                    243; Ord. 1980-105
39.12.120           Ord. 1984-12; Ord. 1983-8; Ord. 1981-  13.24.130
                    243; Ord. 1980-105
39.12.130           Ord. 1984-12; Ord. 1983-8; Ord. 1981-  13.24.140
                    243; Ord. 1980-105
39.12.140           Ord. 1984-12; Ord. 1983-8; Ord. 1981-  13.24.150
                    243; Ord. 1980-105
39.12.150           Ord. 1984-12; Ord. 1983-8; Ord. 1981-  13.24.160
                    243; Ord. 1980-105
39.12.160           Ord. 1984-12; Ord. 1983-8; Ord. 1981-  13.24.170
                    243; Ord. 1980-105
39.16.010           Ord. 1965-26, 4-5-65                   Not codified
39.16.020           Ord. 1965-26, 4-5-65                   Not codified
39.16.030           Ord. 1965-26, 4-5-65                   Not codified
39.16.040           Ord. 1965-26, 4-5-65                   Not codified
39.16.050           Ord. 1965-26, 4-5-65                   Not codified
39.16.060           Ord. 1965-26, 4-5-65                   Not codified
39.16.070           Ord. 1965-26, 4-5-65                   Not codified
39.16.080           Ord. 1965-26, 4-5-65                   Not codified
39.16.090           Ord. 1965-26, 4-5-65                   Not codified
39.16.100           Ord. 1965-26, 4-5-65                   Not codified
39.16.110           Ord. 1965-26, 4-5-65                   Not codified
39.16.120           Ord. 1965-26, 4-5-65                   Not codified
39.16.130           Ord. 1965-26, 4-5-65                   Not codified
39.16.140           Ord. 1965-26, 4-5-65                   Not codified
39.16.150           Ord. 1965-26, 4-5-65                   Not codified
39.16.160           Ord. 1965-26, 4-5-65                   Not codified
39.20.010           Ord. 1983-5; Ord. 1982-154             13.36
39.20.020           Ord. 1983-5; Ord. 1982-154             13.36
39.20.030           Ord. 1983-5; Ord. 1982-154             13.36
39.20.040           Ord. 1983-5; Ord. 1982-154             13.36
39.20.050           Ord. 1983-5; Ord. 1982-154             13.36
39.20.060           Ord. 1983-5; Ord. 1982-154             13.36
39.20.070           Ord. 1983-5; Ord. 1982-154             13.36
39.20.080           Ord. 1983-5; Ord. 1982-154             13.36
39.20.090           Ord. 1983-5; Ord. 1982-154             13.36
39.20.100           Ord. 1983-5; Ord. 1982-154             13.36
39.20.110           Ord. 1983-5; Ord. 1982-154             13.36
39.20.120           Ord. 1983-5; Ord. 1982-154             13.36
39.20.130           Ord. 1983-5; Ord. 1982-154             13.36
39.20.140           Ord. 1983-5; Ord. 1982-154             13.36
39.24.010                                                  13.28.010
39.24.020                                                  13.28.020
39.24.030                                                  13.28.030
39.24.040                                                  13.28.040
39.24.050                                                  13.28.050
39.24.060                                                  Not codified
39.24.070                                                  Not codified
39.28.010           Res. 1984-44, 3-20-84                  13.12
39.28.020           Res. 1984-44, 3-20-84                  13.12
39.28.030           Res. 1984-44, 3-20-84                  13.12
39.32.010           Res. 1983-133, 6-14-83                 13.16
39.32.020           Res. 1983-133, 6-14-83                 13.16
39.32.030           Res. 1983-133, 6-14-83                 13.16
41.04.010           Ord. 1974-44, 7-1-74                   Not codified
41.04.020           Ord. 1974-44, 7-1-74                   Not codified
41.04.030           Ord. 1974-44, 7-1-74                   Not codified
41.04.040           Ord. 1974-44, 7-1-74                   Not codified
41.04.050           Ord. 1974-44, 7-1-74                   Not codified
41.04.060           Ord. 1974-44, 7-1-74                   Not codified
41.04.070           Ord. 1974-44, 7-1-74                   Not codified
41.04.080           Ord. 1974-44, 7-1-74                   Not codified
41.04.090           Ord. 1974-44, 7-1-74                   Not codified
41.08.010           Ord. 1968-41, 10-21-68                 Not codified
41.08.020           Ord. 1968-41, 10-21-68                 Not codified
41.08.030           Ord. 1968-41, 10-21-68                 Not codified
41.08.040           Ord. 1968-41, 10-21-68                 Not codified
41.08.050           Ord. 1968-41, 10-21-68                 Not codified
41.08.060           Ord. 1968-41, 10-21-68                 Not codified
41.08.070           Ord. 1968-41, 10-21-68                 Not codified
41.08.080           Ord. 1968-41, 10-21-68                 Not codified
41.08.090           Ord. 1968-41, 10-21-68                 Not codified
41.08.100           Ord. 1968-41, 10-21-68                 Not codified
41.08.110           Ord. 1968-41, 10-21-68                 Not codified
41.12.010           Ord. 1984-7, 1-10-84; Ord. 1975-1, 1-  2.16.010
                    6-75; Ord. 1974-88, 12-18-74
41.12.020           Ord. 1984-7, 1-10-84; Ord. 1975-1, 1-  2.16.020
                    6-75; Ord. 1974-88, 12-18-74
41.12.030           Ord. 1984-7, 1-10-84; Ord. 1975-1, 1-  2.16.030
                    6-75; Ord. 1974-88, 12-18-74
41.12.040           Ord. 1984-7, 1-10-84; Ord. 1975-1, 1-  2.16.040
                    6-75; Ord. 1974-88, 12-18-74
41.12.050           Ord. 1984-7, 1-10-84; Ord. 1975-1, 1-  2.16.050
                    6-75; Ord. 1974-88, 12-18-74
41.16.010           Ord. 1955-52, 9-19-55                  5.08.010
41.16.020           Ord. 1955-52, 9-19-55                  5.08.020
41.16.030           Ord. 1955-52, 9-19-55                  5.08.030
41.16.040           Ord. 1955-52, 9-19-55                  5.08.040
41.16.050           Ord. 1955-52, 9-19-55                  5.08.050
41.16.060           Ord. 1955-52, 9-19-55                  5.08.060
41.16.070           Ord. 1955-52, 9-19-55                  5.08.070
41.16.080           Ord. 1955-52, 9-19-55                  5.08.080
41.16.090           Ord. 1955-52, 9-19-55                  5.08.090
41.16.100           Ord. 1955-52, 9-19-55                  5.08.100
41.20.010           Ord. 1974-71, 12-18-74                 8.48.010
41.20.020           Ord. 1974-71, 12-18-74                 8.48.020
41.20.030           Ord. 1974-71, 12-18-74                 8.48.030
41.20.040           Ord. 1974-71, 12-18-74                 8.48.040
41.20.050           Ord. 1974-71, 12-18-74                 8.48.050
41.20.060           Ord. 1974-71, 12-18-74                 8.48.060
41.20.070           Ord. 1974-71, 12-18-74                 8.48.070
41.20.080           Ord. 1974-71, 12-18-74                 8.48.080
41.20.090           Ord. 1974-71, 12-18-74                 8.48.090
41.20.100           Ord. 1974-71, 12-18-74                 8.48.100
41.24.010           Ord. 1947-2, 6-10-47                   Not codified
41.24.020           Ord. 1947-2, 6-10-47                   Not codified
 
ORDINANCE LIST AND DISPOSITION TABLE
Ordinance
Number
Ordinance
Number
1981- Establishes uniform street name and address system (Repealed by 1988-2)
14
1981- Repeals and replaces light pollution code (Repealed by 1986-68)
115
1983- Amends subsection X of Res. 1980-55, indigent medical care (2.20)
13
      Adopts technical building codes and sets out county building code requirements and
1983- amendments; incorporates Ords. 1981-115, light pollution code; 1981-244, National
73    Electrical Code; 1981-245, Uniform Plumbing Code; and 1981-246, Uniform Mechanical
      Code; repeals Ord. 1982-16 (15.04, 15.08, 15.16, 15.20, 15.24)
1983- Adds 1982 Editions of Uniform Mechanical Code and Uniform Plumbing Code, with
130   modifications; repeals Ords. 1981-245 and 1981-246 (Repealed by 1987-33)
1983- Amends spa/pool code (Repealed by 1990-62)
155
1984- Amends prior code Ch. 39.12, sewer user fees (13.24)
12
1984- Amends prior code Ch. 39.08, sewer connection fees (13.20)
13
1984- Amends prior code Ch. 23.60, swimming pools and spas (8.32)
42
1984- Regulation of industrial wastewater discharge (13.36)
169
1984- Amends prior code § 15.04.070A, animal licensing fees (Repealed by 1989-159)
188
1984- Amends Res. 1980-55, indigent medical care (Repealed by 1991-2)
194
1984- Amends Ord. 1983-73 to add 1984 Edition of National Electrical Code, with
201   modifications; repeals Ord. 1981-244 (15.08)
1984- Amends prior code § 15.04.060, pound fees (6.04)
211
1984- Amends prior code § 23.08.170, frozen-dessert retailers (8.08)
221
1984- Amends prior code Ch. 39.24, Mt. Lemmon conservation fees (13.32)
239
1985- Repeals and replaces Ch. 29.04, employee merit system commission (2.24)
67
      Zoning (18.01, 18.03, 18.05, 18.07, 18.09, 18.11, 18.13, 18.15, 18.17, 18.19, 18.21,
1985- 18.23, 18.25, 18.27, 18.29, 18.31, 18.33, 18.35, 18.37, 18.41, 18.43, 18.45, 18.49,
82    18.51, 18.53, 18.55, 18.57, 18.59, 18.61, 18.63, 18.69, 18.71, 18.73, 18.75, 18.79,
      18.89, 18.91, 18.93, 18.95)
1985- Deletes subsection K of § 6.04.060, animals (6.04)
108
1985- Adds § 18.19.050; and amends §§ 18.09.040, 18.15.060, 18.17.050, 18.21.050,
111   18.23.050, 18.25.050 and 18.33.060, zoning (18.09, 18.15, 18.17, 18.19, 18.21,
      18.23, 18.25, 18.33)
1985- Amends Ch. 18.75, off-street parking and loading standards (18.75)
112
1985- Amends Ch. 18.61, hillside development overlay zone (18.61)
113
1985- Amends § 18.69.020(2) and (4), zoning (18.69)
114
1985- Amends § 18.91.050D, zoning (18.91)
115
1985- Planning and zoning fee schedule (Repealed by 1987-213)
116
1985- Establishes fee schedules; and amends §§ 18.07.040, 18.79.080, 18.93.040, 18.95.030
117   and 18.95.060, zoning (18.07, 18.79, 18.93, 18.95)
1985- Amends Ord. 1984-12, sewer user fees (13.24)
118
1985- Amends Ord. 1984-13, sewer connection fees (13.20)
119
1985- Amends Ord. 1984-239, Mt. Lemmon conservation fees (13.32)
125
1985- Amends air quality control rules and regulations (17.04, 17.08, 17.12, 17.16, 17.20,
126   17.24, 17.28, 17.32, 17.36)
1985- Floodplain management (16.04, 16.08, 16.12, 16.16, 16.20, 16.24, 16.28, 16.32,
FC1   16.36, 16.40, 16.44, 16.48, 16.52, 16.56, 16.60, 16.64)
1985- Amends §§ 18.01.070, 18.49.050B, 18.63.050C, 18.63.080B, 18.63.100C, 18.71.050A and
141   C and 18.73.080, Chs. 18.89, 18.91, 18.97 and 18.99, zoning (18.01, 18.49, 18.63,
      18.71, 18.73, 18.89, 18.91, 18.97, 18.99)
1985- Adds Ch. 9.12*, emergency services commission (9.16)*Editor's Note: Reso. 1990-135
142   amended Ord. 1985-142 to add Ch. 9.16.
1985- Amends Chs. 18.03, 18.05, 18.17, 18.51, 18.53, 18.55, 18.57 and 18.99, zoning
152   (18.03, 18.05, 18.17, 18.51, 18.53, 18.55, 18.57, 18.99)
1985- Amends Chs. 18.03, 18.05, 18.07, 18.13, 18.17, 18.21, 18.25, 18.31, 18.37, 18.40 and
153   18.75, zoning (18.03, 18.05, 18.07, 18.13, 18.17, 18.21, 18.25, 18.31, 18.37, 18.40,
      18.75)
1985- Adds subsection J to prior code § 23.04.020; adds new subsection to prior code §
166   23.04.030; amends prior code § 23.08.190 D2 and I, sanitary code (8.04)
1985- Amends §§ 18.09.090, 18.11.040, 18.31.010, 18.43.030, 18.45.030, 18.51.040 and Ch.
171   18.73, zoning (18.09, 18.11, 18.31, 18.43, 18.45, 18.51, 18.73)
1985- Adopts county code (1.01, 1.04, 17.04, 17.12)
183
1985- Repeals and replaces §§ 8.44.010 through 8.44.060, liquid waste (Repealed by 1991-
186   137)
1985- Adds Chs. 18.12 and 18.14; amends Ch. 18.13, §§ 18.05.010, 18.09.020, 18.09.040,
187   18.19.020, 18.19.040, 18.21.040, 18.23.040, 18.45.030 and 18.45.040, zoning (18.05,
      18.09, 18.12, 18.13, 18.14, 18.19, 18.21, 18.23, 18.45)
1985- Adds Ch. 18.101; amends Chs. 18.93 and 18.95, §§ 18.01.030, 18.07.020 and 18.07.050,
188   zoning (18.01, 18.07, 18.93, 18.95, 18.101)
1985- Amends Ch. 18.79, zoning (18.79)
201
1986- Amends §§ 18.03.020 and 18.07.030, zoning (18.03, 18.07)
19
1986- Amends Ch. 18.71, development plan standards (18.71)
40
1986- Amends §§ 18.03.020C and P, 18.05.030A2, 18.91.030E2, 18.91.040B2 and 18.97.030,
41    zoning (18.03, 18.05, 18.91, 18.97)
1986- Amends § 18.03.020F, zoning (18.03)
42
1986- Amends §§ 18.03.020G and 18.09.020G, zoning (18.03, 18.09)
43
1986- Amends Ch. 13.20, sewerage and sewage disposal; collection fees and charges (13.20)
45
1986- Hauled Liquid Wastes (repealed by 1998-84)
47
1986- Amends Ch. 18.79, sign standards (18.79)
65
1986- Amends Ch. 18.17, SR suburban ranch zone (18.17)
66
1986- Adds new § 18.51.040 and renumbers existing §§ 18.51.040 and 18.51.050 to be
67    18.51.050 and 18.51.060; amends § 18.03.020P, zoning (18.03, 18.51)
1986- Repeals and replaces Ch. 15.12, light pollution (Repealed by 1993-81)
68
1986- Adds § 15.04.020B7, building codes (15.04)
69
1986- Amends §§ 18.19.010 and 18.19.060, zoning (18.19)
82
      Amends §§ 18.09.020, 18.13.020, 18.14.020, 18.17.020, 18.17.030, 18.19.010,
1986- 18.19.020, 18.21.010, 18.21.020, 18.25.010, 18.27.010, 18.33.020, 18.33.030,
125   18.35.020, 18.35.030 and 18.37.020, zoning (18.09, 18.13, 18.14, 18.17, 18.19,
      18.21, 18.25, 18.27, 18.33, 18.35, 18.37)
1986- Amends §§ 18.97.020 and 18.97.030, zoning (18.97)
127
1986- Amends § 15.04.050, 1982 Uniform Administrative Code (15.04)
128
1986- Repeals and replaces prior code Title 29, Pima County Merit System (2.24)
140
1986- Adds new § 18.03.020A8, A9 and S12, and renumbers existing H8 to H10 and S12 — S14
150   to S13 — S15; amends §§ 18.12.020, 18.12.030, 18.13.020, 18.13.030, 18.14.020 and
      18.14.030, zoning (18.03, 18.12, 18.13, 18.14)
1986- Amends § 18.01.040, zoning (18.01)
152
1986- Pima County sanitary landfills (Repealed by 1991-28)
164
1986- Sewerage and sewage disposal (13.24)
165
1986- Adds §§ 6.04.110, 6.04.120, 6.04.130, 6.04.140 and 6.04.150, and amends § 6.04.050,
176   animal control (6.04)
      Adds Ch. 18.81 and § 18.99.040, and amends §§ 18.03.020, 18.09.040, 18.59.040,
1986- 18.59.050, 18.61.030, 18.61.080, 18.69.050, 18.69.060, 18.71.030, 18.73.010 and
187   18.75.040, zoning (18.03, 18.09, 18.59, 18.61, 18.69, 18.71, 18.73, 18.75, 18.81,
      18.99)
      Amends entirety of Ch. 18.57 and §§ 18.03.020, 18.05.010, 18.12.030, 18.13.030,
1986- 18.14.030, 18.17.030, 18.49.030, 18.51.030, 18.53.030, 18.55.030 and 18.99.050,
188   zoning (18.03, 18.05, 18.12, 18.13, 18.14, 18.17, 18.49, 18.51, 18.53, 18.55, 18.57,
      18.99)
1986- Amends § 18.89.060, zoning (18.89)
201
1986- Amends §§ 18.03.020 and 18.17.030, zoning (18.03, 18.17)
215
1986- Amends § 18.95.020, zoning (18.95)
216
1986- Deletes Ch. 70 of the Uniform Building Code (15.04)
217
1986- Amends §§ 17.04.300, 17.04.310, 17.08.230, 17.12.060, 17.12.200, 17.12.210 and
227   17.12.220, air quality control (17.04, 17.08, 17.12)
1987- Amends § 8.32.240, swimming pool service technicians and operators (8.32)
14
1987- Amends §§ 18.91.040 and 18.91.070, zoning (18.91)
20
1987- Amends Ord. 1980-106, sewer connection fees (13.20)
21
1987- Amends Ord. 1980-105, sewer user fees (13.24)
22
1987- Amends Ord. 1983-73 and repeals Ord. 1983-130, uniform codes (15.04, 15.16, 15.20)
33
1987- Adds Ch. 8.52, water potability (Repealed by 1991-137)
42
1987- Adds Ch. 8.50, smoking in the workplace (Repealed by 1989-158)
43
1987- Adds Ch. 18.58, zoning (18.58)
61
1987- Adds Ch. 18.90, and amends §§ 18.03.020, 18.05.010, 18.89.070, 18.101.030 and
64    18.101.040, zoning (18.03, 18.05, 18.89, 18.90, 18.101)
1987- Amends § 18.95.020, zoning (18.95)
66
1987- Amends §§ 18.12.040, 18.12.050, 18.13.040, 18.13.050, 18.14.040 and 18.14.050,
67    zoning (18.12, 18.13, 18.14)
1987- Amends § 17.04.110, air pollution advisory council (17.04)
68
      Adds §§ 8.44.022, 8.44.065, 8.44.067 and 8.44.069; amends §§ 8.44.025, 8.44.027,
1987- 8.44.032, 8.44.035, 8.44.037 and 8.44.045; repeals and replaces §§ 8.44.010,
70    8.44.020, 8.44.030, 8.44.040, 8.44.050 and 8.44.060, liquid waste (Repealed by 1991-
      137)
1987- Amends § 18.91.100C and E, zoning (18.91)
74
1987- Amends § 6.04.070, animal control regulations (6.04)
86
1987- Sanitary landfills (Repealed by 1988-203)
87
1987- Amends § 18.73.040D, zoning (18.73)
92
1987- Amends § 6.04.060, animal control regulations (6.04)
93
1987- Amends § 6.04.080, animal control regulations (Repealed by 1989-159)
94
1987- Amends §§ 8.04.125, 8.04.130F and 8.08.460D2 and I, health and safety (8.04, 8.08)
95
1987- Adds § 8.08.360, food establishments (8.08)
96
1987- Amends § 8.08.470C2, food establishments (8.08)
97
1987- Amends §§ 6.04.050, 6.04.110, 6.04.120, 6.04.130, 6.04.140, animal control
111   regulations (6.04)
1987- Amends § 18.79.110E17a4, zoning (18.79)
118
1987- Adds Ch. 9.08, emergency vehicle permits (Repealed by 1996-5)
130
1987- Amends § 18.69.020, zoning (18.69)
156
1987- Amends Ch. 15.08, electrical code; repeals Ord. 1984-201 (Repealed by 1991-3)
157
      Adds §§ 17.08.035, 17.08.040 and Table 17.08.230D; amends §§ 17.04.310, 17.08.010,
1987- 17.08.030, 17.08.060, 17.08.070, 17.08.080, 17.08.110, 17.08.200, 17.08.210,
175   17.08.230, Tables 17.08.230A, B and C, 17.12.060, 17.12.070, 17.12.090, 17.12.100,
      17.12.170 and 17.24.030; renumbers and amends existing § 17.08.040 to be §
      17.08.045, air quality control; repeals Table 17.08.210 (17.04, 17.08, 17.12, 17.24)
1987- Amends § 18.45.030, zoning (18.45)
187
1987- Amends §§ 15.12.040, 15.12.050, 15.12.060, 15.12.080, 15.12.100, 15.12.110,
188   15.12.120, 15.12.150 and 15.12.160, light pollution (Repealed by 1993-81)
1987- Amends § 8.04.130, food establishments (8.04)
206
1987- Adds Ch. 9.08*, off-road recreational vehicles (9.12)*Editor's Note: Reso. 1988-43
209   amended Ord. 1987-209 to add Ch. 9.12.
1987- Amends § 18.13.080, zoning (18.13)
213
1987- Adds Ch. 8.54, solid waste (Repealed by 1991-137)
219
1987- Repeals and replaces Ord. 1987-22, sewers (13.24)
220
1987- Repeals and replaces Ord. 1987-21, sewers (13.20)
221
1988- Amends § 18.61.120, zoning (18.61)
1
1988- Adds Ch. 18.83, address standards; repeals Ch. 15.28 (18.83)
2
1988- Amends § 6.04.100, animal control advisory committee (6.04)
12
1988- Adds § 6.04.150; repeals and replaces § 6.04.120C1, animal control regulations
13    (6.04)
1988- Adds Ch. 8.56 and amends §§ 8.04.060, 8.04.125 and 8.04.130, adult amusement
14    establishments and bathhouses (8.04, 8.56)
1988- Amends § 18.12.060, zoning (18.12)
61
1988- Adds Ch. 17.40, travel reduction (17.40)
72
1988- Amends § 8.52.040, water potability (Repealed by 1991-137)
77
1988- Adds 6 to and renumbers 6 — 13 to 7 — 14 of § 18.03.020C, and adds § 18.09.030B7,
78    zoning (18.03, 18.09)
1988- Floodplain management (Title 16)
FC1
1988- Amends § 18.07.050H, zoning (18.07)
89
1988- Amends §§ 8.54.050 and 8.54.060, solid waste (Repealed by 1991-137)
94
1988- Adds § 18.09.040A1h, Ch. 18.67 and § 18.90.010A3; amends §§ 18.05.010A5 and C,
116   zoning (18.05, 18.09, 18.67, 18.90)
1988- Amends §§ 17.12.200, 17.12.210 and 17.12.250, universal control standards (17.12)
117
1988- Repeals § 18.07.060C, zoning (18.07)
118
1988- Amends § 18.43.030F3, zoning (18.43)
150
1988- Amends §§ 18.25.040, 18.27.040 and 18.29.040, zoning (18.25, 18.27, 18.29)
151
1988- Amends §§ 18.07.030B1 and 18.07.040B2; repeals § 18.55.020D, zoning (18.07, 18.55)
153
1988- Amends §§ 6.04.150D6, E1, F3 and G1, animal control regulations (6.04)
164
1988- Amends Ord. 1987-33 and § 301(d) of 1985 Uniform Administrative Code (15.04)
165
1988- Amends entirety of Ch. 10.44, construction in county right-of-way (10.44)
181
1988- Solid waste disposal facilities; repeals Ord. 1987-87 (Repealed by 1991-28)
203
1988- Amends §§ 18.01.070A, C2a and D1 and 18.91.010A1 and 2 and 18.91.060B1 — 5, zoning
204   code amendment and rezone procedures (18.01, 18.91)
1988- Floodplain and erosion hazard management (16.04, 16.08, 16.12, 16.16, 16.20, 16.24,
FC2   16.28, 16.32, 16.36, 16.40, 16.44, 16.48, 16.52, 16.56, 16.60, 16.64, 16.68)
1989- Adds § 18.09.020H and amends § 18.03.020(1), zoning (18.03, 18.09)
1
1989- Adds Ch. 13.24, sewers and sewage disposal; repeals and replaces Ord. 1987-220
12    (13.24)
1989- Amends Ch. 13.20, sewer connection fees (13.20)
13
1989- Amends § 18.01.070B and C, zoning code amendments (18.01)
14
1989- Adds § 6.04.160, excessive noise caused by animals or birds (6.04)
39
1989- Animal control enforcement rules of procedure (6.08)
40
1989- Adds maps 20, 21 and 22 to § 18.61.120, zoning (18.61)
68
1989- Amends Ord. 1987-33 and §§ 15.04.020, 15.16.010 and 15.20.010, uniform codes (15.04,
78    15.16, 15.20)
1989- Adds Ch. 10.52, newspaper collection bins in right-of-way (10.52)
86
1989- Amends §§ 18.79.020B36, 18.79.040B1, 18.79.070B2e, 18.79.080B, 18.79.090A2a and
95    18.79.110C and E17 and repeals said provisions as of 3/1/91, zoning (Repealer)
1989- Amends §§ 18.43.020, 18.43.030 and 18.45.020, zoning (18.43, 18.45)
96
1989- Adds § 13.40.040; amends §§ 13.40.010, 13.40.020, 13.40.030; renumbers §§ 13.40.040,
123   13.40.050 and 13.40.060 to 13.40.050, 13.40.060 and 13.40.070, sanitary landfills
      (Repealed by 1991-28)
1989- Public participation in planning process (Repealed by 1992-69)
125
1989- Repeals and replaces Ch. 8.50, smoking (Repealed by 1992-9)
158
1989- Adds §§ 6.04.030D and 6.04.070I; amends §§ 6.04.110E and 6.04.120C; repeals and
159   replaces § 6.04.080, animal control regulations (6.04)
1989- Amends § 5.04.010, cable communications (5.04)
164
      Amends §§ 17.04.030, 17.04.050, 17.04.070, 17.04.080, 17.04.100, 17.04.170,
      17.04.200, 17.04.300, 17.04.310, Art. IX of Ch. 17.04, §§ 17.08.010, 17.08.080,
1989- 17.08.100, 17.08.120, 17.08.130, 17.08.160, Arts. V, VI and VII of Ch. 17.08, §§
165   17.12.120, 17.12.190, 17.12.200, 17.12.210, 17.12.250, 17.12.260, 17.28.010,
      17.28.020, 17.28.030, 17.28.040, 17.28.050, 17.28.070, 17.28.080, 17.28.090, Table
      17.28.100, Art. I of Ch. 17.32, Table 17.32.040, §§ 17.32.060 and 17.36.010, air
      quality control (17.04, 17.08, 17.12, 17.28, 17.32)
1989- Amends §§ 8.04.125, 8.04.130, 8.44.045 and 8.44.250, health and safety (8.04)
166
1989- Amends §§ 6.04.060A and B and 6.04.070C, animal control regulations (6.04)
173
1989- Adds § 6.04.070I, J and K [6.40.070J, K and L], animal control regulations (6.04)
174
1990- Amends §§ 18.69.020, 18.69.040 and 18.73.040, zoning (18.69, 18.73)
1
1990- Amends §§ 13.40.010, 13.40.020, 13.40.030, 13.40.040, 13.40.050, 13.40.060,
6     13.40.070 and 13.40.080, sanitary landfills (Repealed by 1991-28)
1990- Amends §§ 18.83.040, 18.83.060 and 18.83.110, zoning (18.83)
10
1990- Adds A4 to § 18.03.020 and renumbers former A4 — A10 to be A5 — A11; adds I to §
11    18.09.020, zoning (18.03, 18.09)
1990- Amends D4 and repeals and replaces C3 of § 6.04.150, dangerous animals (6.04)
13
1990- Adds Title 7, environmental quality (7.03, 7.09, 7.17)
39
1990- Amends §§ 8.04.125, 8.04.130, 8.08.460D and I, and 8.32.240A2 and B2, health and
40    safety (8.04, 8.08, 8.32)
      Adopts by reference the Grading Design Manual; adds § 18.81.090; amends §§
1990- 18.81.020, 18.81.030, 18.81.040, 18.81.050, 18.81.060 and 18.81.070; renumbers
61    existing § 18.81.090 to be 18.81.100; renumbers and amends existing § 18.81.100 to
      be 18.81.110 (18.81)
1990- Repeals and replaces Ch. 15.24, spa/pool code (15.24)
62
1990- Adopts 1989 building valuation data table; repeals Ord. 1980-39 (Repealed by 1991-
65    89)
1990- Amends §§ 8.32.020, 8.32.050, 8.32.080, 8.32.090, 8.32.130, 8.32.140, 8.32.160,
81    8.32.170, 8.32.180, 8.32.190, 8.32.200, 8.32.210, 8.32.220, 8.32.230 and 8.32.240;
      repeals § 8.32.290, swimming pools and spas (8.32)
1990- Repeals and replaces Ch. 13.24, sewer user fees (13.24)
95
1990- Amends Ch. 13.20, sewer connection fees (13.20)
96
1990- Amends Pima County Uniform Administrative Code, Pima County Uniform Building Code
108   and Pima County Uniform Mechanical Code (15.04, 15.16)
1990- Amends Ch. 2.12, county manager (2.12)
110
1990- Amends §§ 8.04.125, 8.44.045 and 8.44.250, health fees (8.04)
112
      Amends §§ 17.04.310, 17.08.080, 17.08.210, 17.08.220, 17.08.230, 17.08.230A,
1990- 17.08.230B, 17.08-.230D, 17.08.240, 17.08.270, 17.12.010, 17.12.080, 17.12.200,
113   17.12.210, 17.28.020, 17.28.050 and 17.40.050, air quality (17.04, 17.08, 17.12,
      17.28, 17.40)
1990- Amends §§ 17.04.100, 17.04.110, 17.04.130, 17.04.140 and 17.04.150, air quality
114   (17.04)
1990- Adds Ch. 7.25, waste collection (7.25)
115
1991- Amends §§ 18.79.020B33, 18.79.110C Table 1 and 18.79.110E, zoning (18.79)
1
1991- Adds Ch. 4.01, indigent medical care; repeals Ch. 2.20 and Resolutions 1980-55,
2     1980-138, 1980-209, 1981-170, 1983-13, 1984-194, 1987-174 (4.01)
1991- Adopts by reference the National Electrical Code, 1990 Edition; repeals Ord. 1987-
3     157 (Repealed by 1993-177)
1991- Adds A5 to § 18.03.020 and renumbers former A5 — A11 to be A6 — A12; adds E to §
6     18.55.030 and renumbers former E to be F and repeals said provisions as of 3/1/92,
      zoning (18.03, 18.55)
1991- Repeals and replaces Ch. 13.40, sanitary landfills (Repealed by 1991-108)
28
1991- Amends § 7.25.120, waste collection (7.25)
30
1991- Amends § 18.93.030, zoning (18.93)
31
1991- Adds § 18.07.070, zoning (18.07)
32
1991- Adds § 18.09.020G8 and J; amends § 18.03.020S, 18.09.020G, zoning (18.03, 18.09)
33
1991- Amends § 18.17.020, zoning (18.17)
34
1991- Amends §§ 18.79.020B6 and 18.79.110C and E, zoning (18.79)
35
1991- Adds E and F to § 18.01.070; amends C2 of § 18.01.070, zoning code amendment
36    procedures (18.01)
1991- Adds § 15.12.101, light pollution (Repealed by 1993-81)
37
1991- Amends § 9.16.020 (codified as 9.16.030), emergency services commission (9.16)
45
1991- Amends § 18.09.020, zoning (18.09)
46
1991- Amends § 6.04.030, dogs (6.04)
66
1991- Amends §§ 8.04.060, 8.04.125 and 8.04.130; repeals and replaces Ch. 8.56; repeals
78    Ord. 1988-14, adult entertainment establishment (8.04, 8.56)
1991- Adopts 1990 building valuation data table; repeals Ord. 1990-65 (15.04)
89
1991- Adds Ch. 5.12, suspension and debarment of contractors (5.12)
101
1991- Adds Ch. 5.16, rules for suspension and debarment of contractors (5.16)
102
1991- Repeals and replaces Ch. 13.40, sanitary landfills (Repealed by 1993-30)
108
      Adds §§ 17.12.045, 17.12.095 and amends §§ 17.04.020, 17.04.310, 17.04.370,
1991- 17.08.020, 17.08.030, 17.08.080, 17.08.200, 17.08.280, 17.08.290, 17.12.080,
136   17.12.090, 17.12.200, 17.12.210, 17.28.010 and Tables 17.12.230B, 17.28.020,
      17.28.030 and 17.28.080, air quality (17.04, 17.08, 17.12, 17.28)
      Adds §§ 7.03.030, 7.03.040, 7.03.050, 7.03.060, 7.03.070, 7.03.080, 7.03.090,
      7.03.100, 7.03.110, 7.03.120, 7.03.130, 7.03.140, 7.03.145, 7.03.150 and Chs. 7.21,
1991- 7.29, 7.33, 7.37, 7.41 and 7.45; amends §§ 7.03.020, 7.05.020, 7.05.030, 7.05.040,
137   7.09.020, 7.09.090, 7.17.020, 7.17.040, 7.25.150, 7.25.200, 8.04.060, 8.04.125,
      8.04.130; repeals and replaces § 7.09.050; repeals § 7.17.060 and Chs. 8.36, 8.44,
      8.48, 8.52 and 8.54, environmental quality (7.03, 7.09, 7.17, 7.21, 7.25, 7.29,
      7.33, 7.37, 7.41, 7.45, 8.04)
1991- Amends §§ 7.03.120 and 7.03.130, environmental quality (7.03)
138
1991- Amends § 7.03.130, environmental quality (7.03)
139
1991- Amends Ch. 13.36, wastewater management (13.36)
140
1992- Adds § 18.03.020A5, 18.07.030I and 18.45.040C, zoning (18.02, 18.07, 18.45)
6
1992- Amends §§ 8.04.125, 8.04.130, 8.08.460, 8.32.240 and 8.56.130, public health fees
7     (8.04, 8.08, 8.32, 8.56)
1992- Repeals and replaces Ch. 8.50, smoking (8.50)
9
1992- Amends § 6.04.060, pound fees (6.04)
10
1992- Adds § 18.91.020A3 and renumbers A3 — A8 to A4 — A9; amends §§ 18.91.050A7,
18    18.91.080, 18.91.090 and 18.91.100, zoning (18.91)
1992- Adds §§ 18.03.020S17 and 18.17.030B4, zoning (18.03, 18.17)
23
1992- Amends Ord. 1989-78, uniform codes (15.04, 15.16, 15.20)
32
1992- Amends §§ 13.40.010, 13.40.020, 13.40.030, 13.40.040, 13.40.050, 13.40.060 and
33    13.40.070, solid waste disposal (Repealed by 1993-30)
1992- Amends §§ 5.04.060E and 5.04.160C, cable communications (5.04)
57
1992- Amends §§ 18.71.010, 18.71.020, 18.71.030, 18.71.040, 18.71.060; repeals §
58    18.71.050, zoning (18.71)
1992- Amends § 18.31.030A — D, zoning (18.31)
60
1992- Community participation and mitigation; repeals Ord. 1989-125 (10.56)
69
1992- Amends Ch. 18.89 and §§ 18.67.030, 18.90.030, 18.90.040, 18.90.060, 18.90.080,
96    18.91.030, 18.91.040, 18.91.050, 18.101.020, 18.101.030 and 18.101.040, zoning
      (18.67, 18.89, 18.90, 18.91, 18.101)
1992- Amends § 18.57.030 and title of Ch. 18.57 (18.57)
102
1992- Adds Ch. 18.47, industrial zoning classifications and amends Ch. 18.55, zoning
103   (18.47, 18.55)
1992- Amends Ch. 7.25, waste collection (7.25)
127
1992- Amends § 7.03.130, environmental quality (7.03)
128
1993- Amends Ch. 2.12, county administrator (2.12)
1
1993- Amends §§ 18.91.050, 18.91.080 and 18.91.100, zoning (18.91)
12
1993- Repeals and replaces Ch. 13.40, sanitary landfills (13.40)
30
1993- Amends §§ 18.79.020, 18.79.100 and 18.79.110, zoning (18.79)
35
1993- Amends § 18.43.030(B), zoning (18.43)
55
1993- Adds Ch. 8.14, STD and HIV testing and counseling (8.14)
75
1993- Amends § 6.04.070, dog licensing procedures and bees (6.04)
76
1993- Adds § 18.69.080, zoning (18.69)
77
1993- Amends § 18.43.040, zoning (18.43)
78
1993- Amends § 18.17.050, zoning (18.17)
79
1993- Adds § 18.07.020C, zoning (18.07)
80
1993- Repeals and replaces Ch. 15.12, outdoor lighting code (15.12)
81
1993- Amends § 18.93.050A, zoning (18.93)
92
1993- Amends Ch. 13.24, sewer user fees (13.24)
93
1993- Amends Ch. 13.20, sewer connection fees (13.20)
94
1993- Amends §§ 4.01.010, 4.01.020, 4.01.040, 4.01.050, 4.01.060 and 4.01.070, indigent
95    medical care (4.01)
1993- Adds Ch. 9.20, curfew (9.20)
103
1993- Amends Title 17, air quality control (17.04, 17.08, 17.12, 17.16, 17.20, 17.24,
128   17.28, 17.32, 17.44)
1993- Adds J to § 18.07.030, holiday outdoor sales (18.07)
150
1993- Adds Ch. 8.54, vapor releasing substances containing toxic substances (8.54)
167
1993- Adds § 6.04.170, sale of animals at swap meets and public property (6.04)
168
1993- Amends § 18.79.110, zoning (18.79)
170
1993- Amends §§ 18.11.020 and 18.11.040, zoning (18.11)
171
1993- Repeals Ord. 1991-3, electric code adopted (15.08)
177
1994- Amends Chs. 18.89, 18.90, and 18.91, zoning (18.89, 18.90, 18.91)
11
1994- Amends Ch. 13.40, solid waste (13.40)
24
1994- Adds Ch. 7.31 and § 7.09.015; and amends §§ 7.03.020, 7.03.030, 7.05.010 - 7.05.050,
33    7.17.010, 7.21.130, 7.29.030 and 7.29.060, environmental quality (7.03, 7.09, 7.17,
      7.21, 7.29, 7.31)
1994- Adds Ch. 9.12, alarm systems (9.16)
36
1994- Adopts Model Energy Code (15.04)
65
1994- Amends §§ 18.03.020S, 18.69.010, 18.69.020 and 18.69.040, zoning (18.03, 18.69)
82
      Adds §§ 17.04.420, 17.12.085, 17.12.525 and 17.12.545; and amends §§ 17.04.030,
      17.04.340, 17.08.100, 17.12.050 - 17.12.090, 17.12.140 - 17.12.190, 17.12.210 -
1994- 17.12.270, 17.12.290 - 17.12.320, 17.12.340 - 17.12.470, 17.12.510, 17.12.540,
83    17.12.610, 17.16.010, 17.16.030, 17.16.050, 17.16.060, 17.16.100, 17.16.150,
      17.16.160, 17.16.165, 17.16.180, 17.16.290, 17.16.400, 17.16.430, 17.16.490,
      17.16.530 - 17.16.570, 17.16.590, 17.16.600, 17.16.610, 17.16.630, 17.16.660,
      17.20.080 and 17.28.100, air quality control (17.04, 17.12, 17.16, 17.20, 17.28)
1994- Amends Ch. 13.40*, solid waste (13.40) * Editor's note: Reso. 1999-166 and 1996-150
84    amended Ord. 1994-84 to amend § 13.40.030 (13.40)
1994- Amends §§ 18.03.020S and Y, 18.07.050 and 18.77.030, zoning (18.03, 18.07, 18.77)
112
1994- Amends § 18.07.080, zoning (18.07)
113
1994- Adds new chapter to Title 16, watercourse and riparian habitat protection and
FC2   mitigation requirements (16.54)
      Amends §§ 18.03.020N, 18.07.030, 18.19.020, 18.45.030, 18.45.040, 18.90.030,
1994- 18.90.040, 18.90.060, 18.90.070, 18.90.080, 18.91.020, 18.91.030, 18.91.040,
114   18.91.070, 18.91.080 and 18.91.100, zoning (18.03, 18.07, 18.19, 18.45, 18.90,
      18.91)
1994- Amends § 6.04.090, animals (6.04)
129
1994- Adds Ch. 10.42, parking of vehicles (10.42)
131
1994- Amends § 18.73.040, zoning (18.73)
133
1994- Amends § 18.35.050, zoning (18.35)
134
1994- Amends § 18.01.030, zoning (18.01)
135
1994- Amends § 18.03.020S, zoning (18.03)
136
1994- Amends § 18.69.050, zoning (18.69)
137
1994- Amends §§ 18.12.020, 18.13.020, 18.14.020, 18.17.020, 18.19.010, 18.21.020 and
146   18.23.020, zoning (18.12, 18.13, 18.14, 18.17, 18.19, 18.21, 18.23)
      Adds Ch. 18.18, SR-2 suburban ranch estate zone; and amends §§ 18.05.010, 18.07.030,
1994- 18.09.020, 18.09.040, 18.19.040, 18.21.040, 18.69.040, Table 1 of Ch. 18.73, §§
147   18.79.100, 18.79.110 and 18.89.030, zoning (18.05, 18.07, 18.09, 18.18, 18.19,
      18.21, 18.69, 18.73, 18.79, 18.89)
1994- Amends § 18.89.050, zoning (18.89)
148
1995- Amends § 7.41.050, pollen control (7.41)
4
1995- Adds Ch. 10.43, bicycle helmets (10.43)
12
1995- Amends §§ 18.69.040 and 18.91.030, zoning (18.69, 18.91)
39
1995- Amends §§ 18.27.030, 18.29.030, 18.31.030, 18.31.040, 18.43.060, 18.77.030,
42    18.77.040 and 18.79.110, zoning (18.27, 18.29, 18.31, 18.43, 18.77, 18.79)
1995- Adopts Riparian Habitat Maps (16.54)
FC1
1995- Amends § 18.59.030, zoning (18.59)
65
      Adds §§ 17.12.365 and 17.16.055; amends §§ 17.04.050, 17.04.070, 17.04.340,
      17.04.350, 17.04.360, 17.04.390, 17.04.400, 17.04.420, 17.08.100, 17.12.070,
      17.12.140, 17.12.160, 17.12.180, 17.12.210, 17.12.220, 17.12.230, 17.12.240,
1995- 17.12.320, 17.12.400, 17.12.470, 17.12.500, 17.12.510, 17.12.520, 17.12.525,
87    17.12.540, 17.12.545, 17.12.550, 17.12.560, 17.12.570, 17.12.580, 17.12.590,
      17.12.600, 17.12.610, 17.12.630, 17.12.640, 17.12.650, 17.16.010, 17.16.050,
      17.16.060, 17.16.070, 17.16.080, 17.16.090, 17.16.100, 17.16.120, 17.16.150,
      17.16.400, 17.16.530, 17.16.540, 17.20.050 and 17.28.100, air quality control
      (17.04, 17.08, 17.12, 17.16, 17.20, 17.28)
1995- Amends Ch. 18.89, comprehensive plan, and §§ 18.90.030, 18.90.060 and 18.91.040
94    (18.89, 18.90, 18.91)
1995- Amends Ord. 1992-32, uniform codes (15.04, 15.12, 15.16, 15.20, 15.24)
98
1996- Repeals and replaces Ch. 9.08, emergency vehicle permits (9.08)
5
1996- Adds Title 19, roadway development fee (19.01, 19.02, 19.03)
9
1996- Amends Ch. 13.20, sanitary sewer connection fees (13.20)
18
1996- Amends Ch. 13.24, sanitary sewer user fees (13.24)
23
      Adds §§ 7.09.015, 7.09.055, 7.21.015, 7.21.039, 7.29.060, 7.29.070 and 7.29.080;
      amends Chs. 7.05 and 7.13 and §§ 7.03.010, 7.03.020, 7.03.030, 7.03.040, 7.03.050,
      7.03.060, 7.03.070, 7.03.080, 7.03.090, 7.03.100, 7.03.110, 7.03.140, 7.03.150,
1996- 7.09.105, 7.09.110, 7.09.120, 7.09.130, 7.17.010, 7.21.020, 7.21.035, 7.21.080,
49    7.21.150, 7.21.160, 7.21.170, 7.21.180, 7.21.190, 7.21.210, 7.25.010, 7.29.020,
      7.31.020, 7.37.010, 7.37.030, 7.37.040, 7.37.050, 7.37.060, 7.37.070, 7.45.010,
      7.45.020, 7.45.040, 7.45.050, 7.45.060 and 7.45.080, environmental quality (7.03,
      7.09, 7.17, 7.21, 7.25, 7.29, 7.31, 7.37, 7.45)
1996- Adds § 17.16.645; amends §§ 17.04.340, 17.16.030, 17.16.230, 17.16.400, 17.16.440
50    and 17.16.550, air quality control (17.04, 17.16)
1996- Amends §§ 18.77.030 and 18.77.040; and deletes Table 18.77.040C, roadway frontage
58    standards (18.77)
1996- Amends Table 18.73-1 and §§ 18.03.020, 18.18.020, 18.18.060, 18.69.020 and
59    18.73.040, zoning (18.03, 18.18, 18.69, 18.73)
1996- Amends Ch. 9.20, curfew (9.20)
65
1996- Amends § 19.03.010, roadway development fee (19.03)
73
1996- Amends § 18.69.040, design standards (18.69)
76
1996- Repeals Ord. 1993-177 and amends § 15.08.010, electrical code (15.08); amends §
82    15.20.010, plumbing code (15.20); amends § 15.04.020, building code (15.04)
1996- Amends §§ 18.91.080, 18.91.090, 18.91.100, rezoning procedures (18.91)
91
1997- Amends § 18.03.020, definitions (18.03); adds 18.33.055 and amends §§ 18.33.010,
1     18.33.020, CMH-1, 1 Zone (18.33)
1997- Amends Ch. 5.04, cable communications (5.04)
17
1997- Amends 6.04.060 pound fees, 6.04.070 licensing procedures and fees (6.04)
18
1997- Adds Ch. 6.06 bear regulations (6.06)
19
1997- Amends § 18.03.020 definitions (18.03); amends § 18.12.020 IR Zone (18.12); amends
20    §§ 18.13.020, 18.13.030 RH Zone (18.13); amends §§ 18.14.020, 18.14.030 GR-1 Zone
      (18.14); amends 18.17.030 SR Zone (18.17)
1997- Amends 7.25.120 recyclable materials standards; adds 7.25.125 waivers (7.25)
22
1997- Amends 19.03.050C development fee appeals panel (19.03)
23
1997- Adds Ch. 3.06 bonding disclosure, accountability and implementation (3.06)
25
1997- Amends §§ 6.04.110, 6.04.140 (6.04)
26
1997- Adds Ch. 3.05 mandatory set-aside in each year's budget (3.05)
27
1997- Amends § 18.03.020 self-storage definition (18.03); amends § 18.43.030 CB-1 local
28    business zone self-storage facility (18.43); amends § 18.45.030 CB-2 general
      business zone self-storage (18.45)
1997- Amends § 18.03.020 definitions (18.03); 18.07.030 communication towers (18.07);
40    18.12.030B.8 reserved (18.12); 18.13.030B.20 reserved (18.13); 18.19.020A.3 reserved
      (18.19); 18.45.030B.42 reserved (18.45)
1997- Adds Title 20, Minority and Woman-owned Business Enterprises (20.04, 20.08, 20.12,
44    20.16, 20.20, 20.24, 20.28, 20.32, 20.36, 20.40, 20.44)
1997- Adds Title 11, procurement code (11.04, 11.08, 11.12, 11.16, 11.20, 11.24, 11.36;
45    move and renumber Ch. 5.12 and 5.16 to 11.28 and 11.32, suspension and debarment of
      contractors ordinance)
1997- Add Ch. 8.60 blasting regulations (8.60)
58
1997- Amends §§ 8.12.010, 8.12.020, 8.12.030 immunization (8.12)
59
1997- Amends §§ 18.69.20 definitions, 18.69.030 general regulations, 18.69.060 review
68    procedures, (18.69) 18.91.070 planning and zoning commission review, 18.91.080 board
      of supervisors review (18.91)
1997- Amends §§ 18.03.020 definitions (18.03) 18.09.030 home occupations (18.09)
74
1997- Amends §§ 17.04.070, 17.04.340; 17.12,150, 17.12.160, 17.12.130, 17.12.260,
79    17.12.365, 17.16.490, 17.16.530, 17.16.700, 17.28.010; deletes § 17.28.060; adds §§
      17.16.390 and 17.28.065, air quality control (17.04, 17.12, 17.16, 17.28)
1997- Amends § 17.12.220, air quality control operational flexibility and fees (17.12)
95
1997- Amends Ch. 13.24 §§ 13.24.020 definitions; 13.24.030 fees; 13.24.035; 13.24.040 rate
97    schedule; 13.24.070; 13.24.090; 13.24.120; 13.24.140; 13.24.160; 13.24.170
      delinquency and penalties; 13.24.180 rate schedule table
1998- Amends Ch. 18.89 § 18.89.060 land use intensity legends
4
1998- Amends Ch. 6.04 § 6.04.100 animal control advisory committee
15
1998- Amends § 8.04.125 fees (8.04); 8.08.020 definitions (8.08)
25
1998- Amends § 18.89.050 comprehensive plan schedule revision (18.89)
26
1998- Amends § 6.04.070 fees increases (6.04)
33
1998- Amends § 8.12.020 definitions; § 8.12.030 fee schedule (8.12)
34
1998- Amends §§ 18.90.030, 18.90.070, 18.90.080 revise time limits (18.90); § 18.91.080
35    delete reference specific plan statement of findings (18.91)
      Adds definitions to § 18.03.020 (18.03); amends § 18.09.020 (18.09); amends §
      18.12.030 (18.12); amends § 18.13.030 (18.13); amends § 18.14.030 (18.14); amends
1998- 18.15.030 (18.15; amends § 18.17.030 (18.17); amends § 18.21.010; amends § 18.21.010
36    (18.21); amends § 18.25.010 (18.25); amends § 18.27.010 (18.27); amends § 18.31.010
      (18.31); amends § 18.33.020 (18.33); amends § 18.35.020 (18.35); amends § 18.37.010
      (18.37); amends § 18.43.030 (18.43); amends § 18.45.030 (18.45)
      Amends § 18.030.020 definition of manufactured home park; amends § 18.13.030, adds
1998- 18.13.045 (18.13); amends 18.14.030, adds 18.14.045 (18.14); amends 18.19.020, adds
37    18.19.045 (18.19); amends 18.33.055 (18.33); amends §§ 18.35.020, 18.35.050,
      18.35.060 (18.35); amends § 18.37.010, adds § 18.37.065 (18.37)
1998- Amends §§ 18.67.020, 18.67.030, 18.67.040, 18.67.050, 18.67.070 (18.67)delete credit
38    for golf courses as natural open space.
1998- Adds Ch. 18.72 Native Plant Preservation; amends §§ 18.90.050, 18.90.060 (18.90)
39
1998- Amends §§ 6.04.020 definitions; 6.04.110, 6.04.120, 6.04.130, 6.04.140; adds
46    6.04.180 (6.04)
1998- Amends 18.59.030 groundwater replenishment (18.59)
47
1998- Amends Ch. 18.61 (Hillside Development Zone) and designate as protected peaks or
50    ridges within eastern unincorporated Pima County; amends 18.81.030 grading (18.81);
      amends 18.89.050 protected peaks (18.89)
1998- Amends § 18.03.020 definitions (18.03); amends § 18.09.040 definitions (18.09); Ch.
51    18.67 buffer overlay zone; amends § 18.91.050 staff review (18.91)
1998- Amends § 18.07.080 modifications development standards riparian areas (18.07)
52
1998- Adds 18.07.030.K environmental hazards (18.07)
53
1998- Amends § 6.04.100 advisory committee (6.04)
55
1998- Amends Ch. 2.12 County Administrator §§ 2.12.020, 2.12.070
67
1998- Adds Ch. 2.13 Pima Health Care System
68
1998- Adds Ch. 2.14 Pima Health Care System Chief Executive Officer
69
1998- Amends § 10.44.050 violation-penalty (10.44)
76
1998- Amends Ch. 8.40 title to Rodents, Insects, Vermin, and Other Animals and § 8.40.010
77
1998- Repeals Ch. 13.34 Hauled Liquid Wastes; adds § 13.20.060 septage disposal (13.20)
84
1999- Amends § 17.12.470 exempting sources from permit requirements (17.12); amends §
11    17.16.050.D sources generating fugitive airborne particulate matter (17.16)
1999- Adds Ch. 10.46 Primitive Roads
21
1999- Amends § 18.59.030 golf course design, maintenance, operation standards (18.59)
22
1999- Amends § 15.04.020 amends Ord. 1992-32 to adopt 1997 Uniform Code for Abatement of
25    Dangerous Buildings and the 1997 Uniform Housing Code, as modified (15.04)
1999- Amends § 15.04.020 amends Ord. 1995-98 to adopt 1997 Uniform Building Code Light
26    Gauge Metal Framing provisions as a local amendment; adopts 2000 Int'l Building Code
      as modified (15.04)
1999- Amends 18.07.030E beekeeping (18.07); amends Ch. 18.12, 18.13, 18.14 to delete
34    apiary references within individual zones.
1999- Amends § 18.05.020 adopting buffer overlay zone maps (18.05)
35
1999- Codifies Title 16 Floodplain and Erosion Hazard Management.
FC1
1999- Adds Ch. 9.30 Regulation of Excessive, Unnecessary and Annoying Noises
61
1999- Amends § 6.04.060 animal pound fees; amends 6.04.070 licensing procedures and fees
68    (6.04)
1999- Amends § 8.04.130 Health Provisions Generally, establishing new fees (8.04)
72
1999- Amends Ch. 18.03 § 18.03.020 to revise definition of factory-built building
78    (modular); amends Ch. 18.07 18.07.030 and Ch. 18.09 § 18.09.020 use of factory-built
      buildings in specific zones.
1999- Amends Ch. 18.90 Specific Plans § 18.90.060 and 18.90.070, 18.91 Rezoning Procedures
79    18.91.060 and 18.91.080, 18.97 Conditional Use Procedures 18.97.030, by increasing
      notification area.
2000- Amends Ch. 8.04 Health Provisions Generally, establishing new fees §§ 8.04.125,
2     8.04.130, 8.08.460 (8.04)
2000- Amends Ch. 13.20, Sanitary Sewer Connection Fees §§ 13.20.010, 13.20.030, 13.20.040,
6     13.20.050 (13.20)
2000- Amends Ch. 13.24 Sanitary Sewer User Fees §§ 13.24.030, 13.24.040, 13.24.180
7     sanitary sewer user fees, amending fee calculations, rate schedule, rate schedule
      table (13.24)
2000- Amends Ch. 2.12 Administration and Personnel §§ 2.12.020, 2.12.070 county
8     administrator establishment, duties and responsibilities (2.12)
2000- Repeals Ch. 2.13 Pima Health Care System Commission (2.13)
9
2000- Repeals Ch. 2.14 Pima Health Care System Chief Executive Officer (2.14)
10
2000- Amends Ch. 11.12 Pima County Procurement Code §§ 11.12.040.
23
2000- Amends Ch. 11.12 Pima County Procurement Code § 11.12.040 (11.12); amends Ch. 20.32
24    Pima County Minority and Women-Owned Business Enterprise Code § 20.32.020, 20.32.040
      (20.32)
2000- Adds Ch. 9.40 Fingerprinting and Criminal History Records Check of Prospective and
33    Current Attendant Care Workers
Res.  Amends Ch. 13.40 commercial haulers fee for municipal solid waste at Pima County
2000- landfills; adds volume block rate schedule § 13.40.030 (13.40)
121
      Amends Ch. 18.61 Hillside Development Overlay Zone, to provide more flexible
2000- development standards (18.61); amends Ch. 18.95 Compliance and Enforcement §
52    18.95.030 mitigation requirements and design review committee review of appeal
      (18.95)
2000- Amends Ch. 15.12 Outdoor Lighting Code by adding Marana (15.12)
63
2000- Amends Ch. 18.09 General Residential and rural Zoning Provisions by adding §
66    18.09.100 Conservation subdivision (18.09)
2000- Amends Ch. 11.12 Pima County Procurement Code § 11.12.040 small purchases (11.12)
75
2000- Amends Ch. 2.12 County Administrator § 2.12.070 duties and responsibilities (2.12)
76
2000- Amends 18.03.020 to add definition for assisted living centers; amends §§ 18.27.020,
77    18.29.020 to allow assisted living centers as a conditional use; amends § 18.31.010
      to allow assisted living centers as a permitted use (18.05, 18.27, 18.29, 18.31)
2000- Repeals Ord. 1986-140 and Title 29 of the Pima County Code, and replaces Ord. 1986-
81    140 with Ord. 2000-81 and amends Ch. 2.24 relating to Human Services (2.24)
2000- Adds §§ 10.08.050, 10.08.055, 10.08.056 establishing prima facie reasonable speed
85    limits in construction traffic control zones (10.08)
2000- Amends Ch. 15.24 Spa/Pool Code § 15.24.010 adopted; adds § 15.24.020 copies on file
87    (15.24)
2000- Amends § 18.61.054 grading requirements (18.61)
88
2000- Amends Ch. 18.79 Sign Standards, regulating subdivision directional signs §§
90    18.79.020, 18.79.040, 18.79.090, 18.79.100 (table), 18.79.110 (18.79)
2001- Amends § 15.04.020 uniform codes adopted (15.04)
10
2001- Amends Ch. 13.20 Sanitary Sewer Construction, Connections and Fees §§ 13.20.010,
20    13.20.020, 13.20.025, 13.20.030, 13.20.040 (13.20)
2001- Amends § 13.24.030 fee calculation, § 13.24.040 rate schedule, § 13.24.180 rate
21    schedule table (13.24)
2001- Amends Ch. 18.09 § 18.09.100 conservation subdivision; amends Ch. 18.61 § 18.61.052
22    slope density requirements (18.09, 18.61)
2001- Amends Ch. 19.03 § 19.03.050 relating to roadway development fees (19.03)
42
      Adopting by reference 2000 International Mechanical Code, 2000 International
      Property Maintenance Code with local amendments, 1999 National Electric Code with
      local amendments, 1998 International Energy Conservation Code; repeals all
2001- previously adopted editions of the Uniform Mechanical Code, the Uniform Abatement of
75    Dangerous Buildings Code, the Uniform Housing Code, the Model Energy Code and the
      National Electric Code, together with all previously adopted local amendments to
      those codes; amends Ch. 15.04 building codes §§ 15.04.010, 15.04.020, 15.04.030;
      amends Ch. 15.08 electrical code §§ 15.08.010, 15.08.020; amends Ch. 15.16
      electrical code § 15.16.010 (15.04, 15.08, 15.16)
      Amends Ch. 13.40 §§ 13.40.010 definitions, 13.40.020 waste acceptance to comply with
2001- current Arizona solid waste regulations, 13.40.030 modify residential hauler fees,
88    remove fee schedules from the code; repeals § 13.040.035 buy-back credit for
      recyclable materials; amends §§ 13.40.040, 13.40.050 to modify revenue allocations
      (13.40)
      Amends Ch. 18.91 Rezoning Procedures §§ 18.91.030, 18.91.050, 18.91.060, 18.91.070,
      18.91.100 and Ch. 18.97 Conditional Use Procedures § 18.97.030 by adding requirement
2001- for applications to include a biological impact report pertaining to endangered and
103   threatened species, a staff report element regarding the expected impacts on
      endangered and threatened species, and United States Fish and Wildlife Service
      comment on such applications (18.91, 18.97)
2001- Amends § 3.06.080 gives the board of supervisors greater flexibility in determining
113   the provisions of intergovernmental agreements relating to bond projects (3.06)
2001- Amends Ch. 17.04 §§ 17.04.340, 17.12.150 by inserting date and location of state
121   regulations previously incorporated by reference (17.04)
2001- Amends Ch. 9.30 §§ 9.30.030, 9.30.040, 9.30.050, 9.30.080 relating to the regulation
127   of excessive, unnecessary and annoying noises in Pima County (9.30)
2001- Adds § 11.12.070 on-line bidding; adds Ch. 11.25 Multi Year Contracts Authorized;
131   amends §§ 11.04.020, 11.04.030, 11.08.010, 11.12.030, 11.20.10 (11.12, 11.25, 11.04,
      11.08, 11.12, 11.20)
2001- Amends Ch. 8.50, Smoking; prohibiting smoking in restaurants except under certain
137   conditions (8.50)
2001- Amends § 15.12 Outdoor Lighting Code § 15.12.010 Adopted (15.12)
138
      Large scale retail establishments, neighborhood, regional, and small shopping
      centers: amends Ch. 18.03 definitions; adds Ch. 18.39 general commercial zoning
2001- standards; amends Chs. 18.41 rural village center zone, 18.43 local business zone,
165   18.45 general business zone, 18.51 light industrial/warehousing zone, 18.53 general
      industrial zone, 18.75 off-street parking and loading standards, 18.99 review
      committees (18.03, 18.39, 18.41, 18.43, 18.45, 18.51, 18.53, 18.75, 18.99)
2001- Amends 18.81.080 to add special investigation and special investigation fee
167   regarding grading permit (18.81)
2002- Adds Ch. 11.38 living wage requirement in county contracts (11.38)
1
2002- Amends 15.04.020 uniform codes (15.04)
2
2002- Amends Ch. 8.04 health provisions generally and Ch. 8.08 food establishments to
23    adopt and incorporate state of Arizona food code (8.04, 8.08)
2002- Amends Ch. 13.24 sanitary sewer user fees (13.24)
25
2002- Amends Ch. 13.20 sanitary sewer connection fees (13.20)
26
2002- Amends §§ 8.12.030, 8.12.040 immunization fee schedule (8.12)
51
2002- Amends § 15.04.050 violations as civil infractions enforced (15.04)
53
2002- Amends § 18.89.040 revising criteria for type 1 and type 2 minor revisions (18.89)
65    Comprehensive Plan
      Amends § 18.03.020 to add definitions of types of communication facilities (18.03
2002- General Definitions); amends § 18.07.030 to provide revised development standards
67    for wireless communication towers located in public rights-of-way and located on
      private property and state land (18.07 General Regulations and Exceptions)
2002- Amends ordinances 2002-2 and 2002-66 clarifying required date of compliance with
72    home design ordinance (15.04 Building Codes)
2002- Amends §§ 6.04.030, 6.04.060, 6.04.070, 6.04.100 (6.04 Animal Control Regulations)
80
2002- Deletes § 2.12.070 (2.12 County Administrator) Amends § 11.08.010 (11.08 Procurement
94    Organization); Amends 11.25.010 (11.25 Multi-Year Contracts)
      Amends § 17.12.470 extending term of activity permits; amends § 17.12.540 provide
2002- new fee schedule (17.12 (Permits and Permit Revisions); amends § 17.16.050 prohibit
108   emissions of particulate matter greater than 20 percent opacity (17.16 Emission
      Limiting Standards).
2002- Adds Ch 10.41, Parking for Individuals with Physical Disabilities; Designation,
110   Enforcement §§ 10.41.010, 10.41.020, 10.41.030, 10.41.040, 10.41.050, 10.41.060
      (10.41)
      Amends §§ 18.61.020, 1861.030, 18.61.040, 18.61.054, 18.61.056, 18.61.070, 8.61.080;
2003- adds 18.61.041, 18.61.042, 18.61.043 amending definitions, establishing
17    applicability and standards for level two peaks and ridges, clarifying grading
      requirements, amends development services department fee schedule (18.61)
      Amends §§ 13.20.010, 13.20.020, 13.20.030, 13.20.040 revising construction approval
      procedures, requirements for connection to public sanitary sewerage system,
2003- participating rate eligibility criteria, connection fee rates, development plan and
29    plat review fees, construction requirements of public sanitary sewer facilities,
      model home permit fees, connection fee rates for converted structures, establishing
      cost recovery for unauthorized connections to sanitary sewer system (13.20)
2003- Amends §§ 13.24.020 definitions, 13.24.030 fee calculation, 13.24.040 rate schedule,
30    13.24.090 billing (13.24 Sanitary Sewer User Fees)
2003- Amends §§ 18.39.020, 18.39.030, 18.39.050, 18.39.060, 18.75.040, 18.75.050 general
32    commercial standards, off-street parking and loading standards, review committee
      (18.39, 18.75, 18.99)
2003- Amends § 7.03.120 reserved, Adds § 7.03.125 water/wastewater fees (7.03)
33
2003- Amends § 10.12.020 signal installation and maintenance (10.12)
34
2003- Amends § 11.38.020 eligible contract (11.38 Pima County Living Wage)
36
      Repeals Ord. 1996-09, 1996-73, 1997-23 Ch. 19.01, 19.02, 19.03. Adopts new Ch.
2003- 19.01, 19.02, 19.03 establish benefit areas, assessment of development fees to
40    offset capital costs for construction of streets, establish amount of fees (19.01,
      19.02, 19.03)
2003- Amends §§ 18.03.020, 18.09.020 18.09.030 defines bed and breakfast establishment,
42    home occupation, professional (18.03, 18.09)
2003- Amends § 20.16.010 change MWBE bid preference to 5% (20.16)
63
2003- Amends §§ 15.04.010, 15.04.020 adopting International Urban-Wildland Interface Code
70    for rural forest village (15.04)
2003- Amends §§ 15.04.020, 15.08.010 to conform to local building and construction codes
71    (15.04, 15.08)
      Amends § 18.09.020 allowing bed and breakfast establishments in RVC zone; amends Ch.
2003- 18.15 Mount Lemmon zone; amends Ch. 18.41 RVC Rural Village Center Zone; amends §§
72    18.73.010, 18.73.050, 18.73.060, 18.75.070. exceptions for ML and RVC zones (18.09,
      18.15, 18.73, 18.75)
2003- Amends §§ 18.03.020, 18.09.020 adult care homes and group foster homes (18.03,
85    18.09)
2003- Adds 18.69.090 residential recreation areas; amends §§ 18.09.050, 18.09.080,
16    18.71.030 (18.69, 18.71)
2003- Amends § 19.03.010 effective date, roadway development fees (19.03)
107
2003- Amends § 18.41.020 performance standards; amends § 18.71.060 requirements and
118   procedures for RVC zoning (18.41, 18.71)
2004- Amends §§ 18.27.030, 18.29.030 lot coverage standards (18.27, 18.29)
7
2004- Deletes § 18.13.080 rezoning to GR-1 for parcels five acres or less (18.13)
8
2004- Amends § 18.41.050 development standards-general (18.41)
9
2004- Adds §§ 13.20.026, 13.20.035, 13.20.045; amends §§ 13.20.010, 13.20.020, 13.20.030;
10    13.20.040, 13.20.050 sanitary sewer construction, expansions, connections,
      consideration of private systems, and fees (13.20)
2004- Amends §§ 13.24.020, 13.24.030, 13.24.035, 13.24.040, 13,24.180 revising
11    definitions, amending fee calculation, amending rate schedule and table (13.24)
2004- Amends §§ 3.06.020, 3.06.030, 3.06.040, 3.06.050, 3.06.060, 3.06.070, 3.06.080,
16    3.06.090 bonding disclosure, accountability and implementation (3.06)
      Amends §§ 6.04.020, 6.04.030, 6.04.040, 6.04.050, 6.04.060, 6.04.070, 6.04.090,
2004- 6.04.100, 6.04.110, 6.04.120, 6.04.130, 6.04.140, 6.04.150, 6.04.160, 6.06.050,
17    6.08.010, 6.08.020, 6.08.030, 6.08.050, 6.08.110 changing the name to Pima animal
      care center, reflect ARS changes, and amend impoundment fee schedule (6.04, 6.06,
      6.08)
2004- Amends §§ 5.04.200 application fee; adds 5.04.205 failure to apply for license
19    (5.04)
2004- Amends 18.09.110 establishes buffer area surrounding two-story development (18.09)
20
2004- Amends § 18.61.041 adding design guidelines for level two peaks (18.61)
21
2004- Amends § 13.20.045 extending participating rate status to parties improving
27    wastewater treatment capacity (13.20)
2004- Amends 18.15.070, 8.41.070 adopts alternative hillside development standards (18.15,
29    18.41)
2004- Adds Ch. 9.50 fingerprinting and criminal history records check of prospective and
39    current employees, contract instructors or volunteers for Pima County natural
      resources, parks and recreation department (9.50)
      Amends Ch. 18.01 by revising the requirements for accessory buildings and accessory
      structures; amends the definition of accessory building and structure and adding a
2004- definition for accessory structure in Chs. 18.07 and 18.09; amends the development
59    standards for accessory buildings and accessory structures in Chs. 18.11, 18.12,
      18.13, 18.14, 18.15, 18.17, 18.18, 18.19, 18.21, 18.23, 18.25, 18.27, 18.29, 18.31,
      18.33, 18.37, 18.41, 18.43, 18.45
2004- Amends Ch. 18.69 by amending residential recreation areas in subdivisions.
88
2004- Amends §§ 8.12.030 and 8.12.040 fee changes.
96
2004- Amends Chs. 17.04, 17.08, 17.12, 17.16 and 17.28 to conform with corresponding state
97    and federal air quality regulations.
2004- Amends § 15.12.010 by amending the Tucson/Marana/Pima County outdoor lighting code.
98
2004- Amends § 15.04.020 by amending Pima County Local Amendments to the International
99    Urban-Wildland Interface code.
2004- Adds Ch. 9.60 fingerprinting and criminal history records check of prospective and
103   current employees, contract instructors or volunteers for Pima County Community
      Resources Department.
2004- Amends Ch. 13.28 by adding §§ 13.28.005, 13.28.055, 13.28.060, 13.28.065, 13.28.070,
110   13.28.075, 13.28.080, 13.28.085, 13.28.090, 13.28.095 relating to Mt. Lemmon sewer
      connections.
2005- Amends Ch. 18.08 standards for townhouse and multiple dwelling, Chs. 18.27, 18.29
1     development standards for multiple dwellings, Chs. 18.31, 18.43, 18.45 non-
      residential and residential development standards.
2005- Amends §§ 15.04.020, 15.08.010 uniform codes adopted.
12
2005- Amends § 8.12.030 immunization fee schedule.
33
2005- Amends Ch. 18.03 redefining the definition of "lot" and adds a new
34    Chapter 18.70 Minor Lands Division.
2005- Amends Ch. 18.69 Subdivision Standards; Ch. 18.73 Landscaping, Buffering and
35    Screening Standards; Ch. 18.75 Off-Street Parking and Loading Standards.
2005- Amends Chs. 17.04, 17.12, 17.16, 17.28 to conform with corresponding state and
43    federal air quality regulations.
2005- Amends Ch. 11.04 General Provision; Ch. 11.08 Procurement Organization; Ch. 11.12
44    Source Selection: Materials and Services; Ch. 11.16 Procurement for Construction;
      Ch. 11.24 Cooperative Procurement Authorized.
2005- Amends Ch 6.04 Animal Control Regulations § 6.04.040 impoundment of dogs; § 6.04.060
45    pound fees; § 6.04.070 mandatory spay/neuter program; § 6.04.120 vicious/destructive
      animals; § 6.04.140 procedures to remove animals; § 6.04.150 dangerous animals.
2005- Amends Ch. 9.50 Pima County Natural Resources, Parks and Recreation's Fingerprinting
46    and Criminal History Records Check.
2005- Amends Ch. 19.03 to update non-residential fees; adding additional land use
50    categories; adding administrative fee to cover processing costs; adding provision
      for extended payment authorization.
2005- Amends Ch. 13.20 sanitary sewer construction, connections and fees.
61
2005- Amends Ch. 13.24 sanitary sewer user fees; revising ordinance definitions; fee
62    calculation; rate schedule; rate schedule table.
2005- Amends Ch. 9.50 Pima County Natural Resources, Parks and Recreation's Fingerprinting
79    and Criminal History Records Check.
2005- Amends Title 16 to reflect the most current floodplain erosion and riparian habitat
FC2   regulations.
      Amends Ch. 18.03 by adding definitions for off-road vehicle and off-road vehicle
2005- facilities; Ch. 18.07 by adding development standards for off-road vehicle
85    facilities; Chs. 18.13, 18.14, 18.17 listing off-road vehicle facilities as
      conditional uses; and Ch. 18.45 permitted uses.
2005- Amends Ch. 18.03 the definition for adult activities facility and adds definitions
87    pertaining to adult activities; Ch. 18.07 adult activities facility standards.
2005- Amends Ch. 17.08 to conform to corresponding state and federal air quality
93    regulations.
2005- Amends Ch. 18.03 by adding a definition for non-chartered financial institutions;
105   Chs. 18.13, 18.14, 18.41, 18.43, 18.49, 18.51 by adding a general definition; Ch.
      18.45 by adding standards for non-chartered financial institutions.
2005- Amends Ch. 13.20 by adding new definitions, eliminating the non-participating and
112   participating fee structure and instituting a connection fee discount.
      Amends Ch. 17.12 by adding §§ 17.12.165, 17.12.185 and 17.12.275; amending §§
2006- 17.12.080, 17.12.140, 17.12.150, 17.12.160, 17.12.170, 17.12.180, 17.12.195,
9     17.12.220, 17.12.235, 17.12.240, 17.12.250, 17.12.255, 17.12.260, 17.12.290,
      17.12.310, 17.12.320, 17.12.340, 17.12.470 and Table 17.12.540, environment and air
      quality.
2006- Amends Ch. 6.04 Animal Control Regulations § 6.04.070 adding licensing procedure for
10    guide dogs.
2006- Amends Ch. 19.03 to increase residential and non-residential development impact
25    fees.
2006- Amends Ch. 18.03 by adding definition for parking area; amends Ch. 18.78 by adding
30    and modifying development standards and guidelines; amends Ch. 18.99 by adding a
      requirement for the Pima County Design Review Committee for gateway overlay zones.
2006- Amends Ch. 10.56 public involvement on major roadway projects, revising
31    implementation process, public participation, community advisory committee
      involvement and mitigation measures.
2006- Enacting Ch. 8.70 Drought Response Plan and Water Wasting, declaring drought stages
43    and the authority to declare and enforce drought restrictions.
2006- Amends Ch. 18.51 by adding § 18.51.070 standards and guidelines and amending §
45    18.99.030 mixed-use option review.
2006- Enacting Ch. 5.09 Scrap Metal Dealers, defining, establishing record keeping,
44    reporting requirements and penalties.
2006- Amends various provisions of Ch. 13.20, sanitary sewer construction, connections and
51    fees.
2006- Amends various provisions of Ch. 13.24, sanitary sewer user fees.
52
2006- Amends Ch. 6.04 and adds Ch. 6.05, defining canine-wild animal hybrids.
57
2006- Amends § 8.14.030(B) to increase fees for certain services.
58
2006- Amends Ch. 18.03, definition of communication tower and associated equipment; amends
85    Ch. 18.07, provides revised development standards for communication towers.
2006- Amends Ch. 2.24, relating to the merit system commission.
89
2006- Amends Ch. 11.12, allows to correct mistakes in bids after bid openings; amends Ch.
90    11.08, allows to execute contracts for materials in any amount, subsequent to board
      award.
2006- Amends Ch. 15.04, Building Codes; amends Ch. 15.08, Electrical Code; amends Ch.
91    15.12, Outdoor Lighting Code; adds Ch. 15.14, Energy Code; amends Ch. 15.16,
      Mechanical Code; adds Ch. 15.18 Fuel Gas Code; removes Ch. 15.24 Spa/Pool Code.
2006- Amends Ch. 18.03, new definitions for private aircraft hanger and pedestrian entry
92    architectural feature; amends § 18.07.050, development standard exceptions; amends §
      18.07.060, accessory buildings and accessory structures.
2006- Amends table 13.20.045(E)(1).
95
2006- Amends Ch. 18.59, golf course zone to use effluent, reclaimed water or CAP water;
96    amends Ch. 18.90, requires designation of underlying land use when golf course zone
      is used in a specific plan.
2006- Amends Ch. 18.73, to add water conservation measures and to update chapter with
97    current procedures and regulations.
2007- Enacting Ch. 2.20 which provides for an election of an employee organization to be
1     an authorized representative of county employees.
2007- Amends Ch. 18.03, adding definitions for inoperable motor vehicle and motor vehicle;
3     amends Ch. 18.09, establishing regulations for home automotive repair and open
      storage.
2007- Enacting Ch. 18.92, Transfer of Development Rights, which provides procedures
7     permitting the transfer of development rights from designated sending areas to
      designated receiving areas.
2007- Amends Ch. 6.04, § 6.04.060 pound fees, and § 6.04.070 licensing procedure and fees.
17
2007- Amends Ch. 18.101 to bring it up to date with current state statues.
34
2007- Amends Ch. 17.12 to allow the option for sources to obtain a single permit that
37    authorizes multiple activities per project site, improve organization of the section
      and expand the exemption language to clarify permitting thresholds.
2007- Amends Ch. 13.24 updating sanitary sewer user fees.
39
2007- Amends Chs. 18.89, 18.90 and 18.91 for consistency with state legislation and the
41    comprehensive plan update process.
2007- Amends Ch. 8.70 update to drought response plan and water wasting ordinance.
47
2007- Amends Chs. 17.04, 17.12 and 17.16 to adopt the hazardous air pollutants program
54    established by ADEQ.
2007- Amends § 18.101.030 to bring it up to date with current state statutes.
65
2007- Amends § 13.40.030 to update the uncovered load fee.
67
      Amends Ch. 18.03 by adding definitions for wildlife rehabilitation facility and
      animal rescue and sanctuary facility; amends Ch. 18.09 adding development standards
2007- and application requirements for wildlife rehabilitation facilities and animal
81    rescue and sanctuary facilities; amends Chs. 18.12, 18.13, 18.14, 18.17, 18.18,
      18.19, 18.21, and 18.37 by adding animal rescue and sanctuary facility as a
      conditional use; and amends Chs. 18.51 and 18.53 by adding animal rescue and
      sanctuary facility as a permitted use.
2007- Amends Ch. 13.20 by adding § 13.20.070 Repair and Replacement of House Connection
89    Sewers.
2007- Amends § 18.09.110 Two-Story Residential Buffer Area.
101
2007- Amends Chs. 17.04, 17.12 and 17.16 Class I, Class II, and Class III Air Quality
104   Permit Fees.
2007- Amends Chs. 15.04 and 15.20 adopting by reference the 2006 International Plumbing
106   Code with local amendments and repealing the 1994 Uniform Plumbing Code with
      previously adopted local amendments.
2007- Amends § 13.24.030 Sanitary Sewer User Fees and § 13.24.180 Rate Schedule Table.
109
2007- Amends § 13.20.045 Connection Fees.
110
2007- Amends Title 10 to add Ch. 10.45 Special Events in Pima County Right-of-Way.
114
2008- Amends § 18.92.060, zoning (18.92)
2
2008- Amends §§ 17.04.070, 17.04.340, 17.12.045, 17.12.050, 17.12.180, 17.12.320,
55    17.12.365, 17.16.490, 17.16.530 and 17.16.600; repeals § 17.16.330, air quality
      control (17.04, 17.12, 17.16)
2008- Amends §§ 6.04.070 and 6.05.030, animals (6.04, 6.05)
62
2008- Amends §§ 18.03.020, 18.07.030, 18.07.050—18.07.070 and 18.09.020, zoning (18.03,
70    18.07, 18.09)
2008- Adds Ch. 10.50, regulations for the use of the public right-of-way (10.50)
72
2008- Amends Ch. 2.20, county meet and confer process (2.20)
83
2008- Amends §§ 18.75.030—18.75.050 and Table 18.75-1, zoning (18.75)
93
2008- Adds §§ 7.33.023, 7.33.025 and 7.33.055; amends §§ 7.33.010, 7.33.020, 7.33.030,
117   7.33.040, 7.33.050. 7.33.060 and 7.33.070, removal of rubbish, trash, weeds, filth
      and debris (7.33)
2008- Adds § 18.57.031; amends §§ 18.03.020, 18.07.040, 18.57.010—18.57.030 and 18.93.030;
118   repeals and replaces Figure 18.57.060C2, zoning (18.03, 18.07, 18.57, 18.93)
2008- Amends § 15.04.020 and Ord. 2006-91 § 1, building codes (15.04)
119
2009- Amends § 18.09.040(I), zoning (18.09)
3
2009- Adds § 13.24.187, amends §§ 13.24.020 and 13.24.030, sanitary sewer user fees
7     (13.24)
2009- Amends §§ 13.24.030, 13.24.040, 13.24.180 and 13.24.185, sanitary sewer user fees
14    (13.24)
2009- Adds Ch. 9.70, underage drinking (9.70)
15
2009- Amends §§ 8.12.030 and 8.12.040, immunization (8.12)
24
2009- Amends § 8.14.030, STD and HIV testing and counseling (8.14)
25
2009- Amends §§ 8.04.125 and 8.04.130, health provisions (8.04)
26
2009- Amends §§ 6.04.060, 6.04.070, 6.04.090, 6.04.120 and 6.04.150, animals (6.04, 6.05)
27
2009- Amends § 3.04.120, risk management (3.04)
31
2009- Amends § 18.01.030, zoning (18.01)
35
2009- Amends §§ 7.03.130 and 7.09.090, health and safety (7.09)
36
      Amends §§ 20.04.010—20.04.040, 20.08.010, 20, 20.12.010, 20.16.010, 20.20.010,
2009- 20.24.010—20.24.030, 20.28.010—20.28.080, 20.32.010—20.32.080, 20.36.010, minority
47    and woman-owned business enterprises (20.04, 20.08, 20.12, 20.16, 20.20, 20.20.24,
      20.28, 20.32, 20.36)
2009- Amends §§ 18.01.030, 18.12.030, 18.13.030, 18.14.030, 18.37.020, 18.43.030,
59    18.67.070 and 18.72.090, zoning (18.01, 18.12, 18.13, 18.14, 18.37, 18.43, 18.67,
      18.72)
2009- Amends Ch. 2.20, county meet and confer process (2.20)
69
2009- Amends §§ 18.03.020 and 18.09.020, zoning (18.03, 18.09)
70
2009- Amends §§ 11.04.030, 11.08.010, 11.12.040 and 11.16.020, procurement code (11.04,
88    11.08, 11.12, 11.16)
2009- Amends Ch. 19.03; §§ 19.01.030 and 19.02.010—19.02.040, roadway development fees
95    (19.01, 19.02, 19.03)
2009- Amends §§ 18.03.020, 18.09.020, 18.69.040, 18.69.090 and 18.73.040, zoning (18.03,
98    18.09, 18.69, 18.73)
2009- Amends §§ 18.03.020 and 18.07.030, zoning (18.03, 18.07)
101
2010- Amends §§ 13.20.045, 13.24.030, 13.24.040 and 13.24.180, public services (13.20,
11    13.24)
2010- Amends § 6.04.160, animal control regulations (6.04)
19
2010- Amends Ch. 18.83, zoning (18.83)
26
2010- Adds § 18.89.041; amends § 18.89.040, 18.91.040 and 18.101.030, zoning (18.89,
27    18.91, 18.101)
      Adds §§ 16.04.100, 16.08.530, 16.08.770, 16.20.015, 16.26.055 16.64.005 and
      16.64.070; amends §§ 16.04.010—16.04.030, 16.04.060, 16.08.010—16.08.050, 16.08.100,
      16.08.140, 16.08.150, 16.08.190, 16.08.200, 16.08.220, 16.08.250, 16.08.290,
      16.08.320, 16.08.330, 16.08.350, 16.08.360, 16.08.370, 16.08.450, 16.08.460,
      16.08.520, 16.08.600, 16.08.630—16.08.690, 16.08.710, 16.08.730, 16.08.740,
2010- 16.12.010, 16.12.050, 16.16.030, 16.16.050—16.16.070, 16.20.010,
FC5   16.20.020—16.20.070, 16.24.020, 16.24.050, 16.26.010, 16.26.020—16.26.050,
      16.26.060—16.26.090, 16.28.020—16.28.040, 16.30.070, 16.30.080, 16.34.010—16.34.040,
      16.36.030, 16.36.040, 16.36.070—16.36.100, 16.36.120, 16.36.140, 16.38.010,
      16.42.010, 16.42.030, 16.44.010—16.44.040, 16.48.010—16.48.040, 16.54.010—16.54.030,
      16.56.010, 16.56.020, 16.56.040, 16.56.050, 16.60.010, 16.60.020, and
      16.64.010—16.64.030; renumbers §§ 16.08.010
      to 16.08.020, 16.08.020 to 16.08.010, 16.08.270—16.08.530 to 16.08.260—16.08.520 and
      16.08.770 to 16.08.780; repeals §§ 16.08.260 and 16.54.040, floodplain management
      (16.04, 16.08, 16.12, 16.16, 16.20, 16.24, 16.26, 16.28, 16.30, 16.34, 16.36, 16.38,
      16.42, 16.44, 16.48, 16.54, 16.56, 16.60, 16.64)
2010- Amends § 2.24.070, employee merit system commission (2.24)
42
2010- Adds Ch. 8.80, medical marijuana (8.80)
58
2010- Amends §§ 18.03.020 and 18.45.040, zoning (18.03, 18.45)
59
2010- Amends Ch. 2.16, financial disclosure for elected officials and candidates (2.16)
69
2011- Amends §§ 18.67.050, 18.69.040, 18.69.090, 18.71.030 and 18.91.030, zoning (18.67,
1     18.69, 18.71, 18.91)
      Amends §§ 18.01.070, 18.03.020, 18.07.030, 18.07.040, 18.07.070, 18.09.020,
      18.09.040, 18.12.060, 18.13.030, 18.14.030, 18.17.030, 18.37.010, 18.39.030,
2011- 18.43.030, 18.45.030, 18.49.040, 18.61.041, 18.63.100, 18.63.110 (Repealed by 2025-
2     4), 18.67.050, 18.69.090, 18.75.040, 18.79.070, 18.81.020, 18.81.080, 18.91.060 and
      18.97.030, zoning (18.01, 18.03, 18.07, 18.09, 18.12, 18.13, 18.14, 18.17, 18.37,
      18.39, 18.43, 18.45, 18.49, 18.61, 18.63, 18.67, 18.69, 18.75, 18.79, 18.81, 18.91,
      18.97)
2011- Amends §§ 11.04.010, 11.04.030, 11.08.010, 11.12.010, 11.12.020, 11.12.040,
14    11.12.050, 11.12.060, 11.16.010, 11.16.020, 11.20.010 and 11.25.010; repeals §
      11.12.070, procurement code (11.04, 11.08, 11.12, 11.16, 11.20, 11.25)
2011- Amends §§ 20.04.010—20.36.010; renames Title 20, small business enterprise
15    participation programs (20.04, 20.08, 20.12, 20.16, 20.20, 20.24, 20.28, 20.32,
      20.36)
2011- Amends §§ 18.01.030 and 18.07.030, zoning (18.01, 18.07)
45
2011- Amends §§ 18.03.020 and 18.09.030, zoning (18.03, 18.09)
59
2011- Amends §§ 18.03.020 and 18.09.020, zoning (18.03, 18.09)
60
2011- Amends § 6.04.060, animal control regulations (6.04)
68
2011- Amends § 6.04.070, animal control regulations (6.04)
69
2011- Amends § 6.04.030, animal control regulations (6.04)
70
2011- Adds § 6.04.035, animal control regulations (6.04)
71
2011- Amends § 6.04.040, animal control regulations (6.04)
72
2011- Amends § 6.04.100, animal control regulations (6.04)
74
2011- Amends § 6.04.160, animal control regulations (6.04)
76
2011- Amends §§ 8.12.030, 8.12.040 and 8.14.030, health and safety (8.12, 8.14)
86
2011- Amends § 13.24.180, sanitary sewer user fees (13.24)
89
2012- Amends §§ 11.04.010 and 11.12.030, procurement of goods and services (11.04, 11.12)
10
2012- Amends § 15.12.010, outdoor lighting code (15.12)
14
2012- Amends §§ 18.03.020 and 18.07.030, zoning (18.03, 18.07)
15
2012- Adds Title 14, renewable energy incentive district (REID), (14.01, 14.02, 14.03,
16    14.04)
2012- Amends §§ 18.03.020 and 18.09.020, zoning (18.03, 18.09)
22
2012- Amends § 18.01.030, zoning (18.01)
24
2012- Amends §§ 13.20.020, 13.20.026, 13.20.030, 13.20.040 and 13.20.045, sanitary sewer
27    construction, connections and fees (13.20)
2012- Amends § 6.04.100, animal control regulations (6.04)
33
      Amends §§ 15.04.020, 15.04.030, 15.04.050, 15.04.060, 15.04.080, 15.08.010,
2012- 15.08.020, 15.12.020, 15.14.010, 15.14.020, 15.16.010, 15.16.030, 15.18.010,
34    15.18.020, 15.20.010 and 15.20.020, buildings and construction (15.04, 15.08, 15.12,
      15.14, 15.16, 15.18, 15.20)
2012- Amends § 13.20.045, sanitary sewer construction, connections and fees (13.20)
45
2012- Amends § 8.12.030, immunization (8.12)
67
2012- Amends §§ 18.03.020, 18.09.020, 18.69.020 and 18.97.030, zoning (18.03, 18.09,
71    18.69, 18.97)
2012- Amends § 18.07.030, zoning (18.07)
72
2012- Adds § 13.16.025; amends §§ 13.16.010, 13.16.020 and 13.20.030; repeals § 13.12.020,
76    sewers (13.16, 13.20)
2013- Amends § 6.04.110, animal control regulations (6.04)
1
2013- Amends § 13.40.020, solid waste (13.40)
27
2013- Amends Ch. 13.36, industrial wastewater (13.36)
32
2013- Amends §§ 13.40.010—13.40.030 and 13.40.070; repeals §§ 13.40.040—13.40.060, solid
34    waste (13.40)
2013- Amends § 5.04.030, cable communications (5.04)
37
2013- Amends §§ 18.01.030, 18.03.020, 18.07.030, 18.07.050 and 18.73.050, zoning (18.01,
42    18.03, 18.07, 18.73)
2013- Amends § 14.04.010, REID site maps (14.04)
46
2014- Amends § 14.04.010, REID site maps (14.04)
5
2014- Amends § 6.04.180, animal control regulations (6.04)
36
2014- Amends §§ 8.70.020, 8.70.040 and 8.70.050, drought response plan and water wasting
38    (8.70)
2015- Amends §§ 18.03.020, 18.07.030, 18.09.100, 18.39.030, 18.39.050, 18.39.060,
7     18.73.010, 18.73.030, 18.73.050 and 18.75.040, zoning (18.03, 18.07, 18.09, 18.39,
      18.73, 18.75)
2015- Amends § 13.24.185, sanitary sewer user fees (13.24)
16
2015- Amends § 6.04.100, animal control regulations (6.04)
18
2015- Amends § 17.04.190, composition of the air quality hearing board (17.04)
19
2015- Amends § 6.04.070, animal control regulations (6.04)
22
2015- Amends Ch. 3.06, bonding disclosure, accountability and implementation (3.06)
26
2015- Amends § 18.45.040, zoning (18.45)
39
2015- Adds Ch. 2.32, rulemaking procedure (2.32)
46
2016- Amends §§ 18.77.030 and 18.77.040, zoning (18.77)
2
2016- Amends §§ 6.04.050—6.04.070, animal control regulations (6.04)
6
2016- Adds § 13.16.022; amends §§ 13.16.010, 13.16.020 and 13.16.025, design standards for
11    public sewerage facilities (13.16)
2016- Repeals and replaces Chs. 8.04 and 8.08, health and safety (8.04, 8.08)
12
2016- Amends § 6.04.100, animal control regulations (6.04)
15
2016- Amends §§ 10.44.020, 18.69.060 and 18.71.030, construction in county rights-of-way;
18    zoning (10.44, 18.69, 18.71)
2016- Amends §§ 18.03.020 and 18.09.030, zoning (18.03, 18.09)
21
2016- Amends § 13.20.020; repeals and replaces Ch. 13.24; repeals § 13.20.060, wastewater
29    (13.20, 13.24)
2016- Adds Ch. 10.24, use of handheld electronic devices while operating a motor vehicle
31    (10.24)
2016- Amends § 9.70.010, underage drinking (9.70)
34
2016- Amends Ch. 18.89, comprehensive plan (18.89)
37
2016- Amends §§ 17.04.070, 17.04.340, 17.08.020, 17.08.030, 17.08.050—17.08.070,
42    17.12.045, 17.12.180, 17.12.320, 17.12.365, 17.16.120, 17.16.490 and 17.16.530, air
      quality control (17.04, 17.08, 17.12, 17.16)
2016- Amends § 10.04.020; repeals and replaces Ch. 10.20, yield controlled intersections
53    (10.04, 10.20)
2016- Amends § 13.24.200, sanitary sewer user fees (13.24)
69
2017- Amends §§ 18.07.030, 18.07.050, 18.07.070, 18.43.030, 18.45.030, 18.89.041,
3     18.90.020, 18.90.030, 18.90.050—18.90.070, 18.91.040, and 18.91.080, zoning (18.07,
      18.43, 18.45, 18.89, 18.90, 18.91)
2017- Amends § 13.24.600, sanitary sewer user fees (13.24)
2
2017- Amends § 13.20.045, sanitary sewer construction, connection and fees (13.20)
12
2017- Adds § 10.34.015; amends §§ 10.34.020 and 10.34.030, use of handheld electronic
13    devices while operating a motor vehicle (10.34)
2017- Amends §§ 6.04.040—6.04.060, animal control regulations (6.04)
19
      Adds Chs. 17.11, 17.13 and 17.14; amends §§ 17.04.340, 17.04.400, 17.08.150,
      17.16.050, 17.16.130, 17.16.160, 17.16.165, 17.16.180, 17.16.190, 17.16.200,
2017- 17.16.550, 17.16.580, 17.16.590, 17.16.610, 17.16.620, 17.16.630, 17.16.640, and
20    17.28.100 ; renumbers §§ 17.12.010 as 17.11.010; 17.12.020 as 17.11.020; 17.12.030
      as 17.11.140; 17.12.035 as 17.12.180 (Repealed by 2025- 9), 17.13.200 (Repealed by
      2025-9); 17.12.040 as
      17.12.170, 17.13.190; 17.12.045 as 17.11.160; 17.12.050 as 17.11.210; 17.12.060 as
      17.11.200; 17.12.070 as 17.11.170; 17.12.080 as 17.11.060; 17.12.085 as 17.11.030;
      17.12.100 as 17.11.100; 17.12.110 as 17.12.020, 17.13.030; 17.12.120 as 17.12.030,
      17.13.040; 17.12.130 as 17.11.040; 17.12.140 as 17.11.090; 17.12.150 as 17.11.050;
      17.12.160 as 17.12.010; 17.12.165 as 17.13.010; 17.12.170 as 17.11.070; 17.12.180 as
      17.12.040; 17.12.185 as 17.13.020; 17.12.190 as 17.11.190; 17.12.195 as 17.12.050,
      17.13.070; 17.12.200 as 17.12.060; 17.12.210 as 17.11.180; 17.12.220 as 17.12.080;
      17.12.230 as 17.12.090; 17.12.235 as 17.13.100; 17.12.240 as 17.13.110; 17.12.245 as
      17.12.100, 17.13.120; 17.12.250 as 17.13.050; 17.12.255 as 17.12.110, 17.13.130;
      17.12.260 as 17.12.120, 17.13.140; 17.12.270 as 17.12.130, 17.13.150; 17.12.275 as
      17.13.060; 17.12.280 as 17.12.140, 17.13.160; 17.12.290 as 17.12.150, 17.13.170;
      17.12.300 as 17.11.110; 17.12.310 as 17.11.080; 17.12.320 as 17.12.160, 17.13.180;
      17.12.330 as 17.11.130; 17.12.340 as 17.12.190, 17.13.210; 17.12.345 as 17.12.200,
      17.13.220; 17.12.350 as 17.11.120; 17.12.360 as 17.11.150; 17.12.365 as 17.12.070;
      17.12.370 as 17.13.090; 17.12.390 as 17.13.080; 17.12.400 as 17.13.250; 17.12.465 as
      17.14.010; 17.12.470 as 17.14.040; 17.12.475 as 17.14.060; 17.12.480 as 17.14.080;
      17.12.500 as 17.12.210, 17.13.230, 17.14.020; 17.12.510 as 17.12.220; 17.12.520 as
      17.13.240;
      17.12.530 as 17.14.090; 17.12.540 as 17.14.050, 17.14.070; 17.12.620 as 17.11.220,
      17.14.030; ; repeals §§ 17.12.380, 17.12.410, 17.12.420, 17.12.430, 17.12.440,
      17.12.450, 17.12.460, 17.12.525, 17.12.545, 17.12.550, 17.12.560, 17.12.570,
      17.12.580, 17.12.590, 17.12.600, 17.12.610, 17.12.630, 17.12.640, 17.12.650,
      17.16.220, 17.16.280, 17.16.290, 17.16.300, 17.16.330, 17.16.440,
      17.16.540,17.16.645, 17.16.650, 17.16.655, 17.16.660, 17.16.665, 17.16.670,
      17.16.675, 17.16.680, 17.16.685, 17.16.690, 17.16.700 and 17.28.065, air quality
      control (17.04, 17.08, 17.11, 17.13, 17.16, 17.28)
2017- Adds Ch. 9.80, exploding targets (9.80)
21
2017- Adds Ch. 9.90, sexual orientation change efforts (9.90)
22
2017- Amends §§ 11.04.020, 11.04.030, 11.08.010, 11.12.010, 11.12.020, 11.12.030,
27    11.12.040, 11.16.010 and 11.20.010, procurement code (11.04, 11.08, 11.12, 11.16)
2017- Amends §§ 20.08.010, 20.16.010, 20.20.010, 20.24.010, 20.24.020, 20.24.030,
28    20.28.030 and 20.28.060; repeals ch. 20.44, small business enterprise participation
      program (20.08, 20.16, 20.20, 20.24)
2017- Amends § 2.24.070, human services (2.24)
30
      Amends §§ 18.07.030, 18.09.020, 18.11.020, 18.11.050, 18.12.020, 18.13.020,
2017- 18.14.020, 18.17.020, 18.18.020, 18.19.010, 18.21.010, 18.21.020, 18.23.010,
36    18.23.020, 18.27.010, 18.27.040, 18.29.040, 18.33.020, 18.33.050, 18.35.020,
      18.35.050, 18.37.010 and 18.37.050, zoning (18.07, 18.09, 18.11, 18.12, 18.13,
      18.14, 18.17, 18.18, 18.19, 18.21, 18.23, 18.27, 18.29, 18.33, 18.35, 18.37)
2017- Amends §§ 18.27.030, 18.29.030, 18.31.030, 18.43.060 and 18.45.060, repeals §§
37    18.09.080, 18.27.050 and 18.29.050, zoning (18.27, 18.29, 18.31, 18.43, 18.45)
2017- Adds § 10.50.190; amends §§ 10.50.060, 10.50.100, 10.50.110, regulations for the use
46    of the public right-of-way (10.50)
2017- Repeals and replaces Ch. 10.36, oversize and overweight special permits (10.36)
47
2018- Amends §§ 2.20.010, 2.20.030 and 2.20.050, county meet and confer process (2.20)
1
2018- Amends §§ 18.05.010, 18.63.010—18.63.090 and 18.101.030, zoning (18.05, 18.63,
9     18.101)
2018- Amends §§ 18.07.030 and 18.77.040, zoning (18.07, 18.77)
15
2018- Amends § 18.07.030, zoning (18.07)
17
2018- Adds § 10.40.070; amends § 10.40.050, stopping, standing and parking restrictions
25    (10.40)
2018- Amends §§ 18.03.020, 18.13.030 and 18.14.030, zoning (18.03, 18.13, 18.14)
29
2018- Amends §§ 15.04.020, 15.04.060, 15.08.010, 15.14.010, 15.16.010, 15.18.010 and
30    15.20.010, buildings and construction (15.04, 15.08. 15.14, 15.16, 15.18, 15.20)
2018- Adds Ch. 18.68; amends §§ 18.05.010 and 18.101.030, zoning (18.05, 18.68, 18.101)
31
2018- Amends §§ 18.13.030, 18.14.030, 18.45.030 and 18.45.040, zoning (18.13, 18.14,
33    18.45)
2018- Adds Ch. 11.14; amends §§ 11.04.010 and 11.12.030, procurement code (11.04, 11.12,
37    11.14)
2018- Amends § 15.04.020, building codes (15.04)
39
2018- Adds Title 21, public lands and facilities (21.02)
FC1
2019- Amends Ch. 13.28, relating to Mt. Lemmon sewer connections (13.28)
1
2019- Amends Ch. 13.32, relating to Mt. Lemmon user fee surcharges (13.32)
2
2019- Amends § 18.03.020, 18.09.020, 18.13.030, 18.14.030, 18.19.020, 18.31.010,
5     18.37.020, zoning (18.03, 18.09, 18.13, 18.14, 18.19, 18.31, 18.37)
2019- Adds § 17.16.125, air quality (17.16)
7
2019- Amends §§ 18.37.030, 18.37.040, 18.51.050, 18.53.040, 18.93.030, zoning (18.37,
10    18.51, 18.53, 18.93)
2019- Amends Ch. 13.20, relating to sanitary sewer construction, connections and fees
20    (13.20)
2019- Amends §§ 18.13.030, 18.14.030, 18.25.030, 18.31.010, 18.45.030, 18.93.040, zoning
26    (18.13, 18.14, 18.25, 18.31, 18.45, 18.93)
2019- Amends §§ 17.04.070, 17.04.340, 17.11.160, 17.12.040, 17.12.070, 17.16.390,
28    17.16.490, 17.16.530, air quality control (17.04, 17.11, 17.12, 17.16)
2020- Amends § 13.36.060, industrial wastewater (13.36)
10
2020- Amends §§ 18.25.030, 18.27.030, 18.29.030, zoning (18.25, 18.27, 18.29)
18
2020- Amends §§ 18.07.030, 18.13.030, 18.14.030, 18.17.030, 18.37.010, 18.51.030, zoning
24    (18.07, 18.13, 18.14, 18.17, 18.37, 18.51)
2020- Repeals and replaces Title 19, Roadway Development Impact Fee (19.01, 19.02, 19.03)
27
2020- Amends §§ 21.02.020, 21.02.120 - 21.02.140, public lands and facilities (21.02)
FC1
2020- Repeals Ch. 13.12 and Ch. 13.16, sewers (13.12, 13.16)
36
2020- Amends §§ 18.09.030, 18.40.030, 18.45.030, 18.77.030, 18.83.050, 18.99.030; repeals
41    and replaces 18.79, zoning (18.09, 18.40, 18.45, 18.77, 18.79, 18.83, 18.99)
2020- Amends § 10.45.060, traffic and highways (10.45)
42
2020- Amends §§ 17.14.080, 17.14.090, air quality control (17.14)
43
      Adds § 10.04.035, 10.36.120, 10.36.130; amends §§ 10.08.020, 10.08.030, 10.12.020,
2021- 10.12.030, 10.16.020, 10.16.030, 10.20.020, 10.20.030, 10.24.020, 10.24.030,
11    10.28.020, 10.28.030, 10.32.020, 10.32.030, 10.40.010, 10.40.040, 10.46.020,
      10.46.030, traffic and highways (10.04, 10.08, 10.12, 10.16, 10.20, 10.24, 10.28,
      10.32, 10.36, 10.40, 10.46)
2021- Amends § 8.12.030, health and safety (8.12)
16
2021- Amends §§ 18.05.010, adds 18.68.050, infill overlay zone (18.68)
17
2021- Amends § 2.24.070, human services (2.24)
20
2022- Amends § 3.04.120, risk management (3.04)
8
2022- Amends §§ 18.03.020, 18.13.030, 18.43.030, 18.45.040, 18.51.030, regarding marijuana
16    regulations (18.03, 18.13, 18.43, 18.45, 18.51)
2023- Amends § 18.07.030, land use regulations (18.07)
4
2023- Amends §§ 13.20.100, 13.20.500, public services (13.20)
9
2023- Amends § 16.30.050, watercourse and riparian habitat mitigation (16.30)
FC2
2023- Amends § 18.09.020, zoning (18.09)
19
2024- Adds Ch. 9.85, loss or theft of firearm—mandatory reporting (9.85)
2
2024- Amends § 18.07.030, land use regulations (18.07)
7
2024- Amends § 2.12.070, county administrator duties and responsibilities (2.12)
8
2024- Adds Ch. 11.40, workplace safety (11.40)
10
2025- Amends §§ 16.36.010 - 16.36.030, subdivisions and development (16.36)
FC1
2025- Amends §§ 4.01.010, 4.01.060, indigent health care (4.01)
2
      Amends §§ 16.04.020, 16.08.010, 16.08.240, 16.08.360, 16.08.450, 16.08.640,
      16.08.660, 16.12.010, 16.12.020, 16.12.050, 16.16.020, 16.16.030, 16.20.015,
2025- 16.20.020, 16.34.010, 16.44.030, 16.56.020, 16.56.040, repeals §§ 16.08.130,
FC3   16.08.140, 16.08.200, 16.08.730, 16.08.750, renumbers existing §§ 16.08.150 -
      16.08.780 to §§ 16.08.130 - 16.08.730, floodplain management (16.04, 16.08, 16.12,
      16.16, 16.20, 16.34, 16.44, 16.56)
2025- Amends §§ 18.63.040 - 18.63.110, 18.73.050, 18.79.010, 18.79.060, 18.95.030,
4     18.99.030, 18.101.020, 18.101.030, adds 18.101.070 (18.63, 18.73, 18.79, 18.95,
      18.99, 18.101)
2025- Amends §§ 18.03.020, 18.09.020, 18.13.020, 18.14.020, 18.71.010, triplex dwelling
8     (18.03, 18.09, 18.13, 18.14, 18.71)
2025- Amends §§ 17.12.040, 17.13.020; repeals §§ 17.12.180, 17.13.200, air quality control
9     (17.12, 17.13)
2025- Amend §§ 9.04.050, 9.04.060, 9.04.080, public display of fireworks (9.04)
11
2025- Amends §§ 13.20.100 - 13.20.600, sanitary sewer construction, connections and fees
13    (13.20)
2025- Amends §§ 13.24.100 - 13.24.600, sanitary sewer user fees (13.24)
14
2025- Amends §§ 15.04.020, 15.04.060, 15.08.010, 15.16.010, 15.18.010, 15.20.010,
15    buildings and construction (15.04, 15.08, 15.16, 15.18, 15.20)
2025- Amends Ch. 19.03, Appendix A, roadway development impact fee schedule (19.03)
16
2025- Amends §§ 13.24.200, 13.24.600, sanitary sewer user fees (13.24)
21
2025- Amends §§ 18.03.020, 18.09.020, accessory dwelling units (18.03, 18.09)
27
2025- Amends § 18.69.030, plat requirements and assurances (18.69)
30
 
